Criminal Revision No.544 of 2003 Shiv Kumar Yadav, S/o Videsi Yadav Vs. Smt. Santoshii Yadav, W/o Shiv Kumar

HIGH COURT OF CHHATTISGARH, BILASPUR          

 Criminal Revision No.544 of 2003

 Shiv Kumar Yadav, S/o Videsi Yadav 
  Aged about 27 years, Cultivator, R/o
  Village Kanhera, Thana Khandsara,
  Tehsil Saja, District Durg.
                        ...Petitioners

                      VERSUS

 Smt. Santoshii Yadav, W/o Shiv Kumar  
  Yadav, aged about 22 years, R/o village
  Bhinpuri, President Address: Navapara,
  Tehsil Bemetara, District Durg.
                        ...Respondents

! Shri Sanjay S. Agrawal, counsel for the petitioner.

^ Shri V.D. Bajpai, counsel for the respondent.

 Hon'ble Justice Shri L.C.Bhadoo
Press any key to continue ...

 Dated : 04/02/2004

: ORDER  


                     O R D E R

          (Passed on 4th February 2004)


As per L.C. Bhadoo J.


      The  petitioner has preferred  this  revision
under  Section  397 read with Section  401  of  the
Cr.P.C. 1973, being aggrieved by the order dated 18-
10-2003  passed by the 3rd Additional District  and
Sessions   Judge  (F.T.C.),  Bemetara  whereby   he
reversed  the  order  dated 8-1-99  passed  by  the
Judicial  Magistrate,  First  Class,  Bemetara,  in
Misc.  Criminal Case No.20/1997 whereby the learned 
Judicial  Magistrate rejected  the  application  of
respondent  Smt. Santoshi Bai filed  under  Section
125 of the Cr.P.C. for grant of maintenance.

2.   Brief facts leading to filing of this revision
petition  are  that the marriage of the  petitioner
and  respondent  (  hereinafter Shiv  Kumar  Yadav-
husband  will  be referred as petitioner  and  wife
Santoshi  Bail will be referred as respondent)  was
solemnized one and half year before the  filing  of
the application under Section 125 of the Cr.P.C. by
respondent  on 6-9-1996.  After two months  of  the
marriage   Gauna  ceremony  took  place   and   the
petitioner took the respondent to his residence  at
village  Kanhera.  Both the parties lived  together
for 4 to 5 months and as per the allegations in the
application    the   petitioner   herein    started
harassing, ill-treating and subjected to cruelty to
respondent for bringing dowry.  Thereafter, on Teja
festival  the respondent was taken by her relatives
to  Bemetara.   After celebration of Teja  festival
the  maternal  grandmother  of  respondent  namely,
Jhaman  Bai  and grandfather namely, Siyaram  Yadav 
along with respondent came to her in-laws house  at
Kanhera  for leaving the respondent at her in-laws'
house.   However,  the petitioner  started  abusing
them  saying that he would not keep the  respondent
at   his   residence,  but  her   grandmother   and
grandfather left her at her in-laws' house.

  3.   As  per the allegations of respondent,  five
months  prior  to  filing of the application  under
Section 125 of the Cr.P.C. the petitioner took  the
respondent along with him and left her at  the  Bus
stand of Bemetara and disappeared.  After waiting 3
to   4   hours  she  had  left  for  her   maternal
grandmother's house. The parents of respondent  are
labourers  and  they are not able to  maintain  the
respondent and the respondent is unable to maintain
herself,  whereas  the petitioner's  annual  income
from agricultural sources was said to be Rs.20,000/-
and  the applicant is earning  round about Rs.900/-
per month by doing the labour job.

4.   The reply of the application  was filed by the
petitioner herein before the Magistrate in which he
denied  all the allegations and on the contrary  he
said  that the respondent herself does not want  to
live  with  the  petitioner and he  was  ready  and
willing to bring her at his residence and for  that
purpose  he  filed an application  before  the  Sub
Divisional  Magistrate  under  Section  98  of  the
Cr.P.C.  in  which the learned S.D.M. recorded  the
statement of the respondent and before  that  Court
the    respondent categorically  stated    that she
does  not want to go to her in-laws house  even  if
her  husband  gives  assurance that  he  would  not
demand  dowry and harass her.  After recording  the
evidence  of  the  parties,  the  learned  Judicial
Magistrate  Bemetara, dismissed the application  of
the  respondent under Section125 of the Cr.P.C.  on
the  ground  that the respondent herself  does  not
want  to  live  with  the  petitioner  without  any
sufficient reason. However, on a revision filed  by
the  respondent the learned 3rd Additional Sessions
Judge  (F.T.C.), Bemetara reversed the  finding  of
the Judicial Magistrate holding that the petitioner
does  not  want  to  keep the  respondent  and  the
respondent  was  living separately  for  sufficient
reasons  and  granted maintenance of  Rs.500/-  per
month in favour of the respondent.

5.   I have heard learned counsel for the parties.

6.    Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioner  while
assailing the impugned order passed by the  learned
3rd  Additional Sessions Judge, argued only on  one
ground that the respondent disentitled herself  for
the maintenance on the ground that she herself does
not  want  to  go  to  her  in-laws  house  without
sufficient  reason.   He further  argued  that  the
finding  of  the  learned 3rd  Additional  Sessions
Judge  is perverse, incorrect, illegal and contrary
to the evidence on record.  Therefore, he submitted
that  the  order  of  the  learned  3rd  Additional
Sessions  Judge be set aside and that  of  Judicial
Magistrate First Class, be restored.

7.      On the other hand, Mr. V.D. Bajpai, learned
Sr.  counsel for the respondent argued that as  per
the   evidence   on   record  the   petitioner   is
responsible   for  neglecting  the  respondent   to
maintain   her.    Moreover,   petitioner   started
harassing, ill-treating and subjected to cruelty to
the  respondent  for not bringing the  dowry  i.e.,
Television, Radio, Cycle, Almirah and cash  and  as
the petitioner used to ill-treat the respondent and
beat  her, therefore, it was not possible  for  the
respondent to reside with the petitioner.

8.     Therefore, in view of the points  raised  by
the  learned counsel for the parties a very limited
point remains for consideration of this Court  i.e.
as  to  whether  the  respondent  started  residing
separately  without  sufficient  reason.   In  this
connection  the  provisions of sub-section  (4)  of
Section  125  of  the Cr.P.C., are  relevant  which
read as under:

          "No  wife  shall  be  entitled  to
          receive  an  allowance  from   her
          husband under this Section if  she
          is   living  in  adultery  or  if,
          without any sufficient reason, she
          refuses  to live with her husband,
          or  if  they are living separately
          by mutual consent".

  Therefore, in order to attract the provisions  of
  sub-section  (4) of Section 125 of  the  Cr.P.C.,
  the  petitioner  was required to prove  that  the
  respondent-wife  started living  separately  with
  her  maternal grand-mother without any sufficient
  reason  and  thereby she disentitled herself  for
  maintenance allowance and in this connection, the
  learned   counsel   for  the  petitioner   placed
  reliance on the decision reported in 1978 CRI. L.
  J.  1645  in  the  matter  of  Mammad  Kunhi  Vs.
  Rukhiya,  in  which Kerala High  Court  has  held
  that;

     "There   are  three  circumstances   under
     which   the  normal  obligation   of   the
     husband  to  maintain the wife will  stand
     negatived.  These are: (a) where the  wife
     is  living in adultery, (b) where the wife
     and  husband  are  living  separately   by
     mutual  consent  and (c)  where  the  wife
     refuses  to live with her husband  without
     sufficient reason.  The burden of  proving
     the   existing   of  any  of   the   three
     circumstances, as the case  may  be,  lies
     on  the  husband.  The wife's refusal  can
     be  proved by the husband indicating  that
     he  is  willing to allow the wife to  live
     with him, that he is ready to take her  to
     his  home  for  residence  with  him,  but
     nevertheless  she  is  not  willing.   But
     when one i.e., proved it would be for  the
     wife  to  show  that there are  sufficient
     reasons  for  her living  apart  from  the
     husband.   The burden of proof of  showing
     the   justifiable  reason  must  in   such
     circumstances rest not on the husband".

9.        Therefore,  in  the light  of  the  above
provision of sub-section (4) of Section 125 of  the
Cr.P.C.,  and the above judgment, if we  look  into
the  evidence adduced by the parties in the present
matter,  we  have  to  examine  that  whether   the
petitioner  herein has been able to  discharge  his
burden  as laid down in Kerala High Court  judgment
and  whether the respondent has been able to  rebut
the evidence of the husband.    If we look into the
petition filed by the respondent in which  she  has
categorically  mentioned in para 4  and  5  of  the
petition  that 4  - 5 months after Gauna  ceremony,
petitioner's  husband started  demanding  dowry  in
cash  and ill-treating her and subjected to cruelty
and  that  was seen by one Lobin Yadav  at  village
Kanhera  that  she  continued to  reside  with  her
husband   maintaining decorum looking to  the  back
ground  of  her  family.   In  para  five  of   the
petition,   she  has  further  stated  that   after
celebrating Teeja festival when her  maternal grand-
mother   -  Jhaman Bai and grand-father  -  Siyaram
Yadav  went  to drop her at her in-laws house,  the
non-petitioner,  her  husband started  abusing  and
said  that  he would not keep her at his residence,
but  her grand-mother and grand-father left her  at
Kenhara  whereas  the evidence in  order  to  prove
these  allegations against the husband led  by  the
wife - respondent herein, is totally contrary.   In
her  evidence  she  has  stated  that  her  husband
started  demanding Cycle, Almirah,  Television  and
for  that  purpose  he started  subjecting  her  to
cruelty  and  beating.   In the  application  under
Section  125  of  the Cr.P.C., in  para  4  of  the
petition, Santoshii Bai has simply stated that  her
husband  started  demanding rupees.   She  had  not
mentioned  about the Cycle, Television and  Almirah
and  in  the evidence she has not stated  that  her
husband demanded cash.  Moreover, she has mentioned    
in  para  4 of the application that this  fact  was
seen by one Lobhin Yadav, but that Lobhin Yadav has 
not  been produced in evidence in order to  support
the  allegation  made in the application.   In  her
evidence  before the Court she has stated that  she
had  not  disclosed this fact to any one.   In  the
cross-examination she has stated  that  at  village
Kanhera  her  father's sister and her  husband  are
residing  and  she  used to visit  regularly  their
house, why she had not disclosed this fact to them,
itself  shows  that  she  was  never  subjected  to
cruelty  or  otherwise in the normal  circumstances
when  she  was regularly visiting their house,  she
ought  to have disclosed the fact i.e., harassment,
cruelty  and  beating.  She has  not  produced  any
evidence  to  corroborate her evidence  and  stated
that Siyaram Yadav , grandfather dropped her at her
in-laws house after Teeja festival, but he has  not
been  examined by her, on the contrary he had  been
examined  by  the applicant as  Witness  No.4   and
Siyaram  has  specifically stated in  his  evidence
that  Santoshi Bai is his  grand-daughter.  In para
3  of his  evidence, he has stated that he went  to
drop  her at Kanhera after Teeja Festival  and  she
remained there for 15 days and when he went to drop
her  at  her in-laws house she started coming  back
and  then  he advised her to remain in her  in-laws
house  and  thereafter  with  very  difficulty  she
remained in her in-laws house for 15 days and  came
back  to  Bemetara.  He has further stated that  in
their caste the dowry is not given or taken.  He is
the  real grandfather of Santoshii Bai and  he  has
not stated anywhere that her husband Shiv Kumar was  
harassing or subjecting to cruelty to Santoshii Bai
for  bringing dowry.  In para 5 of the  application
it  has  been mentioned by Santoshii Bai  that  her
husband  Shiv Kumar started abusing Jhaman Bai  and  
Siyaram Yadav  when they went to leave her  at  her
in-laws   house.     This   fact   has   not   been
corroborated  by Siyaram Yadav.  Moreover,  Siyaram 
Yadav  in his evidence has stated that he does  not
know  as  to whether when  she came  from  her  in-
laws  house,  she  had said  about  the  demand  of
dowry.  He does not know whether  Santoshi Bai  had 
stated  that if she will be sent back  to  her  in-
laws  house, then  there  was a danger to her life.
It  is  wrong  to say that maternal grandmother  of
Santoshi  Bai  had ever told him  that  in-laws  of
Santoshi Bai were harassing her.  In para 10 of his
evidence,  he  stated that when  he  went  to  drop
Santoshii  Bai at her in-laws house, at  that  time
only  mother-in-law and father-in-law  of  were  at
residence  and Shiv Kumar was not at the residence.
He  was  out of the house for the purpose of  doing
the work.   Therefore, this evidence of the witness
is  totally contrary to the allegation levelled  by
respondent  in para no.5 of her petition  in  which
she has mentioned that Shiv Kumar abused her grand- 
father  -  Siyaram Yadav and grand-mother -  Jhaman
Bai,  therefore, the ground taken by  Santoshi  Bai
for  living  separately in para  4  and  5  of  the
petition   has  not  been  proved  but  a  contrary
evidence has been led by her in her statement. Even
as  mentioned above, her grandfather Siyaram  Yadav
and her real uncle have not supported her case.  If
she  is being harassed by the husband then why  she 
has not disclosed this fact to her grand-father and
grand-mother and why she did not report the  matter
to  the  Police.  No reasons have been assigned  by
Santoshi  Bai.    More-over if  we  look  into  the
conduct  of  Santoshi Bai, her husband  Shiv  Kumar
filed  the  petition under Section 98  of  Cr.P.C.,
before  S.D.M.  Court in which  her  statement  was
recorded by SDM.  She has categorically stated that
now  even if her husband undertakes not to beat her
and  not to demand of dowry, even then she was  not
prepared to go her in-laws house.  This fact itself
negatived the claim of Santoshi Bai that  there  is
apprehension of her life that is why she does  want
to go to her husband's house.

9.       On the other hand, Shiv Kumar, husband  of
Santoshi Bai, has categorically stated that he  had
never  asked for any dowry and he had never  beaten
her   and when he went to village Bhinpuri to bring
the  respondent to his residence, she was not there
and she was residing with her maternal grand-mother
-   Jhaman  Bai.   He  further  stated  that  their
marriage  took  place in village  Binpuri  and  the
marriage of Santoshi Bai was arranged by her grand-
father  Siyaram Yadav.  Therefore, he  had gone  to
Bhinpuri  to  bring Santoshi Bai as their  marriage
took  place  at Bhinpuri.  He filed an  application
before SDM Court to bring Santoshi Bai and in  that
application Santoshi Bai has stated that  she  does
not  want to go her in-laws house.  He has  further
stated  that Santoshi Bai asked him that she  would
go  to Mungeli and instead of going to  Mungeli she
went  to Bemetara and after leaving him at the  bus
stand,  she went to her grand-mother's house.   She
has  stated  that  she is being maintained  by  her
maternal grandmother on her own will.  His  mother-
in-law  and  his  mother-in-law's sister  are  also
residing with the grand-mother of Santoshi Bai.  As
he is handicapped that is why she does not like him
and she says that he is not able to satisfy her.

10.      In  view of the above evidence on  record,
the petitioner herein Shiv Kumar filed the petition
under  Section 98 of the Cr.P.C., before the S.D.M.
Court  to bring Santoshi Bai to his house,  but  in
that  petition Santoshi Bai deposed before the  SDM
that  she does not want to go to her in-laws  house
even  if  he  assures that he will  not  demand  of
dowry,  harass and beat.  The charges  levelled  by
Santoshi  Bai  have been denied  by  Shiv  Kumar  -
husband  of  the  respondent and  specific  charges
levelled by Santoshi Bai for living separately, she
has  not  been able to prove these charges.   More-
over  she  led evidence contrary to the allegations
levelled  against him in the petition itself.   The
petitioner has been able to discharge his burden as
he  filed  the  petition for bringing  her  to  his
house,  but she  had declined to come to his house.
Moreover, he went to village Bhinpuri to bring  his
wife,  but  she was not there and even as  per  the
evidence  of  Siyaram Yadav, the  grand  father  of
Santoshi  Bai,  he  has  stated  that  after  Teeja
festival,  when he went to drop her at her  in-laws
house,  she was not prepared to stay there and  she
started  saying that she would not stay here,  then
he  advised  her  to stay there.  Thereafter,  with
great  difficulty she stayed at her  in-laws  house
for  15  days  and  came to Bemetara  and  she  was
residing  with her maternal grandmother, where  her
mother was also residing.

11.   In view of the above, Shiv Kumar, husband  of
Santoshi Bai has been able to discharge his primary
burden  that  Santoshi Bai is  residing  separately
without any sufficient reason and Santoshi Bai  has
not  been  able  to establish and prove  her  case.
Therefore,   the   finding  of  the   learned   3rd
Additional  Sessions Judge that there is sufficient
reason  for  Santoshi  Bai to  live  separately  is
perverse and contrary to the evidence available  on
record,  which cannot be sustained for the  reasons
mentioned hereinbefore this order.

12.   In the result, the revision of the petitioner
is  allowed  and the impugned order of the  learned
3rd  Additional Sessions Judge (FTC) Bemetara dated 
18.10.2003  is  set aside and that of  the  learned
Judicial  Magistrate  First  Class,  Bemetara,   is
restored.

                                        Sd/-
                                        L.C.BHADOO
                                        JUDGE
                                        04/02/2004
Raju

