M.Cr.C.No.3657 OF 2000 P. Venkataramana Murthy & Others Vs. Smt. P. Kavita Murthy

HIGH COURT OF CHHATTISGARH AT BILASPUR          

 M.Cr.C.No.3657 OF 2000  

 P. Venkataramana Murthy &amp; Others  
                        ...Petitioners
                        VERSUS
 Smt. P. Kavita Murthy
                        ...Respondents

! Shri Arjun Yadav, Advocate for the applicants.

^ Respondent in person.

 Hon'ble Justice Shri Fakhruddin
Press any key to continue ...

 Dated : 30/04/2004

: ORDER  

                          O R D E R

      This  petition under Section 482 Cr.P.C. has been filed

by  the  applicants for quashing the complaint registered  by

the  Judicial Magistrate First Class, Raipur for  an  offence

punishable under Section 406 of I.P.C.

2.   Briefly stated the facts are that the applicant no.1 and

the  respondent were married on 3/11/1995 according  to  Hind

Rites  and  Customs.   They  lived  together  but  it  is  on

3/12/1997 the respondent was sent to her maternal home on the 

pretext  that  her husband is going to Nagpur and  thereafter

she  received the notice.  The respondent's case is that  she

had  also  reported  the matter under Section  498-A  of  IPC

against  the  accused  persons. It is stated  that  when  the

report  was  lodged,  the list was submitted  to  the  police

station,  panchnama was prepared, some articles  were  given,

whose  list is there, and other articles were not  given  and

have been misappropriated, which are her stridhan.   It    is

further stated  that

she  served  a  notice  on  30/5/1998  and  on  01.08.1998  a

complaint under Sections 405 and 406 I.P.C. read with Section

200  Cr.P.C. was filed by the respondent before the  Judicial

Magistrate  First  Class, Raipur.  The complainant  submitted

the  list  of twelve witnesses with their addresses alongwith

the  list  of articles, which have been misappropriated.  The

learned  Magistrate recorded the statement of Smt. P.  Kavita

Murthy  (AW-1)  on 02.08.1999.  The statement  of  P.  Vasant

Kumar  Naidu  (AW-2),  the father of  complainant,  was  also

recorded on the said date.  The statements of Mahendra  Kumar 

(AW-3)  and  Yashwant Rao Naidu (AW-4) were also recorded  on  

28.08.1999.

3.    The complainant (AW-1) in her statement has stated that

her  marriage was solemnized on 03.11.1995 at Kundan  Palace, 

Raipur according to Hindu Rites and Customs.  At the time  of

marriage,  all  her relatives were present including  mother,

father  and  maternal  grand-father.   The  complainant   has

further stated that gold and silver ornaments and sarees were

presented  in the marriage.  She has also stated that  though

the  sarees have been returned by the accused persons but the

gold and silver ornaments were not returned.  She stated that

after the marriage, the accused persons were ill-treating her

and  was being tortured mentally and physically.  She further

stated  that the accused persons called her father  and  sent

her  to Raipur with him saying that her husband has to appear

in  the examination at Nagpur on 03.12.1995.  She also stated

that she has lodged an FIR on 16.12.1997 in the Mahila Police

Thana  for an offence punishable under Section 498-A   I.P.C.

She  further stated that she had filed the application  under

Section 125 Cr.P.C. for maintenance and a sum of Rs.500/- per

month  has  been awarded to her by the Court.  The father  of

the  complainant (AW-2) in his statement has stated that  the

complainant  is his daughter and her marriage was  solemnized

with  P. Venkatraman Murthy on 03.11.1995 at Raipur according 

to  Hindu Rites and Customs.  He further stated that all  his

relatives  and the relatives of accused persons were  present

in the marriage.  He also stated that at the time of marriage

gold  and silver ornaments of about Rs.1,50,000/- which  were

purchased  from  the shop of Mahendra Kumar Shah,  were  also 

given.  He stated that an FIR was also lodged by his daughter

against  the accused persons for an offence punishable  under

Section  498-A  I.P.C. and the matter is pending  before  the

Court.   He  further stated that in the said case the  police

has seized the articles except the ornaments from the accused

persons and has given him on suprudnama. He also stated  that 

he  was also given a Mukhtyarnama by his daughter, as she was 

studying.

4.    Mahendra Kumar (AW-3) in his statement has stated  that

he  is  a businessman of gold and silver, having his shop  in

Sadar  Bazar  Raipur  in  the  name  of  Shailesh  Kumar  and

Brothers.   He is also having a firm in the name of  Anuradha

Jewellers.   He further stated that he knows the  complainant

Kavita  and her father Shri Vasant Kumar Naidu from the  year

1980-81.  He also stated that for the marriage of Kavita, the

ornaments of ten taula gold and 3-4 kilogram silver were made

by  him  as  well  as  few ornaments and  utensils  were  got

polished.  He stated that in the marriage, the ornaments were

worn  by  Kavita.   The utensils were kept in  front  of  the

Mandap.    Yashwant  Rao Naidu (AW-4) in  his  statement  has 

stated  that  he knows the complainant Kavita.   She  is  his

niece.   The  marriage of Kavita was solemnized on 3/11/1995.

He  further  stated that nowadays Kavita  is  living  in  her

maternal  home,  as  her husband has sent her  alongwith  her

father.  He also stated that the husband of Kavita is  trying

to  take divorce from her. He stated that the ornaments given

in  the  marriage  have  not been  returned  by  the  accused

persons.  The  cash  amount  of  Rs.1  lac  on  1/6/1995  and

Rs.10,000/- in the marriage mandap was also given on  credit.

He  further  stated  that  this amount  was  promised  to  be

returned by the accused persons.


5.    The learned Magistrate on the basis of the complaint as

well   as  the  evidence  recorded  and  after  hearing   the

complainant  and her counsel and considering the material  on

record as well as the law laid down by the Apex Court in  the

case of Pratibha Rani vs. Suraj Kumar and others reported  in

AIR  1985  SC  628 registered the offence on  13/12/1999  and

directed to issue process.


6.    Against  the  order of registering the  complaint,  the

accused  persons  preferred  a  revision  before  the   Addl.

Sessions  Judge, Raipur being Cr.R. No.33/2000.  The  grounds

urged  in the revision were (1) that the learned lower  court

has  grossly erred in law and facts in passing impugned order

against the petitioners; (2) that the learned lower court has

misappropriated and misapprehended the entire documents filed 

by the respondent on record; (3) that the learned court ought

to  have held that where there was no settlement of dowry and

without  receipt  of  records of  articles  at  the  time  of

marriage  the complaint filed after lapse of ample  time  the

criminal   complaint   cannot  be   initiated   against   the

petitioner.   The  Court  ought to  have  seen  the  relevant

documents  and  evidence on record before  taking  cognizance

against the petitioners and therefore the complaint is liable

to  be set aside and issue of process is bad in law and hence

liable to be quashed in the interest of justice; (4) that the

learned court ought to have held that the seized articles are

disputed is undecided in pending criminal court and therefore

the  initiating  criminal  prosecution  is  bad  in  law  and

therefore the issue of process is liable to be quashed in the

interest of justice; (5) that the learned court ought to have

applied his judicial mind before issuing process after taking

cognizance   against  the  petitioners   which   amounts   to

miscarriage of justice and against the established principles

of law.

7.     The Revisional Court after considering the material on

record  and  hearing  the  learned counsel  for  the  parties

dismissed  the  revision.   Being aggrieved,  the  applicants

preferred this petition for quashing the complaint.

8.    The first ground urged is about the maintainability  of

the  complaint.  It is contended that the complaint was filed

by the complainant's father and the counsel and as such it is

not  maintainable. This has been considered by the Revisional

court  as well and noted that the complaint is signed by  the

complainant.   It was presented by her counsel    and     the

complainant's   father.  In

para  6  of  the order, the Revisional court has  noted  that

though in the cause title of the complaint it is mentioned as

the  complainant through Mukhtyar &amp; Father Shri  P.B.  Naidu,

but  in  all  pages of complaint, list of witnesses  and  the

documents  annexed  with  the complaint,  the  signatures  of

complainant  Smt.  P. Kavita Murthy are there.   It  is  also

noted  that  on  the  date of filing of the  complaint,  i.e.

1/8/1998,  she  was present.  She has also  examined  herself

before the Court of learned Magistrate as A.W.1.  In view  of

the  aforesaid circumstances, the court below negatived  this

ground.  This Court has reconsidered the same again and there

is no merit in it. It is just by way of abundant caution that

the  complaint was filed through father, as complainant could

not  attend  all the dates because she was studying  at  that

time.  This is disclosed in the Power of Attorney filed  with

complaint.  The question of maintainability of the  complaint

by  the  Power of Attorney holder had been dealt with by  the

High Court of M.P. in the case of Dr. Anil Kumar Haritwal and

others vs. Sant Prakash Gupta and others reported in 2001 (3)

MPHT 325, wherein it has been held as under: 

      "The  power  of  attorney is the  instrument  by
      which a person is authorized to act as the agent
      of  the  person granting it.  Section 2  of  the
      Powers of Attorney Act empowers the donee  of  a
      power  of  attorney to do anything `in and  with
      his own name and signature', by the authority of
      the  donor of the power.  This section  declares
      that  everything so done `shall be as  effectual
      in  law  as if it has been done by the donee  of
      the power in the name and with the signature the
      donor thereof and as such, the act committed  by
      the  holder  of the power of attorney  would  be
      presumed  to be an act committed by  the  person
      who  gives power of attorney.  In that  view  of
      the  matter,  lodging of the  complaint  by  the
      power of attorney holder of the payee could  not
      be
      said to be illegal or invalid.  Thus, in view of
      the  specific  provision of  Section  2  of  the
      Powers of Attorney Act, the complaint lodged  by
      the  power  of  attorney holder is  a  complaint
      lodged by the payee."

9.   Another question raised is about issuing process against

the  petitioners  is  concerned,  in  this  connection,   the

Revisional Court in para 10 of its judgment has gone  through

the  evidence for the purposes of issuance of summons and has

considered the evidence of the respondent, her father  P.B.K.

Naidu,  Mahendra Kumar and Yashwant Rao Naidu.  In  para  11,  

the  Revisional court also considered that the articles  were

given  by the family members of the respondent. The list  has

been  filed in the Court.  The articles are mentioned in  the

list  and  the same is a matter of evidence and parties  will

have  right  to  make  their submissions  before  the  trying

Magistrate.

10.  Prima facie, for the purposes of issuance of notice, the

judgment  of  the  Apex  Court in the case  of  Deputy  Chief

Controller  of Exports and Imports vs. Roshanlal Agrawal  and

others reported in AIR 2003 SC 1900 is pertinent.  Para 9  of

the said judgment is relevant and is quoted below:

       "In  determining  the question  whether  any
       process  is  to be issued or not,  what  the
       Magistrate  has to be satisfied  is  whether
       there  is  sufficient ground for  proceeding
       and  not, whether there is sufficient ground
       for  conviction.   Whether the  evidence  is
       adequate for supporting the conviction,  can
       be  determined only at the trial and not  at
       the  stage  of  inquiry.  At  the  stage  of
       issuing  the  process to  the  accused,  the
       Magistrate   is  not  required   to   record
       reasons."

This  question  was considered by the Hon. Supreme  Court  in

U.P.

Pollution Control Board vs. M/s Mohan Meakins Ltd. and others

reported in AIR 2000 SC 1456 and after noticing the law  laid

down  in Kanti Bhadra Shah vs. State of West Bengal (AIR 2000 

SC 522),  it was held as under:

       "The  legislature has stressed the  need  to
       record reasons in certain situations such as
       dismissal  of  a  complaint without  issuing
       process.  There is no such legal requirement
       imposed on a Magistrate for passing detailed
       order  while  issuing summons.  The  process
       issued  to accused cannot be quashed  merely
       on  the  ground that the Magistrate had  not
       passed a speaking order."

In  the  instant  case, however, the learned  Magistrate  has

considered the evidence adduced by the complainant  and  also

the  judgment of the Apex Court in the case of Pratibha  Rani

(supra) and passed speaking order.  It is neither cryptic nor

mechanical. 


11.  The next ground raised and reiterated here is that there

was  no  dowry.   It is said that no dowry was  settled.   No

agreement  was  there,  therefore, dowry  was  not  paid  and

offence is not made out.  This contention has no force.   The

question  here  is for return of articles  given  to  her  by

parents  and  relations  and  stridhan  property.   The  Hon.

Supreme  Court in the case of Pratibha Rani (Supra) has  held

as under:

       "It  cannot  be  said that  upon  a  woman
       entering   the   matrimonial   home    the
       ownership  of  stridhan  property  becomes
       joint  with  her husband or his relations.
       Even   if  the  stridhan  property  of   a
       married  woman, is placed in  the  custody
       of  her  husband or in-laws they would  be
       deemed  to be trustees and bound to return
       the same if and when demanded by her."


12.   The  next ground raised was about the pendency  of  the

case  under  Section  498-A of IPC.  The  said  case  is  for

distinct  offence.  Each case will have to be  considered  on

the basis of material placed and evidence adduced.


13.   Learned  counsel  for  the  applicants  contended  that

general  and vague statement does not fulfill the requirement

of  Section 406 I.P.C.  It is further stated that there is no

evidence  whatsoever to suggest that any  jwellery  had  been

entrusted  to any of the three applicants and it should  have

been  held  that  all  the jwellery that  was  given  to  the

respondent  was  worn  by her at the  time  of  marriage  and

thereafter it continued to be in her possession.  It is  also

stated  that filing of a list of ornaments by the prosecution

does not establish that those ornaments were in fact given in

marriage to the bride. These are the questions, which may  be

considered  by  the trial court.  The judgment  of  the  Apex

Court  in  the  case of Pratibha Rani (supra) is  a  complete

answer to the submissions made.  Para 60 of the said judgment 

is pertinent and is quoted below:


       "By  way  of post-script we might add that  we
       are  indeed  amazed  to find  that  so  deeply
       drowned  and inherently engrossed are some  of
       the  High Courts in the concept of matrimonial
       home  qua  the stridhan property of a  married
       woman that they simply refuse to believe  that
       such  properties are meant for  the  exclusive
       use  of  the  wife and could also  be  legally
       entrusted  to  the husband or  his  relations.
       Thus,   if   the  husband  or  his   relations
       misappropriate the same and refuse to hand  it
       over  to  the wife and convert them  to  their
       own  use  and  even  though  these  facts  are
       clearly  alleged in a complaint for an offence
       under  Section 405/406 IPC, some  Courts  take
       the   view   that   the   complaint   is   not
       maintainable.   Thus,  even  when  clear   and
       specific   allegations   are   made   in   the
       complaint  that such properties were entrusted
       to  the husband, they refuse to believe  these
       hard  facts and brush them aside on the ground
       that  they are vague.  The allegations of  the
       complainant  in  this appeal and  the  appeals
       before  the  Allahabad  and  the  Punjab   and
       Haryana  High Courts show that it  is  not  so
       but  is  a  pure figment of the  High  Court's
       imagination  as  a result of  which  the  High
       Courts completely shut their eyes to the  fact
       that  the  husband could also be guilty  under
       Section  405/406  IPC in  view  of  the  clear
       allegations made in the complaint.   In  other
       words,  the  High  Courts  simply  refuse   to
       believe   that   there   can   be   any   such
       entrustment and even if it is so,  no  offence
       is  committed.  Such an approach amounts to  a
       serious   distortion  of  the  criminal   law,
       resulting    in   perpetrating    grave    and
       substantial  miscarriage  of  justice  to  the
       wife  at  the  hands of the High  Courts.   We
       cannot  countenance such a wrong and  perverse
       approach."


14.   So far as the aspect that the marriage had taken  place

at Raipur and the articles were given at Raipur is concerned,

the  Court  has considered.  This Court has gone through  the

material on record.  Even otherwise, the applicants may raise

these  grounds before the learned Magistrate, which  will  be

considered on its own merits.


15.   Shri  Arjun Yadav, learned counsel for the  applicants,

read para 77 of the judgment of the Apex Court in the case of

Pratibha  Rani  (supra),  which is minority  view.   He  also

relied  upon the judgment of the Karnataka High Court in  the

case  of  Smt.  Fulwanti Agrawal vs. Naresh K.R.  and  others

reported  in  2000 Cr.L.J. 3236. That was not a case  between

husband  and wife.  Counsel further relied upon the  judgment

of  Madras  High Court in the case of Alagappan vs.  Thilagam

reported in 2000 Cr.L.J. 3239.  That was the case relating to

maintenance.   It  has nothing to do with the  present  case.

Counsel  also relied upon the judgment of the High  Court  of

M.P.  in the case of Shyam Sunder Banka and others vs.  State 

of  M.P. &amp; others reported in 1983 MPLJ 869 to say that it is

a  dispute of civil nature.  Counsel placed reliance upon the

judgment of the Apex Court in the case of Roshanlal Raina vs.

State  of  Jammu  &amp;  Kashmir reported in  1983  Cr.L.J.  975.

Counsel further relied upon the judgment of the High Court of

M.P.  in  the case of Vijay Kumar and another vs. Sunita  and

others  reported in 2000 Cr.L.J. 4116 to show  the  place  of

trial.  Here  in  the  present case, the facts  are  entirely

different.    Counsel also relied upon the  judgment  of  the

Andhra  Pradesh High Court in the case of Rohinton Noria  vs.

M/s  NCC Finance Ltd., Hyderabad and another reported in 2000 

Cr.L.J.  4117.  That  was  the case  relating  to  Negotiable

Instruments Act.  Counsel further relied upon the judgment of

the High Court of M.P. in the case of Isaac Jaise and another

vs.  Jasmit Singh Saluja and another reported in 2003 Cr.L.J.

1980.   That  was  the  case  filed  against  the  financier.

Counsel  also relied upon the judgment of the Karnataka  High

Court in the case of S. Sathyanarayana vs. State of Karnataka

reported in 2003 Cr.L.J. 1983.   This Court has gone  through

the aforesaid judgments.  All these cases have no application

in the facts and circumstances of the case.

16.   So  far  as the facts and circumstances of the  present

case is concerned, the judgment of the Apex Court in the case

of  Pratibha Rani vs. Suraj Kumar and others reported in  AIR

1985 SC 628 has been referred to in earlier paragraphs and is

referred  to  in this regard. This judgment has further  been

considered by the Apex Court in the cases of Radha  Rani  vs.

Pramod  Kumar Oberai reported in 1995(4) Supp. SCC 491  (Para  

2),  Smt.  Rashmi  Kumar vs. Mahesh Kumar Bhada  reported  in  

1997(2)  SCC 397(Para 14) and S.W. Palanitkar and others  vs.

State  of Bihar and another reported in 2002(1) SCC 241 (Para

15).

17.   Para  2  of the judgment of Apex Court in the  case  of

Radha Rani (supra) is quoted below:

         "The  High  Court has quashed  the  complaint
         made  by  the  wife  under  Section  406  IPC
         against the husband, father-in-law, mother-in-
         law  and  in-laws,  on the  ground  that  the
         entrustment  of ornaments, clothes  and  cash
         was   not  specifically  mentioned   in   the
         complaint.  We have perused the complaint and
         also   the   statement  of  the   complainant
         recorded  by  the Additional  Chief  Judicial
         Magistrate.   We  find  that  the  conclusion
         reached by the High Court appears to  be  not
         correct.  There are allegations to the effect
         of  entrustment, the correctness of which, of
         course,  will  have to be gone  into  in  the
         trial  of  the case.  It cannot, however,  be
         stated  that  there  was  no  entrustment  of
         articles  and cash pleaded in the  complaint.
         For   taking  cognizance  of  the  case,  the
         allegations in the complaint, in our opinion,
         are  sufficient.  The High Court,  therefore,
         was  in error in quashing the complaint under
         Section  406  and  the proceedings  connected
         therewith taken by the Magistrate."

18.   The relevant portion of para 14 of the judgment of Apex

Court  in  the  case of Smt. Rashmi Kumar (supra)  is  quoted

below:

         "...It is fairly settled legal position  that
         at  the  time  of  taking cognizance  of  the
         offence,  the Court has to consider only  the
         averments  made in the complaint  or  in  the
         charge-sheet filed under Section 173, as  the
         case  may be.  It was held in State of  Bihar
         vs.  Rajendra Agrawalla (1996) 8 SCC 164 that
         it  is  not  open for the Court  to  sift  or
         appreciate  the evidence at that  stage  with
         reference  to the material and  come  to  the
         conclusion that no prima facie case  is  made
         out for proceeding further in the matter.  It
         is equally settled law that it is open to the
         Court,  before issuing the process, to record
         the  evidence  and  on consideration  of  the
         averments  made  in  the  complaint  and  the
         evidence thus adduced, it is required to find
         out whether an offence has been made out.  On
         finding  that such an offence has  been  made
         out  and  after  taking  cognizance  thereof,
         process would be issued to the respondent  to
         take further steps in the matters.  If it  is
         a charge-sheet filed under Section 173 of the
         Code, the facts stated by the prosecution  in
         the   charge-sheet,  on  the  basis  of   the
         evidence   collected  during   investigation,
         would   disclose   the  offence   for   which
         cognizance  would be taken by  the  court  to
         proceed  further in the matter.  Thus  it  is
         not  the province of the court at that  stage
         to  embark upon and sift the evidence to come
         to  the  conclusion whether offence has  been
         made   out   or   not.  The  learned   Judge,
         therefore, was clearly in error in attempting
         to  sift the evidence with reference  to  the
         averments  made  by  the  respondent  in  the
         counter-affidavit to find out whether or  not
         offence punishable under Section 406 IPC  had
         been made out. "

19.   Para  15 of the judgment of Apex Court in the  case  of

S.W. Palanitkar (supra) is quoted below:

         "In  case  of  a complaint under Section  200
         Cr.P.C.  or  I.P.C.  a  Magistrate  can  take
         cognizance of the offence made out  and  then
         has   to  examine  the  complainant  and  his
         witnesses,  if  any, to ascertain  whether  a
         prima  facie  case is made  out  against  the
         accused to issue process so that the issue of
         process is prevented on a complaint which  is
         either falls or vexatious or intended only to
         harass.   Such  examination  is  provided  in
         order  to  find out whether there is  or  not
         sufficient ground for proceeding.  The  words
         `sufficient  ground' used under  Section  203
         have to be construed to mean the satisfaction
         that  a  prima facie case is made out against
         the accused and not sufficient ground for the
         purpose of conviction."

20.   In view of the aforesaid judgment of the Apex Court and

the settled law, the position emerges is that the Court below

has  committed  no  illegality in registering  the  case  and

further  that  no case has been made out for interference  in

exercise  of  jurisdiction under  Section  482  Cr.P.C.   The

petition  fails and is dismissed.  However it is  made  clear

that the trial Court shall proceed and decide the case on its

own merits.


21.   At  this  stage,  learned counsel  for  the  applicants

pointed  out  that  the applicants had  appeared  before  the

learned  Magistrate.   It is further  pointed  out  that  the

learned   Magistrate  had  granted  exemption  from  personal

appearance  to  applicant No.3 being an old lady  vide  order

dated  28.03.2001  and she is now appearing through  counsel.

Learned  counsel prays that the applicant No.2  may  also  be

granted exemption from personal appearance, as he is also  an

old  man.   Counsel may make suitable application before  the

learned  Magistrate,  which will be  considered  on  its  own

merits.  However, in the ends of justice, it is directed that

till  the application is filed before the learned Magistrate,

applicant  No.2  is  also  granted  exemption  from  personal

appearance. 

                                                Sd/-
                                             FAKHRUDDIN
                                               JUDGE
                                              30/4/2004.
A/H

