Criminal Appeal No 509 of 2007 Shivnandan Marar Vs. State     of     Chhattisgarh

HIGH COURT OF CHATTISGARH AT BILASPUR       



               Criminal Appeal No 509 of 2007





                        Shivnandan Marar
                                      ...Petitioners


                           Versus



                      State     of     Chhattisgarh
                                                  ...Respondents



(CRMINAL APPEAL UNDER SECTION 374 (2) OF THE CODE OF CRIMINAL              
                      PROCEDURE, 1973)

!     Mrs. Savita Tiwari, counsel for the appellant



^     Mr. Pankaj Shrivastava, Panel lawyer for the State/respondent





Honble Mr. T.P. Sharma, J 


       Dated:12/11/2008



:       Judgment

                        ORAL JUDGMENT
               (Passed on 12th November, 2008)

     By   this  appeal,  the  appellant  has  challenged  the
legality  and  propriety of the judgment  of  conviction  and
order  of  sentence dated 18.5.2007 passed by the  Additional
Sessions  Judge,  Sarangarh,  in Sessions  Trial  No.136/2005
whereby  the learned Additional Sessions Judge after  holding
the accused/appellant guilty for the offence punishable under
Section 306 of the Indian Penal Code sentenced him to undergo
rigorous  imprisonment  for  5  years  and  to  pay  fine  of
Rs.10,000/-, in default of payment of fine to further undergo
rigorous imprisonment for 6 months.

2.    The  judgment of conviction is challenged on the ground
that  without  there being any cogent and credible  evidence,
the trial court has convicted and sentenced the appellant  as
aforementioned and thereby committed illegality.
3.    Case of the prosecution, in brief; Son of the appellant
namely Kanhaiyalal was married with deceased Sukhmati who was    
residing  with  the  appellant and other  co-accused  in  her
matrimonial house. Accused Shivnandan who is father-in-law of
the  deceased  is  behaved  towards his  daughter-in-law  was
indecent and many times he used to enter in the room  of  the
deceased Sukhmati with intent to commit sexual intercourse or
to  outrage  her modesty and used to harass and  torture  his
daughter-in-law. As a result of such harass and  torture  and
indecent behave of the appellant, Sukhmati committed  suicide
on  26.1.2005  by consuming insecticide. Merg was  registered
vide  Exs.P/10 and P/11. Investigating officer left  for  the
scene  of occurrence and after giving notice to the witnesses
vide  Ex.P/1, he prepared inquest (Ex.P/2) over the  body  of
Sukhmati.  Dead  body  of Sukhmati was sent  for  autopsy  to
Primary  Health Centre, Sarangarh where autopsy of dead  body 
of   Sukhmati  was conducted by the team of the  doctor  vide
Ex.P/12A. Dr. M.K.Manhar    (PW-12) who has conducted autopsy   
has opined that death was due cardio respiratory arrest as  a
result  of consuming poison. Her viscera were preserved.  One
packet of insecticide (foret) and soil of the room where  she
committed suicide were seized vide Ex.P/4. Spot map  (Ex.P/5) 
was  prepared. Viscera was seized vide Ex.P/13. On the  basis
of  merg-intimation, F.I.R. Ex. P/9 was lodged. Viscera  were
sent for chemical examination vide Ex.P/15.

4.    After  recording the statement of the  witnesses  under
Section 161 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 and after
completion  of investigation, charge sheet was filed  in  the
Court  of Judicial Magistrate First Class, Sarangarh  who  in
turn  committed  the case to the Court of  Sessions,  Raigarh
from  where the Additional Sessions Judge, Sarangarh received
the same on transfer for trial.

5.    In  order  to prove the guilt of the appellant/accused,
the  prosecution examined as many as 15 witnesses.  Statement  
of  the  accused/appellant was recorded under Section 313  of
the  Cr.P.C., in which he denied the circumstances  appearing
against him and innocence and false implication is pleaded.
7.    Learned  Additional Sessions Judge after  affording  an
opportunity  of hearing to the respective parties,  convicted
and  sentenced  the  accused/appellant as aforementioned  and
acquitted  the other co-accused i.e. husband of the  deceased
Kanhaiyalal and mother-in-law of the deceased.

8.    I  have  heard  Mrs.  Savita Tiwari,  counsel  for  the
appellant  and              Mr.  Pankaj  Shrivastava,   Panel
lawyer  for  the  State/respondent and perused  the  judgment
impugned and record of the trial court.

9.    Learned  counsel  for the appellant  submits  that  the
prosecution  has  not  adduced  any  credible  and  clinching
evidence against the appellant. The appellant is the  father-
in-law of the deceased. He has not committed any offence. His
behave  was not indecent. He has not entered in the  room  of
the  deceased with an intent to outrage her modesty or he has
not  tried  to  commit sexual intercourse with the  deceased.
Evidence  adduced  on  behalf  of  the  prosecution  is   not
sufficient for warrant conviction.

10.   On  the  other hand, judgment impugned is supported  on
behalf of the State/respondent and submits that statements of
Sonau  Ram (PW-1), father of the deceased, Kartik Ram (PW-2),  
grandfather of the deceased, Lalit Ram (PW-3), Dhansai  Patel
(PW-4)   and  Phulsai  (PW-10)  are  sufficient  for  drawing
inference  that the appellant used to go inside the  room  of
the  deceased  with intent to outrage her modesty  and  as  a
result of indecent behave of the appellant, she compelled  to
commit suicide.

11.   Abnormal death as a result of consuming poison  is  not
disputed   on   behalf  of  the  appellant.  Also   otherwise
established by the statements of Sonau Ram (PW-1), Kartik Ram  
(PW-2, Lalit Ram (PW-3), Dhansai Patel (PW-4) and Phulsai (PW-  
10)  and  Dr.  M.K.Manhar (PW-12)  who  has  stated  that  on
27.1.2005  he  conducted autopsy of the body of Sukhmati  and
opined that death was due to cardio respiratory arrest  as  a
result of consuming poison. By these evidence, unnatural  and
abnormal  death  is  established. The  prosecution  has  also
adduced the evidence to the effect that the deceased Sukhmati
has  committed  suicide  by consuming poison.  Commission  of 
suicide by Sukhmati is not disputed.

12.   In  order  to  appreciate the  contentions  of  learned
counsel for the parties, I examined the evidence recorded  on
behalf  of the prosecution.  Sonau Ram (PW-1), father of  the
deceased,  has stated in his evidence that the appellant  and
his  wife, his daughter were always used to insult and  abuse
the  deceased. He has suggested the appellant and his son not
to  harass  her  daughter and finally her daughter  committed
suicide. Kartik Ram (PW-2), grandfather of the deceased,  has
stated  in his evidence that his granddaughter had  told  him
that  the appellant used to enter in her room at the time  of
her  sleeping  with intent to commit sexual intercourse  with
her  (xyr dke djus ds fu;r ls). He has also stated that as  a
result  of  such  indecent  behave  of  the  appellant,  once
deceased has left the house of the appellant and she  changed
her decision on the advice of this witness and other persons.
Lalit  Ram (PW-3) has also stated that once he was called  by
Kartik  Ram  and Phulsai. They went to village Boirada  where
Sukhmati told them that her father-in-law had entered in  her
room  for  committing sexual intercourse with her. Statements
of Lalit Ram (PW-3), Dhansai Patel (PW-4) and Phulsai (PW-10) 
had supported the statement of Kartik Ram (PW-2). Phulsai (PW- 
10)  has  also stated that one time he went to the  house  of
Sukhmati  along with Kartik Ram where Sukhmati told him  that
the  appellant  has  entered into  her  room  for  committing
intercourse and even the appellant has caught hold her  hand.
He  has  also stated that after 4 to 6 months of the  alleged
incident,  Sukhmati  committed suicide.  Defence  has  cross-
examined these witnesses at length, but defence has not  been
able to elicit anything in their cross-examination to discard
their  testimony.  On  the other hand, these  witnesses  have
specifically  stated that the appellant who is  father-in-law
of   the   deceased  Sukhmati  has  tried  to  commit  sexual
intercourse with her and with intent to commit such  offence,
he  has entered in the room of Sukhmati which she has opposed 
and  even she called the persons and tried to leave the house
of the appellant, but on the advice of her grandfather-Kartik
Ram  and other witnesses, she had not left the house  of  the
appellant.   The  appellant  who  is  father-in-law  of   the
deceased Sukhmati was under an obligation to save and  secure 
the  life  of  her  daughter-in-law and to  protect  her  but
instead  of  discharging his moral and legal obligation,  the
appellant  has  tried  to dishonor her and  tried  to  commit
sexual  intercourse with her. The appellant is  not  stranger
and  he  is  father-in-law i.e. father  of  her  husband  and
unwarranted  and  indecent behave  of  the  appellant  became
ultimate cause for the commission of her suicide.

13.   The witnesses adduced on behalf of the prosecution  are
matrimonial relatives of the deceased Sukhmati. Deceased died
within  7  years  of her marriage, but the relatives  of  the
deceased  had  not  levelled any charge of  demand  of  dowry
against  the  appellant  and other co-accused  who  had  been
acquitted  by  the  trial court though the  same  was  easily
available  to  those witnesses. In case of false  implication
they have also not made any great allegation against any  co-
accused. It appears from the statements of Kartik Ram (PW-2),
Lalit  Ram  (PW-3), Dhansai Patel (PW-4) and Phulsai  (PW-10) 
that  when  indecent  behavior of  her  father-in-law  became
intolerable  to the deceased then she was compelled  to  call
her  grandfather Kartik Ram and Kartik Ram (PW-3) went to the
house  of  the  appellant and the deceased along  with  other
aforesaid witnesses where she told the fact to them which was
normally  not possible to narrate by daughter-in-law  to  any
person including her parental relatives against her father-in-
law especially when  at the time of narrating such allegation
the  deceased was residing in the house of the appellant with
the appellant and also residing in the house of the appellant
along  with  appellant for 4 to 6 months till her  death.  It
shows  that no option except to take some help from  parental
(relatives)  was left with her and her relatives and  another
member  of  the society had tried to pacify and  resolve  the
problem.  The  defence has not suggested these  witnesses  in
their         cross-examination   that   they   are    having
interestedness  or  enmity  with  the  appellant  alone.  The
appellant and on the basis of any such enmity they have  made
false allegation against the appellant.
14.   Deceased was daughter-in-law of the appellant. She  was
member   of  his  family  under  the  chain  of  relationship
especially matrimonial relation. The daughter-in-law are  not
free  to  leave their matrimonial house or to live  in  their
maternal house when they so wishes in the present culture and
system  of  society. They have to live in  their  matrimonial
house  even in adverse circumstances unless the circumstances 
so  adverse, becomes difficult for her survival. As a  result
of  indecent behave and conduct of the appellant, survival of
the  deceased Sukhmati became difficult and intolerable, then
she  committed  suicide  as  a result  of  such  conduct  and
indecent  behave  of  the appellant  which  was  aid  in  the
commission of suicide.

15.  After appreciating the evidence available on record, the
trial  court  has  convicted the appellant  for  the  offence
punishable  under  Section  306 of  the  Indian  Penal  Code.
Conviction  is  based  on  credible  and  reliable  evidence.
Conviction is sustainable.

16.   As  regards the question of sentence is concerned,  the
trial court has sentenced the appellant rigorous imprisonment
for  5  years and to pay fine of Rs.10,000/-, in  default  of
payment of fine to further undergo rigorous imprisonment  for
6  months. The appellant is not stranger. He is father-in-law
of  the deceased Sukhmati who was under an obligation to save
and  secure  the life of his daughter-in-law, but instead  of
saving  and securing the life of his daughter-in-law  he  has
tried to commit sexual intercourse and outrage the modesty of
her daughter-in-law and compelled her for committing suicide.

17.   Taking  into  consideration the  inhuman  and  indecent
behave  of       father-in-law with his daughter-in-law,  the
accused/appellant   does   not  deserve   any   sympathy   or
concession. 

18.  Consequently, the appeal being devoid of merit is liable
to be dismissed and it is hereby dismissed.
                                                  JUDGE

