Election Petition No.8 of 2004 Premchand Sonwani Vs. 1.   Dhanendra  Sahu

HIGH COURT OF CHATTISGARH AT BILASPUR       


               Election Petition No.8 of 2004

                         Premchand Sonwani
                                           ...Petitioners

                    versus

                    1.   Dhanendra  Sahu

                     2.   Chandrashekhar Sahu

                     3.   Kailash  Mishra

                     4.   Amarsingh Nishad

                     5.   Tikendra Thakur

                     6.   Sekhuram Banjare

                     7.   Hemant Kumar Tandon

                     8.   The   Returning  Officer
                                            ...Respondents



!          Shri B.P.Sharma, counsel for the petitioner.


^          Dr.  N.K.Shukla, Senior Advocate and Shri
          Manindra   Shrivastava,  Senior  Advocate
          with  Shri Ashish Shrivastava, Shri Anand
          Verma and Shri Rakesh Dubey, counsel  for
          respondent No.1.
          None appeared for other respondents.



           Hon'ble Shri Dilip Raosaheb
            Deshmukh, J.



      Dated:08/09/2008


:     Judgement



     Election Petition under Sections 80, 80A and 81 of
         the Representation of the People Act, 1951


                            ORDER
         (Passed on this 8th day of September, 2008)

      In the election petition filed under Sections

80,  80A and 81 of the Representation of the People

Act,   1951   (henceforth  `the  Act,  1951')   the

following issue arises for determination:-


          "Whether  the nomination  paper  of
          the  petitioner has been improperly
          rejected?"


(2)   Another issue was framed by this Court, which

is as under:


          "Whether  the election petition  is
          liable   to   be  dismissed   under
          Section  86  for non-compliance  of
          the provisions of Section 81(3)  of
          the  Representation of  the  People
          Act, 1951?"

On   25-08-2008,  Dr.  N.K.Shukla,  learned  Senior

Advocate for the respondent No.1 did not press  the

above  issue.   It  is, therefore,  unnecessary  to

dwell on it.


(3)   Section  100(1)(c) of the Act, 1951  empowers

the  High  Court  to  declare the election  of  the

returned  candidate to be void  if  it  is  of  the

opinion  that  any nomination has  been  improperly

rejected.


(4)   It is not in dispute that the petitioner  had

filed  nomination  for election of  the  member  of

Legislative  Assembly of the State of  Chhattisgarh

from Constituency No.42, i.e., Abhanpur within  the

time prescribed for filing of nominations, i.e., on

14-11-2003  at  02:45  P.M.  before  the  returning

officer.   It  is  also not in  dispute  that  Shri

C.K.Khetan,  witness No.2 for the  respondent  No.1

was the returning officer for Abhanpur Constituency

and  had  rejected the nomination of the petitioner

on the following ground:-


       "uke&amp;funsZ'ku i= jn~n djrk gWwa D;ksafd
     Hkkx  3,d+ esa mUgksaus ?kksf"kr fd;k  gS
     fd os nks"kfl) Bgjk, x, gSa-".


(5)   The petitioner alone testified in support  of

the  petition.   The  respondent  No.1,  i.e.,  the

elected  candidate deposed before the tribunal  and

examined his election agent Bramhanand Singh Thakur  

as  R.1.W.3  and  Shri  C.K.Khetan,  the  returning

officer as R.W.-2.



(6)   In  Part  3d  of  the nomination  paper,  the

petitioner was required to state in "Yes"  or  "No"

as  to  whether  he was convicted for  any  offence

under  sub-section (1) or (2) of Section 8  of  the

Act,  1951  or was, upon conviction for  any  other

offence, sentenced to imprisonment for two years or

more.   The  petitioner  opted  to  answer  in  the

affirmative  by ticking the word "Yes" and  scoring

off the word "No".


(7)  In the format of Part 3d only if the answer to

the   above  query  was  in  the  affirmative,  the

petitioner would be further required to furnish the

following information:-


     (i)  The Case Number/F.I.R. Report Number,

     (ii) Name of the Police Station, District  and
          State,

     (iii)     The Sections and brief description of the
          offences for which he was convicted,

     (iv) Date of the conviction,

     (v)  Description of the Court which had convicted
          the petitioner,

     (vi) The imprisonment awarded or fine imposed by
          the Court,

     (vii)     The date of release from prison, and

     (viii)    Whether any appeal was preferred against
          the said conviction (to be answered in "Yes"/"No").


The  petitioner  answered to the  query  No.(i)  by

giving  complaint  case number  965/90  before  the

Judicial  Magistrate First Class, Raipur.   To  the

queries No.(ii), (iv), (v), (vi) and (vii)  he  did

not  furnish any information and simply marked  `X'

against   them.    To  the  query   No.(iii),   the

petitioner wrote "No".  To the query No.(viii),  he

scored off the word "Yes" and ticked the word "No".

Queries  No.(ix) to (xii) were related  to  appeals

against  the  judgment  of conviction.   Since  the

petitioner  had ticked the word "No" in  answer  to

the query No.(viii), he was not required to furnish

any information in answer to the queries No.(ix) to

(xii).


(8)  Along with the nomination form, the petitioner

submitted an affidavit sworn on 13-11-2003  stating

as under:-


     "1- fd   eSaus  mi;qZDr  fuokZpu  ds  fy,
          esjs@esjk   ukekadu  i=  nkf[ky   dj
          fn;k@fn;s gS A

     2-  fd   mi;ZqDr  fuokZpu  ds  fy,   esjh
          vH;fFkZrk  ds laca/k esa]  eSa  yksd
          izfrfuf/kRo vf/kfu;e] 1951 dh  /kkjk
          8  ds  v/khu  fjVfuZax  vkfQlj  }kjk
          ekaxh x;h lwpuk fofgr izksQkekZ  esa
          blds lkFk izLrqr dj jgk gwa A

     3-  fd  layXu izksQkekZ esa nh xbZ  lwpuk
          esjh loksZRre tkudkjh vkSj fo'okl ds
          vuqlkj  lgh  gS vkSj dksbZ  Hkh  rF;
          fNik;k ugha x;k gS A"


(9)   The petitioner also submitted information  in

relation  to Section 8 of the Act, 1951  pertaining

to   disqualification  on  conviction  for  certain

offences  and  also  swore affidavit  in  Form  26.

Paragraph 2 of the affidavit is quoted as under:


     "2-   eq&gt;s  fdlh  vijk/k  ,vijk/kks+,yksd
     izfrfuf/kRo vf/kfu;e 1951 ,1951 dk 43+ dh
     /kkjk   8  dh mi/kkjk ,1+ ;k mi/kkjk  ,2+
     esa fufnZ"V ;k mi/kkjk ,3+ ds varxZr vkus
     okys fdlh vijk/k ,vijk/kks+ ls fHkUUk  ds
     fy,  fl)nks"k Bgjk;k x;k gS@ ugha  Bgjk;k
     x;k  gS  vkSj  ,d o"kZ ;k  vf/kd  ds  fy,
     dkjkokl  ls  naMkfn"V fd;k x;k  gS@  ugha
     fd;k x;k gS A  (The word "x;k" was scored
     off  by  the  petitioner as shown  by  me
     here)
          ,;fn   vfHklk{kh  mi;ZqDRk  :Ik   es
     fl)nks"k  Bgjk;k x;k vkSj  naMkfn"V  fd;k
     x;k  gS  rks og fuEufyf[kr tkudkjh izLrqr
     djsxk+ %&amp;
          ,i+  ekeyk@izFke    lwpuk    fjiksVZ
               la[;k@la[;k, ------------------
               --ifjokn la- 965@02
          ,ii+ U;k;ky; ftlus nafMr fd;k gS ---
     -----------------x------------
          ,iii+iqfyl Fkkuk ,Fkkus+ -------x---
     ---------ftyk ,ftys+----- x----
          ---------x-------- jkT; ----------x-
     -----------------------------
          ,iv+ lacaf/kr  vf/kfu;e ,vf/kfu;eksa
               +  dh  /kkjk ,/kkjk,+  vkSj  ml
               vijk/k ,mu vijk/kks+ dk laf{kIr
               fooj.k ,ftuds+ fy, vH;FkhZ dHkh
               vkjksfir fd;k x;k gS-----------
               ----x----------
          ,v+  rkjh[k     ,rkjh[ksa+    ftudks
               naMkns'k lquk;k x;k Fkk@  lquk,
               x, Fks-----------------x-------
               ------
          ,vi+ D;k  naMkns'k  l{ke  vf/kdkfjrk
               okys U;k;ky; }kjk jksdk x;k gS@
               jksds x, gSa ------------------
               -x----------------------

          LFkku            %            jk;iqj
               izsepUn lksuokuh
                                     vfHklk{kh
               ds gLrk{kj
          Rkkjh[k % 14-11-2003"


(10)  Section 36 of the Act, 1951, which deals with

scrutiny of nomination, is as under:


     "Sec.36:  Scrutiny of nomination.  -  (1)
     On  the  date  fixed for the scrutiny  of
     nominations   under   section   30,   the
     candidates,  their election  agents,  one
     proposer of each candidate, and one other
     person duly authorised in writing by each
     candidate but no other person, may attend
     at  such  time and place as the returning
     officer  may  appoint; and the  returning
     officer  shall  give them all  reasonable
     facilities  for examining the  nomination
     papers of all candidates which have  been
     delivered  within the  time  and  in  the
     manner laid down in section 33.

     (2)   The  returning officer  shall  then
     examine  the nomination papers and  shall
     decide  all objections which may be  made
     to any nomination and may, either on such
     objection  or  on his own  motion,  after
     such  summary  inquiry,  if  any,  as  he
     thinks  necessary, reject any  nomination
     on any of the following grounds:-

     (a)  that on the date fixed for the scrutiny of
          nominations the candidate either is not qualified
          or is disqualified for being chosen to fill the
          seat under any of the following provisions that may
          be applicable, namely:-
          Articles 84, 102, 173 and 191.
          Part II of this Act, and sections  4
          and  14  of the Government of  Union
          Territories Act, 1963 (20 of  1963);
          or

     (b)  that there has been a failure to comply with
          any of the provisions of section 33 or section 34;
          or
(c)  that the signature of the candidate or the
proposer on the nomination paper is not genuine.

     (3)   Nothing contained in clause (b)  or
     clause  (c) of sub-section (2)  shall  be
     deemed to authorise the rejection of  the
     nomination of any candidate on the ground
     of  any  irregularity  in  respect  of  a
     nomination  paper, if the  candidate  has
     been  duly nominated by means of  another
     nomination paper in respect of  which  no
     irregularity has been committed.

     (4)   The  returning  officer  shall  not
     reject any nomination paper on the ground
     of   any  defect  which  is  not   of   a
     substantial character.

     (5)  The returning officer shall hold the
     scrutiny  on the date appointed  in  this
     behalf under clause (b) of section 30 and
     shall  not allow any adjournment  of  the
     proceedings  except when such proceedings
     are interrupted or obstructed by riot  or
     open  violence  or by causes  beyond  his
     control:
          Provided  that in case an  objection
     is  raised by the returning officer or is
     made  by  any other person the  candidate
     concerned may be allowed time to rebut it
     not  later  than  the next  day  but  one
     following  the  date fixed for  scrutiny,
     and  the  returning officer shall  record
     his  decision  on the date to  which  the
     proceedings have been adjourned.

    (6)   The  returning officer shall endorse
     on  each  nomination paper  his  decision
     accepting or rejecting the same  and,  if
     the  nomination paper is rejected,  shall
     record  in  writing a brief statement  of
     his reasons for such rejection.

    (7)   For the purposes of this section,  a
     certified  copy  of  an  entry   in   the
     electoral  roll  for the  time  being  in
     force   of   a  constituency   shall   be
     conclusive evidence of the fact that  the
     person  referred to in that entry  is  an
     elector for that constituency, unless  it
     is  proved  that  he  is  subject  to   a
     disqualification mentioned in section  16
     of  the Representation of the People Act,
     1950 (43 of 1950).

    (8)   Immediately after all the nomination
     papers   have   been   scrutinized    and
     decisions accepting or rejecting the same
     have been recorded, the returning officer
     shall prepare a list of validly nominated
     candidates,  that is to  say,  candidates
     whose  nominations have been found valid,
     and affix it to his notice board."


A  plain reading of the above provision shows  that

under  Section 36(4) of the Act, 1951,  a  duty  is

cast  on  the returning officer not to  reject  any

nomination paper on the ground of any defect  which

is not of a substantial character.


(11)   Submissions  of  Shri  B.P.Sharma,   learned

counsel  for  the  petitioner  and  that   of   Dr.

N.K.Shukla,   learned  Senior  Advocate   for   the

respondent  No.1 were heard at length.  Record  and

case law cited by them are perused.


(12)  In  sum and substance, the arguments advanced 

by   Shri  B.P.Sharma,  learned  counsel  for   the

petitioner  is that although due to an  inadvertent

error, the petitioner had scored off the word  "No"

instead of "Yes" and ticked the word "Yes", instead

of "No" to the query relating to conviction for any

offence under sub-section (1) or (2)  of Section  8

of  the Act, 1951 and regarding the conviction  for

any  other  offence for which he was  sentenced  to

imprisonment  for  two  years  or  more   yet   the

information  supplied  by the  petitioner  in  Form

No.3(d)  and  the proforma and affidavit  mentioned

above   left  no  room  for  any  doubt  that   the

petitioner  had  neither  been  convicted  for  any

offence  mentioned in sub-section  (1)  or  (2)  of

Section  8 of the Act, 1951 nor sentenced  for  any

offence  for  two  years or more.   Therefore,  the

defect  in inadvertently scoring off the word  "No"

and ticking the word "Yes" was not of a substantial

character  and,  therefore, the  returning  officer

erred  in  rejecting the nomination  paper  of  the

petitioner  on the sole ground that the  petitioner

had declared in Part 3d that he had been convicted.


(13)  On  the other hand, the crux of the arguments

advanced  by Dr.N.K.Shukla, learned Senior Advocate 

for  the respondent No.1 is that the defect in  the

nomination  form  which was duly  supported  by  an

affidavit  is  of  a  substantial  character.   The

petitioner admitted in para 3 of the petition  that

he  had notice of the date and time of the scrutiny

of  nominations  to be conducted by  the  returning

officer.   In  his  testimony, the  petitioner  had

further admitted that despite being present he  did

not enter the hall where the scrutiny of nomination

papers   was  being  conducted  by  the   returning

officer.  The nomination form of the petitioner was

filled   in   by  Shri  K.R.Banjare,  a  practicing

Advocate, who had represented the petitioner in the

criminal prosecution.  No malice was attributed  to

the  returning  officer by the  petitioner  in  the

petition.   It was argued that in the petition  the

petitioner  had mentioned the criminal case  number

965/99, whereas in the nomination form it was shown

as  965/90  and in the affidavit it  was  shown  as

965/02.   In  his  deposition, the  petitioner  had

stated  that  the criminal case number was  965/90.

Thus, there was no material in the nomination form,

the declaration form and in the affidavit sworn  by

the  petitioner,  which would have  in  any  manner

facilitated  the returning officer  to  come  to  a

definite  conclusion  that  the  admission  of  the

petitioner in the first part of Part 3d was due  to

an  inadvertent error.  Learned Senior Advocate for

the  respondent No.1 also drew the attention of the

Court  to the fact that although the affidavit  was

sworn by the petitioner before the Notary on 13-11-

2003, the same along with the nomination form  were

signed  on  14-11-2003.   On  the  basis  of  these

glaring  features, Dr. N.K.Shukla,  learned  Senior

Advocate  for the respondent No.1 argued  that  the

returning officer was wholly justified in rejecting

the  nomination paper of the petitioner because the

defect in the nomination paper was of a substantial

character.


(14) The question that arises for consideration  in

this  petition is whether the abovementioned defect

in the nomination paper of the petitioner was of  a

substantial character?


(15) Sub-section (4) of Section 33 of the Act, 1951

is as under:-


     "Sec.33:    Presentation  of   nomination
     paper   and  requirements  for  a   valid
     nomination. -

     xxxxx                 xxxxx         xxxxx
     xxxxx

     (4)   On the presentation of a nomination
     paper,   the   returning  officer   shall
     satisfy   himself  that  the  names   and
     electoral  roll numbers of the  candidate
     and   his  proposer  as  entered  in  the
     nomination  paper are the same  as  those
     entered in the electoral rolls:
          Provided   that   no   misnomer   or
     inaccurate   description   or   clerical,
     technical or printing error in regard  to
     the name of the candidate or his proposer
     or  any other person, or in regard to any
     place, mentioned in the electoral roll or
     the  nomination  paper and  no  clerical,
     technical or printing error in regard  to
     the  electoral roll numbers of  any  such
     person  in  the  electoral  roll  or  the
     nomination paper, shall affect  the  full
     operation  of the electoral roll  or  the
     nomination  paper with  respect  to  such
     person  or  place in any case  where  the
     description in regard to the name of  the
     person or place is such as to be commonly
     understood;  and  the  returning  officer
     shall   permit  any  such   misnomer   or
     inaccurate   description   or   clerical,
     technical   or  printing  error   to   be
     corrected  and  where  necessary,  direct
     that   any   such  misnomer,   inaccurate
     description,   clerical,   technical   or
     printing error in the electoral  roll  or
     in   the   nomination  paper   shall   be
     overlooked.


(16)  Under Section 33(4) of the Act, 1951, on  the

presentation of a nomination paper, a duty is  cast

on  the  returning officer to satisfy himself  that

the   names  and  electoral  roll  numbers  of  the

candidate  and  his  proposer  as  entered  in  the

nomination  paper are the same as those entered  in

the  electoral rolls.   Under the proviso  to  sub-

section  (4)  of Section 33 of the Act,  1951,  the

returning officer has been authorized to permit any

such misnomer or inaccurate description or clerical

or  technical  or printing error in regard  to  the

name  of  a candidate or his proposer or any  other

person  or in regard to any place mentioned in  the

electoral  roll  or  the  nomination  paper  to  be

corrected  (emphasis supplied by me) or  to  direct

that  any  such  misnomer, inaccurate  description,

clerical,  technical  or  printing  error  in   the

electoral roll or in the nomination paper shall  be

overlooked.  A plain reading of sub-section (4)  of

Section 33 of the Act, 1951 leaves no room for  any

doubt  that  under  this  provision  the  returning

officer  was  not obliged to get any error  in  the

entry  in  the  first  part  of  Part  3d  of   the

nomination form corrected since the petitioner had,

in   support  of  those  entries,  also  sworn   an

affidavit as mentioned in paragraph 8 (supra) which

could   not  be  got  corrected  by  the  returning

officer.


(17)  Section  8 of the Act, 1951, which  falls  in

Part II and provides for disqualification, which  a

person may incur on being convicted, is as under:-


     "Sec.8:   Disqualification  on  conviction
     for  certain  offences.  -  (1)  A  person
     convicted of an offence punishable under-

     (a)  section 153A (offence of promoting enmity
          between different groups on ground of religion,
          race, place of birth, residence, language, etc.,
          and doing acts prejudicial to maintenance of
          harmony) or section 171E (offence of bribery) or
          section 171F (offence of undue influence or
          personation at an election) or sub-section (1) or
          sub-section (2) of section 376 or section 376A or
          section 376B or section 376C or section 376D
          (offences relating to rape) or section 498A
          (offence of cruelty towards a woman by husband or
          relative of a husband) or sub-section (2) or sub-
          section (3) of section 505 (offence of making
          statement creating or promoting enmity, hatred or
          ill-will between classes or offence relating to
          such statement in any place of worship or in any
          assembly engaged in the performance of religious
          worship or religious ceremonies) of the Indian
          Penal Code (45 of 1860); or

     (b)  the Protection of Civil Rights Act, 1955 (22
          of 1955), which provides for punishment for the
          preaching and practice of "untouchability", and for
          the enforcement of any disability arising
          therefrom; or

     (c)  section 11 (offence of importing or exporting
          prohibited goods) of the Customs Act, 1962 (52 of
          1962); or

     (d)  sections 10 to 12 (offence of being a member
          of an association declared unlawful, offence
          relating to dealing with funds of an unlawful
          association or offence relating to contravention of
          an order made in respect of a notified place) of
          the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 (37
          of 1967); or

     (e)  the Foreign Exchange (Regulation) Act, 1973
          (46 of 1973); or

     (f)  the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances
          Act, 1985 (61 of 1985): or

     (g)  section 3 (offence of committing terrorist
          acts) or section 4 (offence of committing
          disruptive activities) of the Terrorist and
          Disruptive Activities (Prevention) Act, 1987 (28 of
          1987); or

     (h)  section 7 (offence of contravention of the
          provisions of sections 3 to 6) of the Religious
          Institutions (Prevention of Misuse) Act, 1988 (41
          of 1988); or

     (i)  section 125 (offence of promoting enmity
          between classes in connection with the election) or
          section 135 (offence of removal of ballot papers
          from polling stations) or section 135A (offence of
          booth capturing) or clause (a) of sub-section (2)
          of section 136 (offence of fraudulently defacing or
          fraudulently destroying any nomination paper) of
          this Act; or

     (j)  section 6 (offence of conversion of a place of
          worship) of the Places of Worship (Special
          Provisions) Act, 1991, or

     (k)  section 2 (offence of insulting the Indian
          National Flag or the Constitution of India) or
          section 3 (offence of preventing singing of
          National Anthem) of the Prevention of Insults to
          National Honour Act, 1971 (69 of 1971); or

     (l)  the Commission of Sati (Prevention) Act, 1987
          (3 of 1988); or

     (m)  the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 (49 of
          1988); or

     (n)  the Prevention of Terrorism Act, 2002 (15 of
          2002),

     shall    be   disqualified,   where    the
     convicted person is sentenced to-
          (i)  only fine, for a period of six years from the
                date of such conviction;
          (ii) imprisonment, from the date of such conviction
               and shall continue to be disqualified for a further
               period of six years since his release.

     (2)  A person convicted for the contravention of -

     (a)  any law providing for the prevention of
          hoarding or profiteering; or
(b)  any law relating to the adulteration of food
or drugs; or
(c)  any provisions of the Dowry Prohibition Act,
1961 (28 of 1961),

     and sentenced to imprisonment for not less
     than  six  months, shall  be  disqualified
     from the date of such conviction and shall
     continue to be disqualified for a  further
     period of six years since his release.

     (3)  A person convicted of any offence and
     sentenced  to  imprisonment for  not  less
     than  two  years [other than  any  offence
     referred  to  in sub-section (1)  or  sub-
     section  (2)]  shall be disqualified  from
     the  date  of  such conviction  and  shall
     continue to be disqualified for a  further
     period of six years since his release.]

     (4)   Notwithstanding  anything  in   sub-
     section  (1),  sub-section  (2)  or   sub-
     section   (3)  a  disqualification   under
     either sub-section shall not, in the  case
     of  a  person  who  on  the  date  of  the
     conviction  is  a member of Parliament  or
     the  Legislature of a State,  take  effect
     until three months have elapsed from  that
     date  or, if within that period an  appeal
     or  application for revision is brought in
     respect of the conviction or the sentence,
     until   that  appeal  or  application   is
     disposed of by the court.

          Explanation.-In this section-
          (a)  "law providing for the prevention of hoarding
             or profiteering" means any law, or any order, rule
             or notification having the force of law, providing
             for-
                (i)  the regulation of production or manufacture of
                         any essential commodity;
(ii) the control of price at which any essential
commodity may be brought or sold; 
(iii)     the regulation of acquisition,
possession, storage, transport,  distribution,
disposal, use or consumption of any essential
commodity; 
(iv) the prohibition of the withholding from sale
of any essential commodity ordinarily kept for
sale;
          (b)  "drug"  has the meaning assigned
               to it in the Drugs and Cosmetics
               Act, 1940 (23 of 1940);
         (c)  "essential  commodity"   has  the
               meaning  assigned to it  in  the
               Essential Commodities Act,  1955
               (10 of 1955);
         (d)  "food"  has the meaning  assigned
               to  it in the Prevention of Food
               Adulteration Act,  1954  (37  of
               1954). "


(18) It is noteworthy that every conviction may not

result  in disqualification.  It depends  upon  the

nature  of  the offence and provisions under  which

the  offence  is committed, as also the  period  of

sentence  awarded.   At the time  of  scrutiny  the

Returning  Officer is entitled to  satisfy  himself

that a candidate is qualified and not disqualified.

Sub-section  (2)  of Section 36 authorises  him  to

hold  an  enquiry on his own motion, though summary 

in  nature.  The returning officer had furnished  a

proforma  of  declaration to the petitioner  to  be

filled on affidavit and filed on or before the date

and  time  fixed  for scrutiny  of  the  nomination

paper.   Therefore providing a pro forma, eliciting

necessary and relevant information in the light  of

Section  8 of the Act to enquire as to whether  the

person is qualified and not disqualified, is an act

or  function fully covered under sub-section (2) of

Section  36  of the Act.  The returning officer  is

authorized to seek such information to be furnished

at  the  time  or before scrutiny.   Acceptance  or

rejection  of the nomination paper by the Returning

Officer  shall depend on his forming an opinion  as

to  whether  the  defect is  of  a  non-substantial

character  or  of a substantial character.   Within

the  meaning of the proviso to sub-section  (5)  of

Section 36 the Returning Officer has to record  his

decision by way of acceptance or rejection  of  the

nomination  paper.   If  the  nomination  paper  is

rejected, a brief statement of his reasons for such

rejection has to be recorded in writing.


(19)  It  was  admitted by the  petitioner  in  his

testimony that four sets of nomination papers  were

supplied  to  him and three out of  four  had  been

spoiled due to errors therein.  He further admitted

that  his  nomination paper was filled by one  Shri

K.R.Banjare.   It was admitted by Shri  B.P.Sharma,

learned  counsel  for  the petitioner  before  this

Court  on  30-04-2008 that Shri  K.R.Banjare  is  a

practicing  Advocate who had also  represented  the

petitioner  in  the criminal case.  The  petitioner

admitted that he was present outside the hall where

scrutiny of nomination papers was being done by the

returning  officer and he did not  enter  the  hall

despite   announcement   of   rejection   of    his

nomination.  Bramhanand Singh Thakur, R.1.W.3   has  

also  deposed  that  name  of  the  petitioner  was

announced thrice at the time of scrutiny,  but  the

petitioner  did  not  present  himself  before  the

returning  officer.  It is, thus,  clear  that  the

returning  officer was under no obligation  to  get

the substantial defect, which was duly sworn by the

petitioner on affidavit to be true, corrected  from

the   petitioner  at  the  time  of   scrutiny   of

nomination.  In this petition also, the  petitioner

had mentioned the case number of the complaint case 

filed  against  him before the Judicial  Magistrate

First   Class  as  965/99.   In  Part  3d  of   the

nomination form, the case number has been mentioned  

as   965/90.   In  the  affidavit  filed   by   the

petitioner in support of the declaration form,  the

case  number was mentioned as 965/02.  In paragraph 

2 of the affidavit the petitioner would be required

to furnish information only if he was convicted for

an  offence under sub-section (1) or (2) of Section

8 of the Act, 1951 or for any offence other than an

offence  mentioned in sub-section (3) of Section  8

of the Act, 1951.  Once the petitioner mentioned an

altogether different case number, i.e., 965/02,  he

ought   to   have  furnished  detailed  information

regarding  clauses (ii) to (vi), but the petitioner

did  not furnish any information under this clause.

The  petitioner mentioned different  case  numbers,

i.e.,   Case  No.965/90  at  one  place  and   Case

No.965/02  at  another  and  did  not  furnish  the

necessary details required under the form  and  the

affidavit.   Although  the affidavit  mentioned  in

paragraph 9 supra in support of the declaration was

signed by the petitioner on 14-11-2003, whereas  it

had  already been sworn before a Notary  on  13-11-

2003.   No  explanation  is  forthcoming  from  the

petitioner   for   this.    Therefore,   once   the

petitioner answered the first question in  Part  3d

of the nomination paper in affirmative and admitted

of  having been convicted for an offence under sub-

section (1) or (2) of Section 8 of the Act, 1951 or

for any other offence for which he was sentenced to

imprisonment of two years or more and also provided

different  criminal  case numbers,  he  incurred  a

disqualification under Section 8 of the  Act,  1951

for  membership to the Legislative Assembly of  the

State  under Section 8 of the Act, 1951.  The above

defect  in the nomination form was of a substantial

character and, therefore, the returning officer was

justified  in  rejecting  the  nomination  of   the

petitioner.  Accordingly, Issue No.(i) is  answered

in the negative against the petitioner.


(20)  The  election petition has no merit.   It  is

accordingly dismissed.



                                   ELECTION JUDGE
                                   08-09-2008

