First Appeal M No 100 of 2008 Smt Rajeshwsari Bai Vs. Dani Prakash Mishra

HIGH COURT OF CHATTISGARH AT BILASPUR          

 First Appeal M No 100 of 2008


 Smt Rajeshwsari Bai 
                                                ...Petitioners

                        Versus

 Dani Prakash Mishra 

                                                ...Respondents

! Shri P K C Tiwari Sr counsel with Shri Sumit Verma counsel for the appellant

^ Shri Alok Nigam  counsel for the respondent

 CORAM: Honble Shri Dhirendra Mishra &amp; Honble Shri R N Chandrakar J   

 Dated: 15/09/2009

: Judgement 
                         JUDGMENT

      Passed on this 15th day of September 2009

  First Appeal under Section 19 1 of the Family Court Act 1984


Per Rangnath Chandrakar, J. 


      This  appeal  is   directed   against  the   judgment

and   decree dated 24-7-2008 (Annexure A/1) passed  by  the

learned   Judge,  Family Court, Rajnandgaon (CG)  in  Civil

Suit  No. 26-A/2007, whereby the application filed  by  the

respondent  herein  under Section 13 of the Hindu  Marriage

Act,  1955  (for short, the Act, 1955) for  dissolution  of

marriage  between  the  respondent and  the  appellant  was

allowed.

2)    The  facts of the case, in brief, as projected before

the   Family  Court  are  that  the  marriage  between  the

appellant/respondent   and  the  respondent/plaintiff   was

solemnized  on  12-5-2003 according to  Hindu  customs  and

rites   at   village    Salik  Jhitiya,   Police   Station,

Dongargaon.   The respondent/husband  filed an  application

for  dissolution of marriage  under Section 13 of the  Act,

1955 alleging that  just after marriage, the appellant/wife

started  teasing him repeatedly saying that she never liked

him  and  the marriage was  performed against her will  and

consent.   Even  she  did  not  allow  the   respondent  to

consummate  the  marriage   and  she  used  to   visit  her

maternal  house   frequently.  As and  when  the  appellant

visited  her maternal house, her parents used to  send  her

back to her husband through  their son Rajesh Pathak.   The

appellant had expressed before her parents and in-laws that

she  was not willing to live with her husband. It was  also

alleged  that  since the day of marriage,  she  was  giving

threats  to  the  respondent that if  she  was  pressurized

against her will to live with her husband, she would commit

suicide either by consuming poison or by hanging herself..

3)    The respondent herein further alleged that the father

of  the appellant herein was intimated about the act of the

appellant by writing letters as also to the Police  Station

as  and when the appellant was brought back to her parents.

Thus,  on  the  allegation  of cruelty  and  desertion  the

respondent filed the instant application for dissolution of

marriage.

4)    The  appellant/wife  denied the  allegations  in  her

written  statement  and stated that  she  never  denied  to

discharge   her  marital  obligations  and  prevented   the

respondent  to  consummate  the  marriage.   The  appellant

specifically  denied  the allegation and  stated  that  the

respondent   filed  the  application  for  dissolution   of

marriage  before the Family Court on the basis of concocted

and  fabricated story.  She never threatened the respondent

or  his  relatives  to commit suicide.  Actually,  she  was

subjected  to  physical  and mental cruelty  for  demanding

dowry.     She further stated that she visited her maternal

house  only on the occasion of some festivals and that  too

was with the prior permission and direction of her in-laws.

She never refused to live with the respondent.  She further

stated  that  on 8-9-2006 the respondent and his  relatives

after  committing  "Marpit" with  her,   left  her  to  her

maternal  house, report of which was lodged  in  Dongargaon

Police  Station.  The appellant specifically  alleged  that

Rs.51,000/- was given  to the  respondent by her father  on

the  occasion of "Teeka".  On 8-9-2006 she was not  allowed

by  the  respondent to enter into the house on the  pretext

that  the demand of dowry was not fulfilled and her brother

was  insulted by calling him "Begga".  She further  alleged

that  the respondent and his family members did not want to

keep her with them for want of dowry.

5)    On  the basis of the   pleadings of the parties,  the

learned Judge of the Family Court framed issues as under:

     1)      Whether  the  appellant  treated   the
             respondent with cruelty?

     2)      Whether the respondent is entitled  to
             obtain  a  decree for  dissolution  of
             marriage?

     3)      Cost and other reliefs?


6)   The appellant examined herself and two other witnesses

whereas  the respondent/husband examined himself and  three 

other witnesses.



7)    The  respondent  sought  decree  of  divorce  on  two

grounds;   firstly,  the  consummation  of   marriage   was

deliberately  avoided by the appellant/wife  and  secondly,

the appellant/wife treated him with mental cruelty.  It was

held by the learned Family Court that the respondent failed

to  prove that there was no consummation of marriage but he

succeeded to prove that the appellant/wife treated him with

mental  cruelty.   After hearing learned  counsel  for  the

parties, the learned Judge, Family Court, granted a  decree

of  divorce  in  favour  of the respondent/husband  with  a

finding   that  the  respondent/husband  proved  that   the

appellant/wife    treated   him   with   mental    cruelty.

Thereagainst, the appellant/wife preferred this appeal.



8)    Learned  counsel appearing for the appellant  submits

that  the  impugned judgment and decree  passed  by  family

court  is contrary to law and material available on record.

The  family  court failed to appreciate that the respondent

failed  to  establish the ingredients of cruelty  and  also

failed  to  appreciate that the respondent and  his  family

members  treated the appellant with cruelty for  demand  of

dowry.   He further argued that it was rightly held by  the

Family Court  in para 34 of  its judgment that there was no

evidence    on    record    except    the    evidence    of

respondent/husband   to show that the  appellant/wife  ever

denied   to  discharge  marital  obligations  towards   the

respondent/husband.    He  vehemently   argued   that   the

respondent/husband  himself was not ready  to  lead   happy

married  life with the appellant/wife, therefore,   he  was

more  interested in  creating evidence Ex.P/1 to  P/7   for

dissolution of marriage rather than attempting to reconcile

the matter right from the beginning.   In view of the above

submission  it  cannot  be  said  that  the  appellant/wife

treated  the  respondent  with  cruelty  but  it  was   the

respondent/husband who was not willing  to  live  with  the

appellant/wife  and,  therefore,   the  respondent  is  not

entitled   to  obtain  a  decree  of  divorce.   The   next

submission of learned counsel for the appellant is that the

family   court   reached  to  wrong  conclusion   by   mis-

appreciating  the  material evidence available  on  record.

The  findings recorded by the family court are perverse and

bad  in  the eye of law.  The family court committed  grave

error    in    allowing    the    application    of     the

respondent/husband.   Therefore, the impugned judgment  and 

decree  dated 24-7-2008 passed by the family court  be  set

aside.



9)     Per  contra,  learned  counsel  appearing  for   the

respondent  supporting  the impugned  judgment  and  decree

passed  by  the  family court submits that  it  was  highly

improbable  that  the respondent/husband   or  his   family

members would have subjected the appellant/wife for  demand 

of dowry as clearly held by the trial court of its judgment

that no complaint regarding harassment  for demand of dowry

was  ever made by the appellant/wife to her parents.    The

respondent/husband  was  successful  in  establishing   the

ingredients  of cruelty before the family court.    Learned

counsel  further  submits  that  the  family  court,  after

meticulous examination of the evidence available on record,

came  to  the  conclusion  that the respondent/husband  was

successful  in establishing the ingredients of cruelty  and

desertion   and  thus  allowed  the  application   of   the

respondent/husband  for dissolution of  his  marriage  with

appellant/wife.  Learned counsel further submits  that  the

instant appeal is filed on flimsy grounds and lacks  merit,

therefore, the same is liable to be dismissed.



10)  We have heard learned counsel for the parties, perused

the record, pleadings and documents appended thereto. 



11)    Learned Family Court has passed the impugned  decree 

of  dissolution of marriage solemnized between the  parties

on  12-5-2003  on the ground of cruelty .  Learned  counsel

for  the appellant assailed the above finding on the ground

that  the  respondent/husband   has  failed  to  prove  the

ingredients of cruelty necessary for passing of  decree  on

that ground.  For the purpose of granting decree of divorce

on  the ground of desertion the respondent/husband is  also

required to prove animus desrendi, which is missing in  the

instant case.


12)    It  is well settled law that to constitute  cruelty,

the conduct complained of should be grave and weighty so as

to come to the conclusion that the petitioner spouse cannot

be  reasonably expected  to live with the other spouse.  It

must be something more serious than "ordinary wear and tear

of married life".   The conduct has to be considered in the

background  of  several factors such as  social  status  of

parties,  their education, physical and mental  conditions,

customs  and traditions.  However, it is very difficult  to

lay  down  a  precise  definition  or  to  give  exhaustive

description to satisfy the conscience of the court that the

relationship between the parties had deteriorated  to  such

extent due to the conduct of the other spouse that it would

be  impossible  for  them to live together  without  mental

agony,  torture  or distress, to entitle  the  complaining-

spouse to secure divorce.



13)    If we examine the evidence adduced by the respective

parties, in the light of settled principles of law, we find

that   the     respondent/husband   has  alleged   in   his

application as well as in his deposition before the  family

court  that  since the day of marriage,  the appellant/wife

was  teasing  him saying that she never liked him  and  the

marriage  was  performed against her will and consent.  She

used  to threaten the respondent and his family members  to

commit  suicide  if she was pressurized to  live  with  her

husband.    Even  she  denied  to  discharge  her   marital

obligations  and avoided consummation of marriage.  But  on

perusal of the finding given by the family court in para 34

of   its  judgment,   it  appears  that  the  avoidance  of

consummation   of   marriage  was   not   proved   by   the

respondent/husband  in the light of  evidence.   The  trial

Court  rightly held that it is a serious question to decide

whether the marriage was consummated.  There is no evidence  

on  record except the deposition of the respondent/husband.

So  far  as  the   ground  of cruelty  is  concerned,   the

respondent/husband failed to prove that the  appellant/wife

deliberately  deserted the respondent/husband  without  any

reason  as  deposed by the appellant/wife  that  she  never

deserted him and as and when she visited her maternal house 

that  too was with due permission  of her husband  on  some

occasions.   She also deposed that she was always ready  to

live  with  her husband. She categorically and specifically

denied the allegations made by the respondent/husband   and

stated that it was the husband who treated him with cruelty

for  demand of dowry and despite the fact she attempted  to

reconcile the matter by going to her matrimonial house with

her brother but she was thrown out and even not allowed  to

enter into the house.  It is admitted fact that the attempt

of  reconciliation was made even by the Police and SDM  but

due  to arrogance of the respondent/husband,  it was of  no

result.    The  version  of  the  appellant/wife  is   also

supported by the independent witnesses.    For the sake  of

argument,  if  it is admitted that the appellant/wife  ever

gave   threatening  to  the  respondent/husband  to  commit

suicide that too  is not amounting to cruelty.





14)    After  carefully  examining  the  pleadings  of  the

respective  parties, oral and documentary evidence  adduced

by  them during the course of trial and reasons assigned by

the learned family court for grant of decree of divorce  on

the  ground  of  cruelty and  desertion, relying  upon  the

evidence  of  the respondent/husband  and disbelieving  the

version of the appellant herein, we are of the opinion that

the  family court wrongly held that the  ground of  cruelty

was established by the  respondent/husband. 



15)    Apart from the ground of cruelty, from the  evidence

available on record, it also appears that the appellant and

respondent  were  residing together  for  some  time.   The

appellant alleged that she was willing to reside  with  her

husband.  However, the respondent/husband did not make  any  

efforts  to bring her back. The respondent has pleaded  and

deposed that the appellant/ wife went to her maternal house

just after few days of the marriage and   did not return to

her  matrimonial house for about a year.  However,  he  did

not  file  any petition for restitution of conjugal  rights

which  was  available  to  him before  filing  the  instant

application for dissolution of marriage.  Thus, the conduct

of  respondent/husband goes to show that he himself was not

willing to live with his wife and he never made attempt for

reconciliation.

16)  For the aforesaid analysis, we are of the opinion that

the   learned  Family  Court  erred  in  reaching  to   the

conclusion    that   the   appellant/wife    treated    the

respondent/husband  with cruelty and granted  a  decree  of

dissolution    of    marriage    in    favour    of     the

respondent/husband. Accordingly, the appeal is allowed  and

the  judgment and decree passed by the family court is  set

aside.



                                                     JUDGE
