Criminal Revision No.218 of 2004 1.   Haresh Vs. State  of Chhattisgarh

HIGH COURT OF CHATTISGARH AT BILASPUR      





              Criminal Revision No.218 of 2004




                  1.   Haresh

                    2.   Gurnamal

                    3.   Smt.   Kavita

                    4.   Mukesh

                    5.   Suresh
                             ...Petitioners




                           Versus



          State  of Chhattisgarh
                                             ...Respondents



   (Criminal revision under Section 397/401 of the Code of
                  Criminal Procedure, 1973)

!     Mrs. Anju Ahuja, counsel for the applicants


^     Mr.  Sudhir Kumar Bajpai, Deputy Govt. Advocate for  the State
     Mr. B.P. Sharma, counsel for intervener/objector Ajay Vidhani



Honble Mr. T.P. Sharma, J 




       Dated:29/01/2009



:       Judgment


                          O R D E R
               (Passed on 29th January, 2009)

1.    This revision is directed against the order dated  1-3-
  2004  passed by the Additional Sessions Judge, Dhamtari  in
  Sessions  Trial  No.396/2003,  whereby  learned  Additional
  Sessions Judge has framed charge for offence punishable under
  Sections  304B  &amp; 498A read with Section 34 of  the  I.P.C.
  against the applicants.

2.    The order is challenged on the ground that without  any
  prima  facie material for offence punishable under  Section
  304B of the I.P.C., the Court below has framed the charge and
  thereby committed illegality.

3.   I have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused
  the copy of the order impugned as also the copy of the charge
  sheet.

4.    Learned  counsel for the applicants submits  that  Mrs.
  Neetu @ Neelam (since deceased) was married to applicant No.1 
  Haresh on 9-6-2003 at Dhamtari and she died by jumping into a
  dam  on  14-9-2003 within three months of her  marriage  in
  abnormal circumstances.  Applicants No.2 &amp; 3 are father-in-
  law &amp; mother-in-law of the deceased and applicants No.4 &amp; 5
  are  brothers-in-law of the deceased.   The  deceased  died
  within seven years of her marriage in abnormal circumstances.
  The  applicants are husband &amp; relatives of husband  of  the
  deceased.   She further submits that for framing of  charge
  under Section 304B of the I.P.C., the prosecution is required
  to collect material to show prima facie that the applicants
  had committed cruelty and torture in connection with demand
  of  dowry upon the deceased soon before her death.  But the
  prosecution has not collected any material to show that the
  deceased  was  subjected to cruelty or  harassment  by  the
  applicants in connection with demand of dowry soon before her
  death and in absence of such material, charge under Section
  304B  of  the I.P.C. is groundless and the Court below  has
  committed  illegality in framing charge under the aforesaid
  offences.   Learned counsel further submits  that  copy  of
  charge sheet shows that on 14-9-2003 the deceased, one maid 
  servant  namely  Kaushilya and applicant No.3  Smt.  Kavita
  Buxani were present in the house, the deceased went out  of
  the house and after hiring a rickshaw she went to a dam which
  is  away from the house of the applicants and jumped in the
  dam and thereby committed suicide.  This clearly shows that
  at  the time of leaving the house of the applicants by  the
  deceased  except applicant No.3 none of the applicants  was
  present, applicant No.3 has not harassed or committed cruelty
  upon her at the time of leaving the house of the applicants.
  Material  witness  Kaushilya  Bai,  maid  servant  of   the
  applicants, has not stated anything relating to torture  or
  harassment.  Relatives of the deceased i.e. mother Smt. Padma
  Devi, cousin Sanjay Kumar, younger brother Ajay Kumar Vidhani 
  &amp;  uncle Mohan Das are not residents of Dhamtari, they  are
  residents of Khandwa (M.P.) which is far away from Dhamtari.
  they have stated what the deceased had narrated to them, but
  on  the  date  of commission of suicide, relatives  of  the
  deceased  were not present at Dhamtari, they have not  been
  communicated anything by the deceased or any person to show  
  that on the date of death or soon before her death she  was
  subjected  to  cruelty or harassment by the  applicants  in
  connection with demand of dowry, even they have not  stated
  that the applicants have demanded dowry.  The only allegation
  is that parents of the deceased had given less dowry and in-
  laws of the deceased used to demand golden bangles, Kangan &amp;  
  cash.   But it is evident from inquest that at the time  of
  inquest golden tops, necklace (Mangalsutra), locket, Kangan,
  two golden rings, silver payal &amp; Bichia were found over her
  body,  this  shows  that she was wearing  silver  &amp;  golden
  articles even at the time of her death.  Learned counsel also
  submits that relatives of the deceased have exaggerated their
  statements because of the death of their daughter &amp;  sister
  and they have stated against the present applicants only with
  a view to implicate them falsely.

5.    Learned  counsel for the applicants placed reliance  in
  the matter of Harjit Singh v. State of Punjab1 in which the
  Apex Court while dealing with the charge of Section 304B of
  the I.P.C. held that five conditions are required to be shown
  &amp;  established by the prosecution relating to  the  offence
  punishable under Section 304B of the I.P.C. i.e. dowry death
  which are as follows: -
          (1)  That the death of the woman caused by any burns or
            bodily injury or in some circumstances which is not normal;
(2)  Such death occurs within 7 years from the date of her
marriage;
(3)  That the victim was subjected to cruelty or harassment
by her husband or any relative of her husband;
(4)  Such cruelty or harassment should be for or in
connection with demand of dowry; and 
(5)  is established that such cruelty and harassment was made
soon before her death.

  It  has  also been held that if the prosecution establishes
  the  aforesaid  ingredients,  the  Court  may  presume   in
  accordance  with  Section 113B of the Indian  Evidence  Act
  that  the  accused  have committed  dowry  death.   Learned
  counsel  further placed reliance in the matter of Noorjahan
  v.  State Rep. by D.S.P.2 in which it has been held by  the
  Apex  Court that offence punishable under Sections  304B  &amp;
  498A  of  the  I.P.C. are the two distinct  offences,  only
  cruelty  is  a common essential to both the Sections.   The
  prosecution  is  required  to show  that  the  accused  was
  present  at  the  time  of demand of dowry.   Reliance  has
  further  been placed in the matter of Onkar Nath  Mishra  &amp;
  Ors.  v. State (NCT of Delhi) &amp; Anr.3 in which it has  been
  held  by  the  Apex Court that at the stage of  framing  of
  charge  the Court is required to evaluate the material  and
  documents on record - With a view to find out if the  facts
  emerging  therefrom, taken at their face  value,  disclosed
  the  existence  of  all  the ingredients  constituting  the
  alleged  offence - Court is not expected to  go  deep  into
  the  probative value of the material on record - What  need
  to  be  considered  is  a  ground for  presuming  that  the
  offence  has been committed and not a ground for convicting
  the  accused  has been made out.  Reliance  has  also  been
  placed  in  the matter of Gurucharan Kumar and  another  v.
  State  of Rajasthan4 in which it has been held by the  Apex
  Court  that  in  absence  of any evidence  of  torture  and
  cruelty,  the  husband or relatives of the husband  of  the
  deceased  are  not liable for any offence punishable  under
  Section 304B of the I.P.C.  Learned counsel further  placed
  reliance  in the matter of Hazarilal v. State of  M.P.5  in
  which  it has been held by the Apex Court that only on  the
  basis  of suicide or unnatural death of the bribe it  could
  not  be  presumed  that there must be  some  harassment  or
  cruelty,  mere surmises and conjectures are not  sufficient
  for  conviction under Section 304B of the I.P.C.   Reliance
  has  also been placed in the matters of K.R. Soorachari  v.
  State  of  Karnataka6  &amp; Ran Singh and  Anr.  v.  State  of
  Haryana  and  Anr.7 in which it has been held by  the  Apex
  Court  that  in  the case of demand of dowry  i.e.  offence
  punishable   under  Section  498A  of   the   I.P.C.,   the
  prosecution  is  required  to show  prima  facie  case  for
  demand  of  dowry  and  harassment/torture.   Reliance  has
  further been placed in the matter of T. Aruntperunjothi  v.
  State8 in which it has been held by the Apex Court that  in
  case  of  absence of accused at the time of  commission  of
  suicide  and  absence  of evidence relating  to  demand  of
  dowry  any  conviction falling under Section  304B  of  the
  I.P.C.  is  not  sustainable.  Further  reliance  has  been
  placed in the matter of Devi Lal v. State of Rajasthan9  in
  which  it  has  been  held  by  the  Apex  Court  that  the
  prosecution is required to prove the ingredients  of  dowry
  death.   Further reliance has been placed in the matter  of
  Sunil @ Balo Das and Ors. v. Rajesh Das and Ors.10 in which
  the  Apex  Court  has  held that the  revisional  Court  is
  required to pass a reasoned order, abrupt conclusions  show
  non-application of mind.  Reliance has further been  placed
  in  the matter of Paul George v. State11 in which the  Apex
  Court   has   held  that  while  invoking  the   revisional
  jurisdiction  the  Court is required to see  the  legality,
  propriety and correctness of the order passed by the  Court
  below.

6.    On  the other hand, learned counsel appearing on behalf
  of  the  State  submits that the prosecution has  collected
  sufficient  material  for  faming  of  charge  of   offence
  punishable under Sections 304B &amp; 498A read with Section 34 of
  the I.P.C. and the Court below has rightly framed the charge.
  He further submits that the deceased died within three months
  &amp;  10 days of her marriage in abnormal circumstances.   The
  statement  of Kaushilya shows that the applicants  used  to
  harass &amp; torture the deceased in connection with demand  of
  dowry and the deceased was always perturbed, even on the date 
  of  commission of suicide, she was perturbed and  left  the
  applicants' house and committed suicide.  Smt. Padma  Devi,
  Sanjay Kumar, Ajay Kumar Vidhani &amp; Mohan Das are relatives of 
  the   deceased,  they  had  specifically  stated  in  their
  statements recorded under Section 161 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 that the applicants used to demand dowry  and 
  always  condemn  the deceased by saying that  she  has  not
  brought  sufficient dowry, they used to beat her also.   In
  their  statements they have stated that after her marriage,
  the  deceased stayed for twenty days in her paternal  house
  where she told the incidence of harassment to them, even she
  was  not permitted to talk on telephone, she has also  told
  them  over  telephone  relating to  harassment  &amp;  torture.
  Learned  State  counsel placed reliance in  the  matter  of
  Rajendra Kumar Jain etc. v. The State of Rajasthan12 in which
  the Rajasthan High Court has held that at the time of framing
  of  charge,  the Court is required to see the  prima  facie
  material and no meticulous scrutiny is required.

7.    This  is a criminal revision against the order  framing
  charge.  It is well settled that at the stage of framing of
  charge  the Court is required to evaluate the material  and
  documents on record with a view to finding out if the facts
  emerging  therefrom taken at their face value disclose  the
  existence  of all the ingredients constituting the  alleged
  offence.   The Court may for this limited purpose sift  the
  evidence as it cannot be expected even at the initial stage
  to  accept all that the prosecution states as gospel  truth
  even  if  it  is  opposed  to common  sense  or  the  broad
  probabilities of the case.

8.    As has been held by the Apex Court in the case of State
  of M.P. v. S.B. Johari and others13, at the stage of framing
  of  charge the Court is required to see the facts  emerging
  from  materials collected by the prosecution  whether  such
  material constitute the offence with which the accused could
  be charged, but the Court is not required to marshal it with
  a view to decide the reliability thereof.

9.    At  the  stage  of  framing of  charge,  no  meticulous
  scrutiny  is  required,  only a  strong  suspicion  of  the
  commission of offence is sufficient for framing of  charge.
  In  the case of Onkar (supra) it has been held by the  Apex
  Court in para 11 thus,
          "It  is true that at the stage of framing  of
          charge the court is required to evaluate  the
          material and documents on record with a  view
          to   finding   out  if  the  facts   emerging
          therefrom,   taken  at  their   face   value,
          disclosed   the   existence   of   all    the
          ingredients constituting the alleged offence.
          At  that stage, the court is not expected  to
          go  deep  into  the probative  value  of  the
          material  on  record.   What  needs   to   be
          considered  is whether there is a ground  for
          presuming that the offence has been committed
          and  not  a ground for convicting the accused
          has  been  made  out.  At  that  stage,  even
          strong  suspicion founded on  material  which
          leads the court to form a presumptive opinion
          as   to   the   existence  of   the   factual
          ingredients constituting the offence  alleged
          would  justify the framing of charge  against
          the  accused in respect of the commission  of
          that offence."

10.  In the instant case, death of Mrs. Neetu @ Neelam within
  seven  years of the marriage in abnormal condition  is  not
  disputed.  The statements of mother, brother &amp; cousin of the
  deceased  also  show  that the applicants  used  to  demand
  articles and condemn her that she has not brought sufficient
  dowry.   As regards the question of demand soon before  her
  death, the deceased was married to applicant No.1 Haresh on 9-
  6-2003 and she died on 14-9-2003 within four months from the
  date of her marriage.  Statements of the witnesses show that
  the  applicants  had  continuously  demanded  articles  and
  condemned her.  In the light of the ingredient `soon before
  her death' there cannot be a particular time limit for demand
  and  there must be continuity.  Statements of the witnesses
  further show continuity of demand &amp; torture.  This is not the
  case  of casual or one time demand.  Material collected  on
  behalf of the prosecution is sufficient for framing of charge
  for offence punishable under Sections 304B &amp; 498A read with
  Section  34  of  the  I.P.C.  The Court below  has  neither
  committed any irregularity nor any illegality in framing the
  charge.

11.  Consequently, the revision is liable to be dismissed and
  it is hereby dismissed.

12.    In  view  of  this  order,  M.(Cri.)P.No.2840/2004   &amp;
  I.A.No.3899/2004 stand disposed of.

                                                  J U D G E

