Criminal Miscellaneous Petition No.99 of 2009 1.  Sanjay  Pandey Vs. 1.  Smt.  Reenu Pandey

HIGH COURT OF CHATTISGARH AT BILASPUR      



        Criminal Miscellaneous Petition No.99 of 2009




                       1.  Sanjay  Pandey

                        2.  Ramanand Pandey

                        3.  Hiramani  Pandey

                        4.  Anjani  Pandey

                        5.  Narad  Pandey

                        6.  Urmila  Pandey
                                         ...Petitioners



                           Versus

                       1.  Smt.  Reenu Pandey

                        2.  The   State  of  Chhattisgarh

                                               ...Respondents


   {Application under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973}


!     Mr. Parag Kotecha, counsel for the petitioners


^     Mr. Arvind Singh, counsel for respondent No.1.
      Mr.   Akhil  Mishra,  Deputy  Govt.  Advocate  for   the
      State/respondent No.2.




Honble Mr. T.P. Sharma, J 


       Dated:29/10/2009


:       Judgment



                         ORAL ORDER
                        (29-10-2009)

1.    This  is  a  petition under Section 482 of the  Cr.P.C.
  against the order taking cognizance dated 4-9-2008 passed by
  the Judicial Magistrate First Class, Baikunthpur in Criminal
  Complaint  Case  No.269/2008 and the order dated  30-1-2009
  passed  by  the  Sessions Judge, Koriya in an  unregistered
  revision, whereby the order taking cognizance was affirmed by
  the revisional Court.

2.   Quashment is prayed on the ground that without any prima
  facie material for taking cognizance against the petitioners,
  the  Court  below has taken cognizance against  all  family
  members and thereby committed illegality.

3.    I  have  heard learned counsel for the parties, perused
  the  orders  impugned  and  copies  of  the  statements  of
  complainant Ranu Pandey &amp; Tribhuvan Nath Dubey.  

4.    Learned  counsel for the petitioners vehemently  argued
  that at the time of taking cognizance the Court is required
  to  see  the  prima  facie material sufficient  for  taking
  cognizance and the complainant is required to adduce specific
  material  against  the specific accused.   Bald  &amp;  omnibus
  statement is not sufficient for taking cognizance against the
  petitioners and for dragging the persons before the criminal
  Court.  Learned counsel further argued that the statement of
  the  complainant  is not sufficient for  taking  cognizance
  against  any  of  the  petitioners,  because  she  has  not
  specifically stated anything against any petitioners and bald
  &amp; omnibus statement is not sufficient for taking cognizance.
  Learned counsel placed reliance in the matter of B.S. Joshi
  and others v. State of Haryana and another1 in which the Apex
  Court has held that in cases of matrimonial offences, it is
  duty of Court to encourage genuine settlements of matrimonial
  disputes  and in appropriate cases, proceedings  should  be
  quashed  in  accordance with the compromise  of  the  case.
Learned  counsel  further placed reliance in  the  matter  of
  Onkar Nath Mishra &amp; Ors. v. State (NCT of Delhi) &amp; Anr.2 in
  which the Apex Court has held that in absence of any evidence
  of  misappropriation of the article of the bride, the order
  taking  cognizance for the offence punishable under Section
  406 of the I.P.C. is not maintainable but on the ground  of
  cruelty,  criminal  proceedings may be  continued  for  the
  offence punishable under Section 498A of the I.P.C.  Learned
  counsel  also placed reliance in the matter of Ran Singh  &amp;
  Anr. v. State of Haryana &amp; Anr.3 in which the Apex Court has
  held that without assigning any reason interference against
  the accused persons for the offence punishable under Section
  498A of the I.P.C. is not sustainable.

5.    This is a petition under Section 482 of the Cr.P.C. for
  quashment of criminal complaint pending before the Court of
  Judicial Magistrate First Class, Baikunthpur.  Power  under
  Section  482  of the Cr.P.C. is exceptional in  nature  and
  should  be used sparingly.  While dealing with exercise  of
  power under Section 482 of the Cr.P.C. in the matter of M/s.
  Zandu  Pharmaceutical Works Ltd. and others v. Md. Sharaful
  Haque and others4 the Apex Court has held thus,
          "8.   Exercise of power under Section 482  of
          the  Code  in  a case of this nature  is  the
          exception and not the rule.  The Section does
          not  confer any new powers on the High Court.
          It  only  saves the inherent power which  the
          Court  possessed before the enactment of  the
          Code.  It envisages three circumstances under
          which   the  inherent  jurisdiction  may   be
          exercised, namely, (i) to give effect  to  an
          order  under the Code, (ii) to prevent  abuse
          of   the  process  of  court,  and  (iii)  to
          otherwise secure the ends of justice.  It  is
          neither  possible nor desirable to  lay  down
          any  inflexible rule which would  govern  the
          exercise   of   inherent  jurisdiction.    No
          legislative enactment dealing with  procedure
          can  provide for all cases that may  possibly
          arise.    Courts,  therefore,  have  inherent
          powers  apart from express provisions of  law
          which  are necessary for proper discharge  of
          functions  and duties imposed  upon  them  by
          law.    That  is  the  doctrine  which  finds
          expression   in  the  section  which   merely
          recognizes and preserves inherent  powers  of
          the  High Courts.  All courts, whether  civil
          or  criminal possess, in the absence  of  any
          express  provision,  as  inherent  in   their
          constitution,   all  such   powers   as   are
          necessary to do the right and to undo a wrong
          in course of administration of justice on the
          principle   "quando   lex   aliquid    alicui
          concedit,  concedere videtur et id  sine  quo
          res  ipsae  esse non potest"  (when  the  law
          gives  a  person anything it gives  him  that
          without   which  it  cannot  exist).    While
          exercising  powers  under  the  section,  the
          court  does not function as a court of appeal
          or revision.  Inherent jurisdiction under the
          section  though  wide  has  to  be  exercised
          sparingly,  carefully and  with  caution  and
          only  when such exercise is justified by  the
          tests  specifically laid down in the  section
          itself.   It  is  to be exercised  ex  debito
          justitiae to do real and substantial  justice
          for  the administration of which alone courts
          exist.   Authority  of the court  exists  for
          advancement of justice and if any attempt  is
          made to abuse that authority so as to produce
          injustice,  the  court has power  to  prevent
          abuse.   It  would be an abuse of process  of
          the  court  to allow any action  which  would
          result in injustice and prevent promotion  of
          justice.   In  exercise of the  powers  court
          would be justified to quash any proceeding if
          it  finds that initiation/continuance  of  it
          amounts  to abuse of the process of court  or
          quashing of these proceedings would otherwise
          serve  the ends of justice.  When no  offence
          is  disclosed by the complaint, the court may
          examine  the  question  of  fact.    When   a
          complaint  is  sought to be  quashed,  it  is
          permissible  to  look into the  materials  to
          assess  what the complainant has alleged  and
          whether any offence is made out even  if  the
          allegations are accepted in toto."

6.   In the present case, the complainant/respondent No.1 has
  lodged the report on 19-6-2007 and afterwards she has filed
  the present complaint.  Her statement recorded under Section
  200  of the Cr.P.C. reveals that the petitioners herein are
  her husband, father-in-law, mother-in-law, sister-in-law  &amp;
  brother-in-law  and  after marriage, her  in-laws  &amp;  their
  relatives have committed cruelty upon her in connection with
  demand  of  dowry.   Meetings amongst  the  relatives  were
  convened where the accused persons agreed that they will not
  commit cruelty on the complainant in future, but again they
  demanded  dowry and committed cruelty upon the complainant.  
  At  the stage of taking cognizance the Court is required to
  see  and  evaluate the evidence in its face  value  and  no
  meticulous scrutiny is required.  The Court is not required
  to consider the evidence in its evidentiary value and if the
  allegations made in the complaint are not rebutted it would
  be  sufficient for warranting conviction of the accused and
  the  Court may take cognizance against the accused  on  the
  basis  of  the complaint.  If the allegation  made  in  the
  statement  of  the complainant is not rebutted  and  it  is
  admitted in its face value same is sufficient for warranting
  conviction of the petitioners.

7.    As  held by the Apex Court in the matter of B.S.  Joshi
  (supra),  the Court is duty bound to encourage the  genuine
  settlements  and  the  party may take appropriate  recourse
  before  the  trial Court.  This is not the case  where  the
  parties have entered into agreement, and despite of this, the
  case  is pending before the trial Court.  The case of  B.S.
  Joshi (supra) is distinguishable on facts to that of the case
  in hand.

8.   The matter of Onkar (supra) is applicable in the present
  case and the material adduced on behalf of the complainant is
  sufficient for taking cognizance against the petitioners.  As
  held by the Apex Court in the matter of Ran Singh (supra) the
  Court is required to assign reasons for interference against
  the accused persons.

9.    The  order impugned, though brief, reveals that on  the
  basis  of  the statement &amp; documents, the Court  has  taken
  cognizance  against the petitioners and  statement  of  the
  complainant  is  sufficient for taking  cognizance  of  the
  offence punishable under Section 498A read with Section 34 of
  the  I.P.C. against the petitioners.  Both the Courts below
  have not committed any illegality warranting interference in
  exercise  of  the  extra  ordinary  inherent  jurisdiction.
  Consequently, the petition is liable to be dismissed and it
  is hereby dismissed.

10.  I.A.No.1 thus stands disposed of.

                            JUDGE

