Criminal Appeal No.437 of 2006 Criminal Appeal No 51 of 2008 Kailash  Raut Vs. State     of     Chhattisgarh

HIGH COURT OF CHATTISGARH AT BILASPUR       





      Criminal Appeal No.437 of 2006 Criminal Appeal No 51 of 2008





                     Kailash  Raut

                       Ashok  Kumar Kujur
                                  ...Petitioners


                           Versus



                     State     of     Chhattisgarh
                                                    ...Respondents


    (APPEAL UNDER SECTION 374(2) OF THE CODE OF CRIMINAL           
                      PROCEDURE, 1973)











!     Shri  Pushpendra  Kumar  Patel, counsel  for  appellant-
      Kailash Raut in Criminal Appeal No.437/2006
      Shri  Abhay  Tiwari,  counsel for appellant-Ashok  Kumar
      Kujur in Criminal Appeal No.51/2008

^     Shri Akhil Mishra, Dy.Govt.Advocate for the
      State/respondent







Honble Mr. T.P. Sharma, J 




       Dated:10/08/2009




:       Judgment


                          JUDGMENT
              (Delivered on 10th August, 2009)

     Criminal  Appeal No. 437/2006 filed by Kailash Raut  and
Criminal  Appeal  No.51/2008 filed by Ashok Kumar  Kujur  are
arising out of the judgment of conviction &amp; order of sentence
dated  17.4.2006  passed by the Special  Judge  (Atrocities),
Jashpur, in Special Criminal Case No.10/2005, therefore, they
are being disposed of by this common judgment. 

2.    The aforesaid criminal appeals are directed against the
judgment  of  conviction &amp; order of sentence dated  17.4.2006
passed by the Special Judge (Atrocities), Jashpur, in Special
Criminal  Case  No.10/2005  whereby  and  whereunder  learned
Special  Judge  after holding the appellants guilty  for  the
offence  punishable under Sections 376 (2) (g) of the  Indian
Penal  Code  and  each of them sentenced to undergo  rigorous
imprisonment for ten years.

3.   Judgment of conviction &amp; order of sentence is challenged
on  the  ground that without there being an iota of evidence,
the court below has convicted and sentenced the appellants as
aforementioned and has not considered the case of enmity  and
cause of false F.I.R. against the present appellants.

4.    Case  of the prosecution, in brief is that on 30.3.2005
the  prosecutrix (PW-1) aged about 15 years was  coming  from
village  Susdega  to  her village Kharkatta,  police  station
Pattalagaon  by Max Van at about 5 p.m. Accused  Ashok  Kumar   
was  driving the vehicle. Accused Kailash was sitting  beside
the  prosecutrix. When they reached near Khardhodhi,  accused 
Ashok stopped the vehicle and forcefully dragged her and took
inside  the  forest.  When she tried  to  save  herself  then
accused  fell  down her and accused Kailash caught  hold  her
hands and pressed her mouth. Accused Ashok after removing his  
clothes   and  clothes  of  the  prosecutrix  and   committed
forcefully  sexual intercourse with her.  At  about  11  p.m.
after commission of the offence, the prosecutrix went to  the
house  of Lacchan Sai and she narrated the incident  to  him.
Lacchan chased the accused persons but they fled away by  the 
vehicle.  The  prosecutrix stayed in the  house  of  Lacchan.
Second day i.e. on 31.3.2005, she appeared in her examination
and  after coming from the school, she narrated the  incident
to  her  father, uncle and mother and lodged the F.I.R.  vide
Ex.P/1  on  1.4.2005  at  about  1  p.m.  at  police  station
Patthalgaon. Her underwear was seized vide Ex.P/2.  Spot  map 
was  prepared  vide Ex.P/3. Photocopies of her marksheet  and
caste  certificate (Exs.P/5 and P/6) were seized vide Ex.P/4.
Prosecutrix  was  sent  for  medical  examination.  She   was
examined by Dr.Smt.K.Tirki (PW-4) vide Ex.P/9 where she found 
26  teethes in her both the jaws. Breast were well developed.
Pubic  hairs were scanty. On examination of her private part,
swelling  and  redness were found over Para urethral  region.
Hymen  was  swollen.  Abrasion present posteriorly.  She  was
complained  pain. Two slides of vaginal smear  were  prepared
and  sealed. She was subjected to sexual intercourse. Accused 
were arrested. One vehicle was seized from accused Ashok vide 
Ex.P/8.  Documents  of  the vehicle  were  also  seized  vide
Ex.P/10.  Accused  was  examined by Dr.P.Suthar  (PW-7)  vide 
Ex.P/11   who  opined  that  accused  Ashok  is  capable   of
committing  sexual intercourse. Map was prepared  by  patwari
vide  Ex.P/12. One underwear of accused Ashok was seized vide  
Ex.P/7.  Slides were seized vide Ex.P/21. Articles were  sent
for medical analysis.
5.    Statements of the witnesses were recorded under Section
161 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (in short `Code')
and after completion of investigation, charge sheet was filed
in the Court of the Chief Judicial Magistrate, Jashpur who in
turn  committed  the  case to the Court  of  Sessions  Judge,
Jashpur  from  where the Special Judge (Atrocities),  Jashpur
received the same on transfer for trial.

6.    In  order to prove the guilt of the accused/appellants,
the  prosecution examined as many as 9 witnesses.  Statements  
of  the accused/appellants were recorded under Section 313 of
the  Code  of Criminal Procedure, 1973, in which they  denied
the  circumstances appearing against them and  innocency  and 
false  implication  is  claimed. The accused/appellants  have
also  examined  defence witness Lacchan Sai  (DW-1)  who  has 
deposed  in  his evidence that on 30.3.2005 at about  5  p.m.
Rohit  came to his house. He was waiting for arrival of  bus.
On  being  asked,  he told him that he was  waiting  for  one
person  who will come by Kiran Bus. After sometime  at  about
5.30  p.m.  one white colour Marshal came and the prosecutrix
got  down  from  marshal vehicle. Rohit went to  his  village
along with the prosecutrix. On the date of incident, Rohit or
prosecutrix  were  not  stayed  in  his  house.  Distance  of
Kharkatta  and  Khardhodhi  is about  1  km.  Rohit  and  the
prosecutrix  were having love affairs. Penalty  of  Rs.1500/-
was imposed upon Rohit. He has also deposed that quarrel took 
place  between mother-father of Piyo Bai relating to property
of  dowry,  daughter-in-law of Kawal Sai i.e. father  of  the
prosecutrix. In his detail evidence, Lacchan Sai has  deposed
that  accused persons did not come there and the  prosecutrix
went  with her lover Rohit. Kotwar Dhursai (DW-2) has deposed
in  his evidence that name of prosecutrix is not recorded  in
the  birth  registrar and name of Padma Bai  finds  place  in
birth  register who is daughter of Kawal Sai. In  his  cross-
examination, he has admitted that he has not made  any  entry
in the birth register.

7.    Learned  Special Judge after affording  opportunity  of
hearing   to   the  parties,  convicted  and  sentenced   the
accused/appellants as aforementioned. 

8.    I have heard Shri Pushpendra Kumar Patel and Shri Abhay
Tiwari,  counsel  for the appellants and Shri  Akhil  Mishra,
Dy.Govt.Advocate  for the State/respondent  and  perused  the
judgment impugned as also record of the court below.

9.    Shri Abhay Tiwari, learned counsel for appellant  Ashok
Kumar vehemently argued that present accused Ashok Kumar  and    
co-accused have never took the prosecutrix and Ashok has  not
committed  any offence on the date of incident. Sister-in-law
(bhabhi)   of   the   prosecutrix  hired  one   vehicle   for
transportation of her articles. She also went  to  Kharkhatta
along with her sister-in-law (bhabhi) and other relatives  of
her  bhabhi. They have transported the articles of  dowry  of
her  Bhabhi  from  Kharkhatta  to  Susdega.  Learned  counsel
further argued that on the ground that the present appellants
have  transported the articles of her bhabhi. She has  lodged
false report after getting advice from her relatives. On  the
date  of incident she went with lover Rohit and he might have
been committed sexual intercourse with her to create evidence
against  the  present  appellants.  The  statement   of   the
prosecutrix  is full of contradiction and omission  does  not
inspire  confidence and trustworthy and is not safe to  rely.
Learned  counsel  also argued that other witnesses  have  not
corroborated  the statement of the prosecutrix.  The  defence
was  not required to prove its defence like the case  of  the
prosecution.  Simply  creating  doubt  upon  the   story   of
prosecution  is sufficient for discharge the  burden  of  the
defence.  Defence  has examined Lacchan  Sai  (DW-1)  who  is 
prosecution  witness, but the prosecution  has  not  examined
him.  Reason best known to the prosecution. Lacchan  Sai  has
specifically  deposed  that  on  the  date  of  incident  the
prosecutix went with her lover Rohit. She has never stayed in
his  house and the prosecutrix has not narrated any  incident
to  him. This evidence is sufficient for creating and casting
doubt  upon  the story of prosecution and to make  the  story
suspicious. The prosecution has utterly failed to  prove  the
age  of  the  prosecutrix  below 16  years  on  the  date  of
commission of the offence.

10.   Shri  Pushpendra  Kumar Patel,  counsel  for  appellant
Kailash  Raut  vehemently argued that according  to  case  of
prosecution  only present appellant was sitting in  the  same
vehicle  and  co-accused  Ashok Kumar  has  committed  sexual 
intercourse with the prosecutrix. The prosecutrix has deposed
improbable  story  that at the time of commission  of  sexual
intercourse  by  the  co-accused, the present  appellant  has
caught  hold her hands and pressed her mouth. Learned counsel 
further  argued  that story of prosecution is improbable.  It
appears  that  only  with a view to implicate  the  appellant
falsely in the crime in question, the prosecutrix has deposed
against  him. Learned counsel also submits that according  to
case of prosecution he has not committed intercourse with the
prosecutrix. Even according to case of prosecution,  his  act
does  not  fall  under  the  category  of  act  committed  in
furtherance of his common intention.

11.   On  the other hand, judgment is supported on behalf  of
the respondent/State.

12.   In  order to appreciate the contentions of the  parties
and  to  connect  the  accused/appellants  in  the  crime  in
question,  I have examined the evidence adduced on behalf  of
the prosecution. As regards the age of the prosecutrix at the
time  of commission of offence is concerned, the Court  below
has ascertained the age of the prosecutrix below 16 years  on
the  basis  of  date of birth recorded in  the  marksheet  as
7.2.90.  In  case  of rape with minor girl, heavy  burden  is
always on the prosecution to prove the age of the prosecutrix
below 16 years by cogent and reliable evidence. Entry of date
of   birth  in  the  birth  register  (kotwari  register)  is
conclusive proof for determination the age of the person, but
in  the  absence of such evidence, the Court is  required  to
determine  the  age of the prosecutrix on the  basis  of  her
physical  appearance,  statements of the  parents  and  other
persons  having  knowledge about the date  of  birth  of  the
person  ,  ossification test and entry  in  school  admission
register showing the date of birth.

13.   In  the  matter of Sidheswar Ganguly v. State  of  West
Bengal1,  the  Apex Court has held that the  only  conclusive
piece   of  evidence  may  be  the  birth  certificate,   but
unfortunately,  in  this  country  such  a  document  is  not
ordinarily available. The Court or the jury has to  base  its
conclusions upon all the facts and circumstances disclosed on
examining  all the physical features of the person whose  age
is  in  question, in conjunction with such oral testimony  as
may be available.

14.   In  the  absence  of conclusive evidence,  age  can  be
determined  on the basis of other circumstances. Age  of  the
prosecutrix  was ascertained approximate by the Court  as  14
years.  Kawal  Sai (PW-2) father of the prosecutrix  has  not
deposed   anything   relating  to  age   of   his   daughter.
Dr.Smt.K.Tirki  (PW-4)  has  examined  the  prosecutrix   and
estimated  her age as 14 years. The prosecutrix was  examined
by  Dr.Smt.K.Tirki  vide  Ex.P/9  in  which  the  doctor  has
recorded her physical appearance as follows:-
          "Her  height  was 4 feet, weight was  35  kg.,
          chest was 31 cm. Teethes 7-6/6-6, breast  were
          well developed. Public hairs were scanty."

15.  Her copy of marksheet (Ex.P/5) was seized vide Ex.P/4 by
S.R.Bhagat  (PW-9)  Sub  Divisional  Officer  (Police).   For
determination the age of the prosecutrix below  16  years  on
the  date of commission of offence, the prosecution  has  not
conducted any ossification test of the prosecutrix. Even  the
prosecution has not seized admission register of the  school,
has  not  examined any person who has made entry of  date  of
birth  in  the school register and the basis of  such  entry.
Virtually,  in  this case, the prosecution has not  collected
any  evidence  except  seizure of photographs  of  marksheet.
Parents  of the prosecutrix have not stated that her age  was
only  below  16  years. Photocopy of document or  seizure  of
photocopy  of  the marksheet containing date of birth  itself
does  not  proof the age or date of birth of the prosecutrix.
The prosecutrix herself has deposed that she is aged about 14
years and her date of birth is 7.4.90 but she has not deposed
that  on  what basis she has told her age or date  of  birth.
Statement of the prosecutrix relating to her age itself is  a
question  for determination. In this case, only statement  of
the prosecutrix is not sufficient to prove her date of birth.
In  the absence of any proof  of age or date of birth of  the
prosecutrix it is difficult to hold that her age was below 16
years at the time of commission of offence.

16.   As  regards  the  commission of sexual  intercourse  by
present  appellant  Ashok  Kumar  with  the  prosecutrix   is
concerned,  the  prosecutrix (PW-1) has specifically  deposed
that  on 30.3.2005 she was returning from her sister-in-law's
(Bhabhi's) village Susdega to her village Kharkatta. She  was
standing  in the bus stand and waiting for bus, at that  time
appellants came and asked where she want to go. She told them  
that she want to go to village Kharkatta, then the appellants
told  her  that they were also going to village Kharkatta  by
Max  Van  and  suggested to sit in the max. She  agreed  with
their suggestion. Appellant Ashok was driving the vehicle and
other  appellant  was  sitting beside her.  She  was  setting
towards  gate  in the vehicle. The distance of Kharkhatta  to
Susdega  was  20 kg. At about 11 p.m. when they reached  near 
Khardhodhi,  then appellant Ashok Kumar stopped the  vehicle.
Both  the accused dragged and took her inside the forest  and
after  laying  down her in the field, appellant  Ashok  Kumar
removed her clothes and after removing his clothes, committed
sexual  intercourse with her and at that time her hands  were
caught hold by co-accused Kailash and also pressed her mouth. 
She  immediately fled away from the spot with her clothes and
went  to  the house of Lachhan. Accused persons were  chasing 
her.  When  Lacchan and Rohit came out from  the  house  from 
Lachhan with stick and they chased the accused persons,  then 
they  fled away by their vehicle. She stayed in the house  of
Lacchan. Second day morning at 8 p.m. she went to school  and 
appeared in the examination. She narrated the incident to her
teacher. After completion of the examination she came to  her
house  and  narrated the incident to her  father,  uncle  and
mother and thereafter she lodged the F.I.R. vide Ex.P/1.  Her
underwear  was seized vide Ex.P/2. Spot map was prepared  vie 
Ex.P/3.  Her  mark-sheet and caste certificate  (Exs.P/5  and
P/6)  were  seized vide Ex.P/4. She has specifically  deposed
that she has not consented appellant Ashok for commission  of
intercourse.  Kawal  Sai  (PW-2) has  stated  that  when  her
daughter  came back she narrated the incident and  then  they
lodged  the  report.  Rohit Kumar (PW-3)  has  supported  the
seizure  (Exs.P/2,  P/7  and  P/8).  S.R.Bhagat  (PW-9)   has
supported the investigation in his detail evidence.  She  was
examined by Dr.Smt.K.Tirki    (PW-4) who found swelling  upon
hymen  of the prosecutrix. She has specifically deposed  that
she was subjected to sexual intercourse. She has admitted  in
para-9  of  her cross-examination that injury in the  private
part   may   be   caused  for  other  reason.   Evidence   of
Dr.Smt.K.Tirki   and   report  Ex.P/9   suggests   that   the
prosecutrix has been subjected to sexual intercourse.

17.   Lacchan  Sai (DW-1) has deposed that  on  the  date  of
incident, Rohit was present at Khardhodi. He was waiting  for
the  prosecutrix.  The prosecutrix came by marshal  at  about
5.30   p.m.  then  Rohit  went  with  the  prosecutrix.   The
prosecutrix  has  not stayed in his house. They  were  having
love  affairs.  He  has deposed that panchayat  was  convened
relating  to  love affairs of Rohit and the  prosecutrix  and
document were also written.

18.   In  this  case,  the prosecutrix  is  only  substantial
witness  relating to commission of offence with her.  Defence
has  cross-examined the prosecutrix at length. In her  detail
cross-examination,  she  has deposed  that  on  the  date  of
commission  of  offence, she was coming from  her  sister-in-
law's (bhabhi's) maternal house. The defence has specifically
suggested to the prosecutrix that the present accused persons
were  driving  marshal vehicle and both the  accused  persons
were  present in the vehicle and told that she will reach  in
time  for taking part in the examination then she boarded  in
the  vehicle. Lastly, they reached near the house of  Lacchan
where  the accused stopped the vehicle. By giving suggestions
to  the  prosecutrix, the appellants have admitted  the  fact
that they came to the place of incident by their vehicle from
Susdega  along  with  the prosecutrix.  The  prosecutrix  had
denied  the  suggestion that near the place of  incident  she
herself got down and also denied the suggestion that she  was
not  dragged  by  the  accused persons. The  prosecutrix  has
specifically deposed that after dragging the accused persons,
took  the  prosecutrix to the place of incident and appellant
Ashok committed sexual intercourse with her. She has admitted 
the  fact that second day they went to Patthalgaon along with
her  father, uncle and Rohit, but she denied any relation  or
love  affairs  with Rohit. She has specifically deposed  that
her name is Sombai and not Padma Bai. Kawal Sai (PW-2) father  
of  the prosecutrix has also not admitted any relation of the
prosecutrix  with Rohit. The prosecution has  examined  Rohit
Kumar  as  PW-3  who  has also denied any relation  with  the
prosecutrix, but has specifically admitted in para-4  of  his
cross-examination that when the prosecutrix came to the house
of  Lacchan  at that time he was present. He has  denied  the
suggestion that when the prosecutrix stayed in the  house  of
Lacchan,  then he committed sexual intercourse with her.  The
prosecutrix  (PW-1) has specifically deposed that  while  she
was coming from her sister-in-law's village in the vehicle of
the  accused persons, then at near Khardhodi, appellant Ashok
stopped  the  vehicle and both the accused took  her  to  the
place  of  incident  and  appellant  Ashok  committed  sexual
intercourse with her. She has specifically deposed  that  she
stayed  in  the house of Lacchan Sai at night and  Rohit  was
also present there.

19.   The  prosecution has not examined Lacchan, but  defence
has examined Lacchan who has specifically deposed that on the 
date  of incident the prosecutrix has not stayed in his house
but  she  went with Rohit, contra the defence has  not  asked
anything to the prosecutrix that she went with Rohit from the
house of Lacchan. On the other hand, defence has specifically
suggested  Rohit  Kumar  (PW-3)  in  para-4  of  his   cross-
examination that during the course of stay of the prosecutrix
in  the house of Lacchan, he has committed sexual intercourse
with her which he has specifically denied. This suggestion is
sufficient to draw inference that the prosecutrix has  stayed
in  the  house  of Lacchan and has not gone  with  Rohit  and
disbelieve the fact that she has not stayed in the  house  of
Lachhan. She has not lodged the report on second day  morning 
but  she went to school for appearing in the examination  and
when  she  came back from the school, thereafter she narrated
the  incident  to her mother, father and other relatives  and
finally she has lodged the report.

20.   The prosecutrix is teenaged girl. She has attended  the
school  and  appeared  in  the  examination.  She  has  given
preference  in appearing the examination instead  of  lodging
the report promptly. This is a case of gang rape. Normally in
case  rape prompt report is not possible and after discussing
with   the  family  members  and  other  consideration,   the
prosecutrix  and  her parents used to lodge the  report,  but
only on this ground the evidence of the prosecution cannot be
discarded. Her statement is supported by the medical evidence
which  is  suggestive  of the fact that the  prosecutrix  was
subjected   to  sexual  intercourse  during  the  period   of
incident.  The defence has suggested that Rohit has committed
sexual  intercourse  which  he has denied  specifically.  The
prosecutrix has specifically deposed against appellant Ashok.
The  suggestion  has  not been given by the  defence  to  the
prosecutrix that Rohit has committed sexual intercourse  with
her  and  she  is  implicating the  present  appellants.  The
defence  has  not suggested anything to the prosecutrix  that
her  sister-in-law has transported her dowry articles by  the
vehicle  of  the  accused or the prosecutrix has  lodged  the
report  against the present appellants on the basis  of  some
dispute  or enmity. The prosecution witnesses had denied  the
suggestion  of  love affairs of the prosecutrix  with  Rohit.
Corroboration of the statement of the prosecutrix is not sine
qua  non. Corroboration is not a rule of law but it is a rule
of caution and prudent.

21.   In  the  present case, statement of the prosecutrix  is
corroborated  by  the  medical evidence  and  partly  by  her
father's  Kawal Sai (PW-2), Rohit (PW-3) and F.I.R.  (Ex.P/1)
which  are  sufficient for drawing inference  that  appellant
Ashok  has committed sexual intercourse with her without  her
consent  and will. The prosecutrix has also deposed  that  at
the  time  of  commission  of  offence  by  appellant  Ashok,
appellant  Kailash  caught hold her hands  and  pressing  her
mouth. She has lodged the report (Ex.P/1) in which this  fact
also  finds place. She has also deposed that after commission
of  sexual  intercourse by appellant Ashok,  she  immediately
fled  away from the spot and reached to the house of  Lacchan
to  save  her. The accused persons also chased her  but  when
they  were  chased by Lacchan and Rohit, then they were  fled
away with their vehicle. It shows that appellant Kailash  was
not  only  present  in  the place  of  incident  but  he  has
facilitated the commission of the offence and also chased the
prosecutrix  after  commission of offence  shows  his  active
participation in the offence.

22.  After appreciating the evidence available on record, the
Special  Judge has convicted the appellants for  the  offence
punishable  under  Section 376 (2) (g) of  the  Indian  Penal
Code. The finding of the Court below is based on evidence  of
the   prosecutrix,  materially  corroborated  by  independent
sources  sufficient for drawing inference with the commission
of  gang rape. Conviction is based on legal evidence  and  is
sustainable under the law.

23.   As  regards  the  question of  sentence  is  concerned,
minimum  prescribed  sentence  have  been  awarded   to   the
appellants which does not warrant any interference.

24.   In  the result, Criminal Appeal Nos. 437/2006 &amp; 51/2008
filed by the appellants being devoid of merits are liable  to
be dismissed and are hereby dismissed. 

                                                    J U D G E

