CRIMINAL APPEAL NO 578  OF 2007 1.       Vinod  Kumar Patel Vs. State  of Chhattisgarh

HIGH COURT OF CHATTISGARH AT BILASPUR     




                               CRIMINAL APPEAL NO 578  OF 2007




                  1.       Vinod  Kumar Patel

                   2.       Jeturam   Patel
                                         ...Petitioners



                   VERSUS



                    State  of Chhattisgarh
                                               ...Respondents





MEMO OF APPEAL UNDER SECTION 374 (2) OF THE CODE OF CRIMINAL               
PROCEDURE, 1973.    






!       Mr. P.P. Sahu, Advocate for the appellants


^         Mr.  Rajendra  Tripathi,  P.L.  for   the State/respondent






Honble Mr. T.P.Sharma, J 





       Dated:04/09/2009




:       Judgment
                                 JUDGMENT
                                 (Passed on  4/9/2009)


1.   This criminal appeal is directed against the judgment

of conviction and order of sentence dated 20/6/2007 passed

by  the  Additional  Sessions Judge, Bhathapara,  District

Raipur  (C.G.) in Sessions Trial No. 71/2007  whereby  and

where   under  learned  Additional  Sessions  Judge  after

holding  the appellants guilty for the offence  punishable

under  Sections  498-A/34 and 306/34 of the  Indian  Penal

Code  and sentenced rigorous imprisonment for 3 years with

fine of Rs. 500/- in default of payment of fine amount, to

further  undergo  rigorous imprisonment for  3  months  to

each appellants and rigorous imprisonment for 7 years with

fine of Rs. 500/- in default of payment of fine amount, to

further undergo rigorous imprisonment for 3 months to each

appellants.

2.   Judgment of conviction and order of sentence is
challenged on the ground that without any clinching and
credible  evidence of cruelty, torture and abatement of
suicide Court below has convicted and sentenced the
appellants and thereby committed an illegality.
3.    The brief case of the prosecution:- deceased
Indranibai was married to appellant No. 1 Vinod Kumar
Patel in the Year 2006 within 8 months of her marriage she
committed suicide in the house of appellants by consuming
poison. Marg was reported by Melandas vide P-2 on 
21/10/2006. Investigating Officer proceeded for spot and
after summoning the witnesses vide Ex. P-3 prepared
inquest of the body of the deceased vide Ex.  P-4. Dead
body was sent for autopsy to the Community Health Center, 
Bhatapara vide Ex. P-18. Autopsy was condoned by team of  
two doctors vide Ex. P-20 by Dr. Rajendra Maheshwari and 
Dr. D.P.  Verma, death was due to asphyxia as a result of
consuming poison. Viscera were preserved and was seized  
vide Ex. P-1. Spot map was prepared by P-19 Tahsildar and 
vide Ex. P-21-A by Sub Divisional Officer (Police). First
Information Report was registered Vide Ex. D-3.  Accused
persons were arrested vide P-22 to P-24. Viscera were sent
for chemical analysis vide Exs. P-25 &amp; P-26. Statements of
the witnesses were recorded under Section 161 of the Code
of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (in short `the Code'). After
completion of the investigation charge sheet was filed
before the Judicial Magistrate First Class, Bhatapara who
in turn committed the case to the Court of Sessions,
learned Additional Sessions Judge received the case on
transfer.
4.   In order to prove the guilt of the appellants
prosecution examined as well as 24 witnesses. Examination 
of the accused persons were conducted under Section 313 of 
the Code where they denied the circumstances appearing 
against them and innocency and false implication is
claimed.
5.   After affording an opportunity of the hearing to the
parties learned Additional Sessions Judge has convicted
and sentenced the appellants as aforementioned.
6.   Learned counsel for the parties are heard. Judgment
impugned and records of courts below perused. 
7.   Learned counsel for the appellants argued that in the
present case deceased who was wife of appellant No. 1 and 
daughter-in-law of appellant No. 2 died under abnormal
circumstances on 20/10/2006 in their house but they have
never demanded dowry and committed  torture upon the  
deceased they have neither instigated or added nor abated
her suicide the only facts that that she died within 8
months of her marriage is not sufficient to draw the
inference that present appellants are liable for
commission of the offence.
8.   Learned counsel for the appellants further argued
that prosecution witnesses are not supported the case of
the prosecution. The statement of PW5 Ramanand Patel   
father of the deceased reveals that relation between the
parties were cordial even one day before the incident he
himself has  visited the house of the appellants where he
stayed in the night he took his meal there and after
taking tea in the morning he came back to his house.
Deceased was second wife of the appellant No. 1 there was
no custom of dowry and their caste and in case of second
marriage given and taking of the dowry is most uncommon. 
9.   Learned counsel for the appellants placed reliance in
the matter of Appasaheb &amp; Another v. Sate of Maharashtra1 
in which Apex Court has held that a demand for money on 
account of some financial stringency or for meeting some
urgent domestic expenses or for purchasing manure cannot 
be termed as a demand of dowry as the said word is
normally understood.
10.  On the other hand, learned counsel for the
State/respondent opposed the appeal and argued that 
deceased Indranibai died in the house of appellants under
abnormal circumstances within 8 months of her marriage,
the evidence adduced on behalf of the prosecution is
sufficient for drawing inference that soon before her
death she was subjected cruelty and torture in connection
with the demand of dowry and present appellants are the
person who have compelled the deceased to end her life.
The conviction and sentenced awarded to the appellants are
based on reliable and clinching evidence.
11.  In order to appreciate the contention of the parties,
I have examined the evidence adduced on behalf of the
prosecution and the defence of the appellants. It is not
disputed that present appellant No. 1 is a husband of the
deceased and appellant NO. 2 is a father-in-law of the
deceased  Indranibai who died within 8 months of her
marriage in abnormal circumstances in the house of the
appellants her death was abnormal, cause of death was 
asphyxia as a result of suspecting poisoning. PW22 Dr.
Rajendra Maheshwari who conducted autopsy has deposed in    
Para-5 of his evidence that smell of poison was present in
the abdomen of the deceased and no other injury was found
over the body. He has specifically admitted in his cross
examination that death was as a result of consuming of the
poison.
12.  As regard the cruelty, torture and abetment of
suicide is concerned the cruelty has been defied in
Section 498A of the Indian Penal Code which reads as
follows:-
    498-A.   Explanation.-For  the  purposes  of   this
section, "cruelty"  means-
    (a)  any willful conduct which is of such a nature as is
       likely to drive the woman to commit suicide or to cause
       grave injury or danger to life, limb or health (whether
       mental or physical) of the woman; or
(b)  harassment of the woman where such harassment is with 
a view to coercing her or any person related to her to
meet any unlawful demand for any property or valuable
security or is on account of failure by her or any person
related to her to meet such demand. ]
13.  A new provision in Evidence Act for presumption as to

abatement of suicide by a married woman has been added  in 

the Year 1983 vide amendment Act 46 of 1983 which reads as  

follows:-

       [  113A.  Presumption  as  to  abetment  of
       suicide   by   a  married  woman-When   the
       question  is  whether  the  commission   of
       suicide by a woman had been abetted by  her
       husband or any relative of her husband  and
       it  is shown that she had committed suicide
       within  a  period of seven years  from  the
       date  of  her marriage and that her husband
       or   such  relative  of  her  husband   had
       subjected  her  to cruelty, the  court  may
       presume,  having regard to  all  the  other
       circumstances  of  the  case,   that   such
       suicide had been abetted by her husband  or
       by such relative of her husband.
       Explanation.-  For  the  purposes  of  this
       section,  "cruelty"  shall  have  the  same
       meaning  as  in Section 498A of the  Indian
       Penal Code, 1860 (45 of 1860).]
14.  In the present case deceased Indranibai died within 8

months of her marriage according to autopsy report Ex.  P-

20 and statement of PW22 Dr. Rajendra Maheshwari  she died  

by  consuming poison and same is abnormal death  within  7 

years  of  her marriage. PW1 Kotwar Melandas  has  deposed  

that  death  of deceased was informed to him by  appellant

No.  2  he also informed the death to the parents  of  the

deceased, second day father of the deceased came  then  at 

his  instance  he went to Police Station and  lodged  Marg

intimation vide Ex. P-12 then Tahsildar and Police Officer

came  and  prepared the inquest report. PW3 Prahlad  Verma 

and  PW4  Ramawatar Verma has also admitted that Tahsildar  

and  Police officer prepared inquest report vide Ex.  P-4.

PW5  Ramanand Patel father of the deceased has deposed  in  

his  evidence that his daughter Indranibai died  within  8

months  of her marriage in the house of appellants  before

Diwali  festival. On 17th. Appellant No. 2  telephoned  to

him  at  about  9 P.M. in which he demanded  Rs.  20,000/-

for  construction of the house then he told that he is not

in  position to give such amount, second day when he  came

from field he saw his daughter in his house on being asked

she  told  that she has been sent for taking Rs. 20,000/-,

appellant  No. 1 will also come then he told his  daughter

that  it is not possible for him to arrange   Rs. 20,000/-

for  them.  At evening  appellant No. 2 came to his  house

and  after  some time he repeated demand of  Rs.  20,000/-

which  he  explained. On 19th  his daughter and  appellant

No.  2  went back to their house he also went to the house

of  the appellant along with Ramlal, Gajanand and Paretram

where they stayed in the night and they took the meal.  On

second day 20/10/2006 after taking tea he came back  along

with other persons from the house of the appellants.

15.  On 20/10/2006 he received the telephone call that her
daughter had died then on second day he went along with 40-
50 persons of his village to the village of appellants. He
saw the  dead body of his daughter.  He searched the
Kotwar and went to the police station then Police Officer
came and inquired. He has also deposed that blood were 
coming from the nostril and there was symptoms of pressing
of neck. Autopsy of the dead body was conducted and after
last rites to the dead body he came back to his house. He
has admitted that his statement Ex. P-5 was recorded by
Tahsildar. PW6 Mongrabai, elder aunt of the deceased has 
corroborated  the statement of PW5 Ramanand Patel to the 
extent of information relating to death of deceased,
demand of money and death of deceased and report. PW8   
Sahodrabai, mother of the deceased has corroborated the
statement of her husband PW5 Ramanand Patel, PW9 Ramlal     
Marar the elder brother of the father of the deceased,
PW10 Paretram, PW11 Gajanand Patel have also supported the    
statement of Ramanand Patel. 
16.   In  the  present case when father  of  the  deceased

informed by the appellants then he came to the village and

saw  the  dead body of her daughter he went to the  Police

Station  where Kotwar lodged the Marg intimation.  Inquest

was  prepared.  Tahsildar has recorded  the  statement  on

21/10/2006  vide Ex. P-5 where father of the deceased  has

stated  the demand of  money and series of incidents  took

place  before the death of his daughter. Statement of  the

PW5  Ramanand  Patel  is  corroborated   by  his  previous

statement  Ex.  P-5 recorded by Tahsildar and  from  other

witnesses,  PW1  Kotwar-Melandas,   PW6  Mongarabai,   PW7    

Nandlal  Verma,  PW8 Sahodrabai , PW9 Ramlal  Marar,  PW10    

Paretram  and  PW11  Gajanand there are some  discrepancy,  

contradiction and omission in their previous statement and

with  the statement of other witnesses. The witnesses  are

villagers  they  have  substantially deposed  against  the

appellants. Statement recorded  under Section 161  of  the

Code   is a brief, statement does not take place of detail

evidence  given  during the trial in  the  Court.  In  the

present case PW5 Ramanand Patel father of the deceased has   

categorically  deposed that on 17/10/06  appellant  No.  2

demanded  Rs.  20,000/- for construction of his  house  on

second  day  18/10/06 her daughter came to his  house  and

again repeated the demand and told that she has been  sent

for getting money.

17.  On 18/10/06 at evening present appellant No. 2
himself came to the house of father of the deceased where
he  repeated demand. Father of the deceased along with
other persons went to house of the appellants along with
appellant No. 2 and deceased where they stayed in the
night, they took meal and after taking tea in the morning
they  went back to their village. On same day at about 5.
30 deceased committed suicide by consuming poison when PW5     
Ramanand Patel came to know of the fact of commission of 
suicide then he went to the village of appellants not
alone but with other 30-40 persons he saw the dead body of
his daughter and went to the Police Station along with
Kotwar for lodging the report where Kotwar has lodged the
report. Autopsy report and statement of PW22 Dr. Rajendra
Maheshwari reveal that froth  and blood were coming out
from both the nostrils, light swelling were present over
face. One abrasion 3 c.m. x 2 c.m. was found over the left
side of the face. She was carrying pregnancy 6-8 weeks.
PW5 Ramanand Patel has also deposed in his evidence blood   
were coming out from her nostril and symptoms of pressing
neck was also present. Blood from the nostrils and
abrasion over the face were visible and these symptoms
caused doubt upon her normal death. Symptoms  relating to 
pressing neck has not been supported by the medical 
evidence same is exaggerated, when there was no abnormal  
circumstances then there was no propriety to accompany the 
appellant No. 2 and the deceased by her father and other 3
persons and to stay in the house of the appellants. These
circumstances are sufficient for drawing the inference of
abnormal circumstances which the father of deceased want 
to pacify therefore he accompanied along with other
responsible persons and also stayed at night to take
proper and ample opportunity to pacify the situation  and
when according to him the situation became normal then he 
came back to his house and same day deceased committed    
suicide.
18.   As held in case of  Appasaheb (Supra) the demand for

money  on  account  of some financial  stringency  or  for

meeting  some  urgent domestic expenses or for  purchasing 

manure  cannot  be termed as a demand for  dowry.  In  the

present  case  the demand of Rs. 20,000/- for construction

of  the house may be with condition of repay or not cannot

be  termed  as a demand of dowry. The evidence adduced  on 

behalf  of  the prosecution clearly shows that  appellants

have  demand  money for construction of work  and  not  in

terms  of  dowry  therefore it  cannot  be  inferred  that

appellant has demanded dowry.  

19.   In  the  case  of  domestic violence  or  harassment

normally  the  affected person i.e. daughter -in-law  does

not  report  or  inform  anyone about  the  harassment  or

torturous  attitude of her husband or in  -laws  to  other

persons  but  as  and when she gets the  opportunity,  she

informs about it to her parents. The parents of the  bride

normally  do  not  react  immediately  but  wait  for   an

appropriate   time,  in  the hope of  amicable  settlement

between  the  parties  and to avoid further  complications

which  may  arise in future. But when the  matter  becomes

intolerable then the daughter-in-law or the affected  lady

discloses  the torturous attitude of her husband  and  in-

laws,  to the police, neighbour and other persons  related

to   her   to   get  the  dispute  resolved   with   their

intervention.

20.  In such case specific instance of harassment &amp;
torture is not possible and after the death of bride the
details of harassment &amp; torture is also not possible, but
it may be inferred  from the evidence of parents &amp; other
relatives of the deceased and the circumstances that the
deceased was subjected to harassment &amp; torture. 
21.  In the present case deceased was carrying pregnancy
of 6-8 weeks and thereby not only she has killed her life
but also stopped the birth of her own child. It was not a
normal step taken by her and it was not possible for her
to take drastic step for ending her life even during
pregnancy. 
22.  Statement of father of the deceased PW5 Ramanand  
Patel corroborated by the statement of independent
witnesses statement recorded by the Tahsildar vide Ex. P-5
in which Ramanand Patel has categorically deposed that on 
17/10/06 appellant NO. 2 demanded Rs. 20,000/-. On 
18/10/06 appellant sent the deceased for bringing Rs.
20,000/- from him, appellant NO. 2 also visited maternal
house of the deceased for taking money. On 19/10/06 father
of the deceased and other persons  along with deceased,
appellant NO. 2 came to the house of the appellant No.2
where PW5 Ramanand Patel along with other persons stayed   
in the house of the appellants and on 20/10/06 he went
back along with other persons and on very day at evening
deceased committed suicide by consuming poison the   
aforesaid circumstances are linked and closed to each
other and are sufficient to give rice the presumption that
within 3 days appellants compelled the deceased  for
brining Rs. 20,000/- from her maternal house and failing
such on same day she committed suicide these circumstances   
are completely against the appellants and sufficient to
give rise the presumption that appellant are man who has
committed cruelty and torture upon the deceased and as a
result of such torture and cruelty she committed suicide.
23.    Section  113(A) of the Evidence  Act  provides  for

presumption as to abatement of suicide by a married  women 

and  makes  the  provisions that Court may presume  having

regard  to  all other circumstances of the case that  such

suicide has been abated by husband or by such relatives of

her husband. 

24.  In the present case evidence adduced on behalf of the
prosecution is sufficient for drawing the inference in
terms of Section 113(A) of the Evidence Act that
appellants have committed cruelty and torture upon the
deceased who was wife of appellant NO. 1 and daughter in
law of appellant NO. 2 as a result of such cruelty and
torture deceased had taken drastic steps of ending her
life specially when she was carrying the pregnancy of 6-8
weeks. After appreciating the evidence available on record
learned Courts below has convicted and sentenced the 
appellants as aforementioned. Conviction of the appellants
are based on credible  and clinching evidence sustainable
under the law.
25.  As  regard the question of sentence is concerned
present appellants have been sentenced under Sections 498- 
A/34 and 306/34 of the Indian Penal Code and sentenced 
rigorous imprisonment for 3 years with fine of Rs. 500/-
in default of payment of fine amount, to further undergo
rigorous imprisonment for 3 months to each appellants and
rigorous imprisonment for 7 years with fine of Rs. 500/-
in default of payment of fine amount, to further undergo
rigorous imprisonment for 3 months to each appellants.
Taking into consideration the commission of suicide within
8 months of her marriage of the woman aged about 22 years 
who was pregnant at the time of such commission of the
suicide. The present appellants does not deserves any
sympathy in the sentence imposed upon them. Consequently,   
this criminal appeal is liable to be dismissed and it is
hereby dismissed. 
                                                     JUDGE

