Criminal Appeal No.461 of 2006 Kumar    Ram  Kumar Vs. State  of Chhattisgarh

HIGH COURT OF CHATTISGARH AT BILASPUR      




                Criminal Appeal No.461 of 2006





                        Kumar    Ram  Kumar
                                           ...Petitioners



                            Versus



                       State  of Chhattisgarh
                                             ...Respondents









!     Mr.Sandeep Shrivastava, counsel for the appellant


^     Mr.Akhil     Mishra,     Dy.Govt.Advocate     for      the State/respondent




Honble Mr. T.P. Sharma, J 


       Dated:23/07/2009




:       Judgment




     (APPEAL UNDER SECTION 374 (2) OF THE CODE OF CRIMINAL          
                       PROCEDURE, 1973)

                           JUDGMENT
                  (Passed on 23rd July, 2009)

     This appeal is directed against the judgment of conviction
and  order  of  sentence dated 25.5.2006 passed  by  the  First
Additional  Sessions Judge, Durg, in Sessions Trial  No.55/2005
whereby  and  whereunder the learned First Additional  Sessions
Judge  after  holding the appellant guilty, who is  husband  of
deceased  Pushpa  Dewangan, for the  offence  punishable  under
Sections  498-A,  304-B and in alternate  Section  306  of  the
Indian   Penal   Code   sentenced  him  to   undergo   rigorous
imprisonment  for  3 years and to pay a fine of  Rs.1000/-,  in
default   of   payment  of  fine  to  further  undergo   simple
imprisonment  for  3  months and rigorous imprisonment  for  10
years and to pay a fine of Rs.2000/-, in default of payment  of
fine  to further undergo simple imprisonment for 1 year and  no
separate  sentence has been imposed under Section  306  of  the
Indian Penal Code.

2.   Judgment of conviction and order of sentence is challenged
on  the ground that without there being an iota of evidence  of
demand  of  dowry  soon before the death of  the  deceased  and
torture  and  cruelty,  the  Court  below  has  convicted   and
sentenced the appellant as aforementioned and thereby committed 
an illegality.

3.    Case  of  the prosecution, in brief, is that the  present
appellant  is  husband  of  deceased Pushpa  Dewangan  who  was  
married  with the appellant in the year 2002. At  the  time  of
marriage  sufficient articles were given to the  appellant  but
after  marriage the appellant and their relatives have demanded
dowry  especially  motorcycle and as a result  of  torture  and
cruelty in connection with the demand of dowry, deceased Pushpa 
Dewangan has committed suicide on 23.1.2005 by hanging herself.  
Merg  intimation  was  registered  vide  Ex.P/9.  Investigation
officer proceeded for the scene of occurrence and inquest  over
the  body  of  the  deceased  was prepared  vide  Ex.P/6  after
summoning the witnesses (Ex.P/5). Articles of dowry were seized
vide Ex.P/7. Spot map was prepared vide Ex.P/8. Rope (sari) was
seized  vide  Ex.P/10. Dead body was sent for autopsy.  Autopsy
was  conducted by Dr.S.R.Churendra (PW-3) who opined that cause   
of death was asphyxia as a result of hanging. F.I.R. was lodged
vide Ex.P/2.

4.    After  recording  the statements of the  witnesses  under
Section  161 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (in  short
`Code') and after completion of investigation, charge sheet was
filed  before the Judicial Magistrate First Class, Durg who  in
turn  committed  the case to the Court of Sessions,  Durg  from
where  learned  First Additional Sessions Judge, Durg  received
the same on transfer for trial.

5.    In order to prove the guilt of the accused/appellant, the
prosecution has examined as many as 13 witnesses. Statements of   
the  accused were recorded under Section 313 of the Code  where 
they  denied  the  circumstances  appearing  against  them  and
innocency and false implication is pleaded.

6.   Learned First Additional Sessions Judge after affording an
opportunity  of  hearing to the parties, acquitted  Itwari  and
Rajim Bai (father-in-law and mother-in-law of the deceased) and
convicted and sentenced the appellant as aforementioned.

7.    I  have heard Shri Sandeep Shrivastava, counsel  for  the
appellant and Shri Akhil Mishra, Deputy Government Advocate for
the  State/respondent  and perused the  judgment  impugned  and
record of the court below.

8.    Learned counsel for the appellant vehemently argued  that
though  deceased Pushpa Bai, wife of the appellant, died within
three  years  of  her  marriage in  abnormal  circumstances  by
hanging  in  the house of the appellant but this fact  are  not
sufficient to constitute the offence of dowry death and offence
punishable under Sections 498-A, 304-B and in alternate Section
306  of  the  Indian  Penal Code. The prosecution  has  utterly
failed to adduce any evidence relating to demand of dowry  that
too  soon  before the death of deceased Pushpa Bai and  torture
and cruelty in connection with demand of dowry. Learned counsel
further  argued that at the time of inquest over the dead  body
of  the  deceased, relatives of the deceased were  present  but
they  have  not  stated anything relating to demand  of  dowry.
Panchuram  Dewangan (PW-1) father of the deceased  has  deposed   
that relatives of the appellant have demanded motorcycle but he
has  deposed  that  it  was demanded  in  the  year  2002.  The
prosecution  has  utterly  failed to prove  the  continuity  of
demand or demand soon before the death of the deceased. Learned  
counsel  placed reliance in the matter of Prem Kunwar v.  State
of  Rajasthan1 in which it has been held by the Apex Court that
for  raising presumption of dowry death under section 113-A  of
the  Evidence Act there must be proximity and live-link between
the  effect of cruelty based on dowry demand and the  concerned
death.

9.     On   the   other   hand,   learned   counsel   for   the
State/respondent  supported the judgment  impugned  and  argued 
that  charge  sheet was originally filed against  the  husband,
father-in-law  and  mother-in-law of  the  deceased  but  after
minutely  scrutiny of the evidence adduced  on  behalf  of  the
prosecution, learned First Additional Sessions Judge  has  only
convicted  and  sentenced the appellant  i.e.  husband  of  the
deceased  and has acquitted father-in-law and mother-in-law  of
the deceased. The evidence adduced on behalf of the prosecution
is  sufficient  for warranting conviction and sentence  against
the appellant. Learned counsel further argued that according to
case of prosecution, motor-cycle was demanded. It shows that it
was  demanded by the appellant and for the use of him  and  not
for his old aged father and mother.

10.   In order to appreciate the contentions of the parties,  I
have examined the evidence adduced on behalf of the parties. In
the  present case, marriage took place in the year 2002 and she
died  as a result of hanging herself on 23.1.2005 in the  house
of  the  appellant. Deceased Pushpa Bai wife of  the  appellant
died   within   three  years  of  her  marriage   in   abnormal
circumstances  in the house of the appellant  as  a  result  of
suicide is not disputed, on the other hand, also established by
merg  intimation  (Ex.P/9) lodged by father of  the  appellant,
inquest  report  (Ex.P/6),  F.I.R.  (Ex.P/2),  autopsy   report
(Ex.P/3) and statement of Dr.S.R.Churendra (PW-3). 

11.   In order to establish the complicity of the appellant  in
the  crime in question, the prosecution has required  to  prove
the  fact  that  soon  before the death  of  the  deceased  the
appellant has demanded dowry and committed cruelty and  torture 
and  thereby  compelled or aided death of deceased Pushpa  Bai.
Panchuram  Dewangan (PW-1) father of the deceased  has  deposed   
that  after  the marriage of her daughter, she was  normal  for
sometime but afterwards he came to know by his son that her in-
law's  relatives  were demanded motorcycle  to  them,  then  he
informed  that  he will give motorcycle after marriage  of  her
second daughter Deepa and in the year 2005 he came to know that  
her daughter has committed suicide. He has also stated in para-
4  of  his  evidence  that on the date of  such  commission  of
suicide  he  sent  to police station Pulgaon  for  lodging  the
report, then police advised him to give report in writing  then
he  filed written report (Ex.P/1). Dhanesh Kumar (PW-5) brother
of  the  deceased has also deposed that after 6 months  of  the
marriage  of his sister, the appellant has started  cruelty  in
connection with demand of dowry and the appellant has  demanded  
motorcycle  and used to commit cruelty upon her sister.  Lastly
Pushpa died. Gangaram Dewangan (PW-6) has also corroborated the    
statement of Panchuram Dewangan. Ramkumar (PW-9) brother of the    
deceased  has deposed that after 4 to 6 months of  marriage  of
her  sister, the appellant started cruelty and used to beat the
deceased  and  they  also demanded motorcycle  and  lastly  his
sister  died. The present appellant (husband of deceased Pushpa
Bai)  has not offered any explanation relating to death of  his
wife  who  died in the house of the appellant as  a  result  of
hanging.

12.   Written complaint was made on 24.1.2005 second day of the 
alleged commission of suicide in which it has been specifically
mentioned that the deceased has told her brother Ashok 15  days
prior  to the accident that if they will not provide motorcycle
then  present  appellant i.e. husband will  kill  her  but  the
prosecution  has  not examined witness Ashok,  brother  of  the
deceased. Panchuram Dewangan (PW-1) father of the deceased  has    
admitted  in para-12 of his evidence that in the year  2003  at
the  time of Teeja festival when her daughter came at that time
she   told   relating   to   demand  of   motorcycle   by   the
accused/appellant.  He has specifically denied  the  suggestion
that  the  appellant has not demanded any dowry  and  has  been
implicated falsely. Dhanesh Kumar (PW-5) has deposed in  para-3 
of  the  evidence that at the time of previous  Teeja  festival
Pushpa  had  told him that her husband demands  motorcycle  and 
commits  cruelty. He has also admitted that before his evidence
discussed  and  decided  what to depose  but  has  specifically
denied the suggestion that the appellant and other persons have
not  demanded  motorcycle.  Gangaram Dewangan  (PW-6)  maternal    
uncle   of  the  deceased  has  also  supported  the  case   of
prosecution.  He has specifically deposed in his evidence  that
persons of in-law's house of the deceased were demanded  sewing 
machine  and  motorcycle and used to commit  cruelty,  but  the
defence  has not asked anything to these witnesses relating  to
factum of such demand and cruelty. Ram Kumar (PW-9) brother  of  
the  deceased has specifically deposed in his evidence that  in
connection  with  demand  of  dowry  the  appellant  and  their
relatives had assaulted the deceased which is not find place in
the  statement of other persons. It reveals from the statements
of  Panchuram  Dewangan (PW-1), Dhanesh Kumar (PW-5),  Gangaram      
Dewangan     (PW-6) and Ram Kumar (PW-9) that accused and their   
relatives  used to demand motorcycle and commits  cruelty  upon
the  deceased  and the appellant is a person who  has  demanded 
motorcycle.  There are discrepancies in the statements  of  the
witnesses but they are trivial and they are consistent relating
to demand of motorcycle. 

13.   In Prem Kanwar (supra), the Apex Court has held that  the
prosecution  is required to prove existence of a proximate  and
live-link  between the effect of cruelty based on dowry  demand
and the concerned death. Para 12 of the said judgment reads  as
under:-
          "12.  A  conjoint reading of Section 113-B of  the
          Evidence  Act  and Section 304-B, IPC  shows  that
          there  must  be material to show that soon  before
          her  death the victim was subjected to cruelty  or
          harassment.  Prosecution  has  to  rule  out   the
          possibility of a natural or accidental death so as
          to  bring  it  within the purview  of  the  `death
          occurring otherwise than in normal circumstances'.
          The  expression  `soon before'  is  very  relevant
          where  Section  113-B  of  the  Evidence  Act  and
          Section  304-B,  IPC  are  pressed  into  service.
          Prosecution  is obliged to show that  soon  before
          the occurrence there was cruelty or harassment and
          only  in  that case presumption operates. Evidence
          in that regard has to be led by prosecution. `Soon
          before' is a relative term and it would be  depend
          upon  circumstances of each case  and  no  strait-
          jacket  formula can be laid down as to what  would
          constitute a period of soon before the occurrence.
          It  would  be  hazardous  to  indicate  any  fixed
          period,  and  that brings in the importance  of  a
          proximity test both for the proof of an offence of
          dowry  death  as well as for raising a presumption
          under  Section  113-B  of the  Evidence  Act.  The
          expression  `soon before her death'  used  in  the
          substantive  Section 304-B, IPC and Section  113-B
          of  the  Evidence Act is present with the idea  of
          proximity  test.  No  definite  period  has   been
          indicted and the expression `soon before'  is  not
          defined.  A reference to expression `soon  before'
          used  in  Section  114, Illustration  (a)  of  the
          Evidence  Act  is relevant. It lays  down  that  a
          Court  may  presume  that a  man  who  is  in  the
          possession  of  goods `soon after' the  theft,  is
          either the thief or has received the goods knowing
          them  to be stolen, unless he can account for  his
          possession. The determination of the period  which
          can come within the term `soon before' is left  to
          be  determined by the Courts, depending upon facts
          and  circumstances of each case. Suffice, however,
          to  indicate  that  the expression  `soon  before'
          would normally imply that the interval should  not
          be   much   between  the  concerned   cruelty   or
          harassment  and the death in question. There  must
          be  existence of a proximate and live-link between
          the  effect  of cruelty based on dowry demand  and
          the  concerned  death.  If  alleged  incident   of
          cruelty  is  remote in time and has  become  stale
          enough  not to disturb mental equilibrium  of  the
          woman concerned, it would be of no consequence."

14.   In  this  case  according to  case  of  prosecution,  the
appellant demanded motorcycle after his marriage and there  was
no  other  occasion for such demand except in  connection  with
marriage.  Deceased died within few months probably six  months
of the last statement of the deceased relating to demand. It is
also  not  disputed that such demand was not fulfilled  by  the
parents  of the deceased till her death and statements  of  the
witnesses  show that the appellant was regularly making  demand
for  last  3  years.  The  prosecution  is  required  to  prove
proximity  and lie link between cruelty based on  dowry  demand
and  concerned death but it is not possible for the prosecution
to  prove that demand was made daily or periodically within the
interval  of week or month. The word soon before her  death  is
question of fact and defer from the fact of the case.

15.   In the present case, the prosecution has established  the
fact that the appellant has demanded motor-cycle since last 2 +
years  and  prior  to  fulfilling of the  demand  the  deceased
committed  suicide  raised  the presumption  that  the  present
appellant has committed cruelty upon the deceased in connection
with  demand of motor-cycle and as a result of such cruelty  no
option  was left to her except to own her life and thereby  she
has  committed suicide shows the continuity of demand and nexus 
between death and demand by motor-cycle.  
16.   After  appreciating the evidence available on record  the
learned Court below has convicted the appellant for the offence
punishable  under Section 498-A and 304-B of the  Indian  Penal
Code  and sentenced him to undergo rigorous imprisonment for  3
years  and  fine of Rs.100/- and rigorous imprisonment  for  10
years  and  fine  of  Rs.2000/-. Conviction  is  based  on  the
credible  and  clinching evidence sustainable  under  the  law.
Learned  Additional  Sessions  Judge  has  not  committed   any
illegality in convicting the appellant. The sentence awarded by
the Court below is neither excessive nor unjust.
17.    For  the foregoing reasons, the appeal being  devoid  of
merit is liable to be dismissed and it is hereby dismissed.
                                                  JUDGE

