CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1018 OF 2002 1.  Suresh    Kumar Vs. State   of  Chhattisgarh

HIGH COURT OF CHATTISGARH AT BILASPUR      






                CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1018 OF 2002 




                    1.  Suresh    Kumar
                     2.  Shanti  Bai
                     3.  Rakesh    Kumar
                                ...Petitioners


                     Vs
                   State   of  Chhattisgarh
                                        ...Respondents




!        Mr. Utkarsh Verma, learned counsel for the appellants


^        Mr.  Ashish  Shukla,  learned  Government  Advocate  for   the State




HON MR DHIRENDRA MISHRA,HON MR R N CHANDRAKAR, JJ               


       Dated:21/10/2009


:       Judgment




                        J U D G M E N T

                                (Delivered on 21.10.2009)



Per Dhirendra Mishra, J



  1.    This  criminal appeal is directed against the judgment  of
     conviction and order of sentence dated 22.7.2002 passed in S.T.
     No.480/00 whereby the learned II Additional Sessions Judge,
     FTC, Mungeli, District Bilaspur has convicted appellants No.1 &amp;
     2 under Sections 498A, 302 &amp; 201 of the I.P.C. and appellant
     No.3 has been convicted under Section 302/34 &amp; 201 of  the
     I.P.C.  and  sentenced to undergo RI  for  3  years,  life
     imprisonment, RI for seven years, respectively and appellant
     No.3 has been sentenced with life imprisonment and RI for 7
     years, respectively.
  2.    Appellant Suresh Kumar and deceased Uttarabai were married  
     in the year 1998 and Satyendra Kumar was their son. Appellant
     Shantibai is mother of appellant Suresh and appellant Rakesh.
  3.    Case  of  the prosecution, in brief, is that the  deceased
     resided with the appellants in her matrimonial home at Village-
     Kui, whereas her parents resided at Kawardha.  Behaviour of the
     appellants towards deceased Uttarabai was not proper, she was
     not liked by appellant Shantibai as she was not efficient in
     domestic work.  The appellants also nourished a grudge that
     they did not give color T.V at the time of marriage.   The
     deceased used to narrate her plight to her parents and elder
     sister Pushpadevi.  On the eve of Teeja (September) of the year
     2000, she visited her parental home and complained about the
     behaviour of the appellants to her parents and sister.  She
     returned with appellant Suresh after festival. On 18.10.2000
     around 13.30 hours appellant Suresh gave merg intimation of
     Ex.P/9 mentioning therein that his wife Uttarabai has died by
     burning.  He also gave merg intimation regarding death of his
     son Satyendra Kumar, aged about 1-1 + years, who had sustained
     serious burn injuries in the same incident and died while they
     were preparing to take him to hospital for treatment on way.
                Police    proceeded   for   the   scene   of    occurrence,
     performed  inquest  over the person  of  deceased  in  the
     presence of witnesses vide Ex.P/2 and thereafter, sent her
     dead  body  to  Primary  Health   Center,  Pandariya   for
     postmortem  vide Ex.P/7, where a team of Dr. V.P.  Jaiswal
     (PW-10)  and Dr. P.L. Kurre conducted postmortem and  gave
     their  report  of  Ex.P/8.  Investigating  Officer  (PW-9)
     Rajesh Devdas prepared site plan of both the places  where
     Uttarabai  and  Satyendra died vide Ex.P/6.   Plain  soil,
     kerosene mixed soil, a tin containing kerosene oil  and  a
     match box placed near the body of deceased Uttarabai, were
     taken  into possession vide Ex.P/3.  Nazri Naksha  of  the
     place  of incident was got prepared by Halka Patwari  vide
     Ex.P/16(C). On the basis of report lodged on 23.10.2000 by
     ASI  Rajesh  Devdas, FIR under Cr.No.53/00 was  registered
     vide  Ex.P/11.   A  separate  Cr.No.56/00  was  registered
     against the appellants under Section 302/34 of IPC on  the
     basis  of  report dated 5.11.2000 lodged by Rajesh  Devdas
     for  causing homicidal death of child Satyendra Kumar, and
     the  appellants were separately tried for the said  charge
     in S.T.No.481/00. The articles seized during investigation
     were  sent  for  chemical examination to Forensic  Science
     Laboratory, Raipur vide Ex.P/15.
  4.    After  completing investigation, charge  sheet  was  filed
     against  the  accused/appellants in the Court of  Judicial
     Magistrate First Class, Mungeli, who in turn committed the case
     to  the Court of Sessions Judge, Bilaspur and the same was
     received  on transfer for trial by the learned  Additional
     Sessions Judge.
  5.    Learned  trial Court framed charges under Section 498A  or
     in the alternative 498A/34, Section 302 or in the alternative
     302/34 and 201 or in the alternative 201/34 of the IPC against
     all  the  accused  persons, who abjured their  guilt.  The
     prosecution  in  order to establish  charges  against  the
     accused/appellants examined 11 witnesses in all. Thereafter,
     statements of accused/appellants were recorded, in which they
     denied  the  circumstances appearing against them  in  the
     prosecution case and pleaded innocence and false implication.
     Appellant Suresh also contended that at the time of incident,
     he was not present at home, and Rakesh stated that he had gone
     to  Panchayat Bhavan to attend his duties as  daily  wager
     Watchman, whereas appellant Shantibai stated that she had gone
     to  river to take bath. The appellants also examined Laxmi
     Thakur and Krishna Kumar in their defence as DW-1 and DW-2 
     respectively.
  6.      Learned  trial  Court  after  hearing  counsel  for  the
     respective parties, convicted &amp; sentenced the appellants as
     mentioned in para-1 of this judgment.
  7.    The trial Court after setting issues for consideration  in
     para-7 of its judgment, relying upon the evidence of Dr. VP
     Jaiswal, who conducted postmortem on the person of deceased 
     Uttarabai and proved his report of Ex.P/8, has held that the
     deceased died homicidal death.  Rejecting the defence of the
     appellants that they were not present at the time of incident
     at  home and relying upon the evidence of PW-1 Pushpadevi-
     sister, PW-2 Udanlal Dinkar-father, PW-3 Sarswati Bai-mother
     of the deceased, PW-4 Mohanlal and PW-5 Kaveribai, neighbourers
     of  the  appellants, held that appellants No. 1 &amp;  2  were
     responsible  for physical and mental cruelty  towards  the
     deceased.  However, appellant No.3 has been acquitted of the
     charge under Section 498A of IPC.  It has been further held
     that  though no direct evidence is available in this case,
     however, since in the residential house of the accused persons,
     deceased  Uttarabai  was murdered by  throttling  and  the
     appellants have not offered any explanation as to under what
     circumstances she was murdered, in such situation, relying upon
     circumstantial evidence available on record, a presumption has
     been drawn under Section 114G of the IPC and it has been held
     that the appellants jointly in furtherance of their common
     intention committed murder of Uttarabai by throttling.
                Defence  of  the  accused  persons that  the  deceased  was
     suffering from epilepsy, in the past also she had suffered
     attack  of  epilepsy and asphyxia could  be  caused  as  a
     result of epileptic attack, has been rejected.
  8.    Shri  Utkarsh  Verma, learned counsel  appearing  for  the
     appellants, argued that domestic dispute in the family  is
     common.  Allegation against appellant Shantibai is that she did
     not approve the domestic work performed by Uttarabai and for
     this reason, she used to get annoyed and a situation of quarrel
     used to crop up.  Father of the deceased Udanlal Dinkar has
     also alleged that Shantibai had asked them through Uttarabai to
     arrange for color T.V. as at the time of marriage, they had
     given Black &amp; While T.V. However, the above allegation is made
     for the first time before the Court and Sarswatibai i.e. mother
     or  Pushpa-sister of the deceased, has not made  any  such
     allegation.  The appellants have a dispute with their neighbour
     Mohanlal and they were not in talking terms for the last 5-6
     years and because of the above animosity this witness  has
     deposed against them, deliberately suppressing their strained
     relationship, which has been admitted by his wife Kaveribai (PW-
     5).  Version of Mohanlal further stands falsified from the
     evidence of PW-7 Shantibai. There is evidence available on
     record that the deceased was suffering from epilepsy, and her
     father has admitted this fact in his deposition.  There is
     evidence that Uttarabai had suffered epileptic attack in the
     past also.  In these circumstances, the possibility of deceased
     undergoing epileptic fit and dying as a result of suffocation
     and in the process catching fire, cannot be outrightly ruled
     out.
        Referring    to   Modi's   Medical   Jurisprudence    and
     Toxicology,  it was argued that suffocation by obstruction
     of  the air passage from within is also possible during  a
     fit of epilepsy.  The necessary symptoms normally found in
     the cases of deaths due to strangulation or throttling are
     not  present in this case.  The doctor has admitted in his
     cross-examination that the deceased suffered burn injuries
     to   the   extent  of  98%  and  in  these  circumstances,
     contusions described in the postmortem report could not be
     observed.   Finding  of  the  trial  Court  is  based   on
     conjectures  and  surmises and the  same  is  without  any
     evidence available on record.
  9.    On   the  other  hand,  learned  counsel  for  the   State
     supporting the impugned judgment of the trial Court, argued
     that  the deceased died homicidal death in her matrimonial
     house,  there is evidence available on record  that  after
     committing murder, her dead body was set on fire in order to
     destroy the evidence and misleading information was given to
     the police that the deceased died due to burning, which stands
     falsified from the postmortem report. In these circumstances,
     in  view of Section 106 of the Evidence Act, there will be
     corresponding burden on the inmates of the house to give a
     cogent explanation as to how the crime was committed.  The
     inmates of the house cannot get away by simply keeping quiet
     and offering no explanation on the supposed premise that the
     burden  to  establish  its case  lies  entirely  upon  the
     prosecution.
  10.   Reliance  is  placed on the judgments in the  matters  of
     Trimukh Maroti Kirkan Vs. State of Maharashtra1, and Swamy
     Shraddananda  alias  Murali Manohar Mishra  Vs.  State  of
     Karnataka2.
  11.   We  have heard learned counsel for the parties.  We  have
     also perused the record of the trial Court as also the impugned
     judgment.
  12.   Evidence of PW-1 Pushpadevi-sister, PW-2 Udanlal  Dinkar- 
     father, PW-3 Sarswati Bai-mother  of the deceased, is to the
     effect that Uttarabai was married with appellant Suresh Kumar
  on 5th May, 1998 and she gave birth to Satyendra Kumar through
     appellant Suresh.  Uttarabai used to inform them that appellant
     Shantibai was unsatisfied with the quality of her domestic work
     and therefore, she used to quarrel with her and in the above
     quarrels, appellant Suresh used to support his mother  and
     because of the above quarrels, atmosphere of the house was
     tense.
                Udanlal  Dinkar  has  also  deposed  that  Shantibai   used
     to ask Suresh that parents of Uttarabai should immediately
     arrange color T.V., however, the above fact is missing  in
     his diary statement of Ex.D/1.  They had brought Uttarabai
     to  their home in the last Teeja festival. After festival,
     Suresh  came  and took her.  At that time  also,  she  had
     narrated  that her difference with mother-in-law is  still
     continuing.   After receiving telephone of  Station  House
     Officer,  Kui, he went to Kui with his wife in  the  night
     itself.   He was informed by the villagers that  Satyendra
     was  being  taken to hospital in semi-burnt  condition  by
     motorcycle for treatment. However, he died on way.  In the
     cross-examination, he has stated that  his  statement  was
     recorded  on  19th  and  no  statement  was  recorded   on
     12.11.2000. In para-11 of his deposition, he has  admitted
     that  Uttarabai  was  suffering from disease  of  becoming
     unconscious.  He  had got her treated also,  however,  her
     ailment used to recur within 4-6 months.
  13.   Sarswatibai, mother of the deceased, has also stated that
     Uttarabai used to inform her that her mother-in-law Shantibai
     complains that she does not know cleaning and cooking, her work
     is not liked by Shantibai.  She did not pay much attention to
     the above complaint, as such domestic quarrel is common.  At
     the time of Teeja, she had narrated the above facts to her.
     Apart from the above complaint, Uttarabai did not tell her
     anything. She has specifically stated that she does not know
     anything about appellant No.3, brother-in-law of Uttarabai.
     She did not state anything against appellant No.3.
  14.   PW-4 Mohanlal resides in a house adjacent to the house of
     the appellants.  There is a passage of 2-4 feet between their
     houses. This witness has deposed that Suresh and Shantibai used
     to beat Uttarabai.  He had heard the shouts of beating from his
     house.   However, he did not see the actual marpeet.   One
     Shantibai Baretin had gone to the house of appellants a day
     before the death of Uttarabai.  At that time Suresh was beating
     Uttarabai, she tried to mediate, he overheard their shouts.
     Shantibai was saying, "don't beat, leave her". However, he
     never intervened in their affairs.  On the day of incident, he
     had gone to Pandariya and on return, he learnt that Uttarabai
     has been set on fire and murdered. He has denied the suggestion
     of the defence that there is any dispute between them.  He has
     further denied that they are not in talking terms since last 5-
     6 years.  He has stated that they have cordial relationship
     with the accused persons. He had stated before the police that
     Shantibai went to the house of appellants a day before the
     incident and had stopped them from beating. He cannot say as to
     why  this fact is not mentioned in his diary statement  of
     Ex.D/2.
  15.   PW-5  Kaveribai, wife of Mohanlal, has also deposed  that
     the accused persons used to quarrel with Uttarabai, which they
     overheard from their house. In the cross-examination she has
     admitted that they are not in talking terms with the accused
     persons and they have stopped going to each other's house even
     before the death of Uttarabai. There was some dispute between
     the two families in connection with repairs of roof.
  16.   PW-6 Narendra Singh is a witness of inquest of Ex.P/2. He
     has also deposed that on the date of incident, on hearing about
     the incident, he went to the house of Suresh.  He saw that
     Uttarabai was lying inside the room in burnt condition, her 1-1
     + year child was taken out in burnt condition, he died on way
     while being taken to Pandariya hospital and he was brought back
     to Suresh's house. The clothes lying nearby on the floor were
     also burnt. However, the clothes which were hanging on rope
     were not burnt.  Inquest was prepared in their presence and he
     has signed the inquest report.  In the cross-examination, he
     has  admitted  that he never heard or saw  the  appellants
     quarreling or arguing with the deceased.  Accused persons and
     Uttarabai were residing happily and peacefully. Uttarabai was
     suffering from epilepsy, as was told by Suresh Kumar, he had
     given ten to twenty rupees to Suresh for purchasing medicine
     for Uttarabai. At the time of incident, Suresh had gone to his
     tea shop in Kui market, appellant Rakesh was discharging his
     duties as Watchman of Gram Panchayat. Gram Panchayat is at a  
     distance of 2 furlong whereas shop of Suresh is at a distance
     of 100 meters. When they reached the house of accused persons,
     Shantibai told them that she has just returned from river after
     taking her bath. Rakesh resides in Gram Panchayat Bhavan and
     sleeps there. There is a dispute between PW-4 Mohanlal and the
     accused persons since 5-6 years and they are not in talking
     terms and they did not visit each other's house.  The clothes
     on the rope were not burnt as they were at a distance.
  17.   Shantibai  (PW-7)  has not stated  anything  against  the
     accused persons and she has been declared hostile. In the cross-
     examination  by the prosecution also, she has not  deposed
     anything against them.
  18.   PW-8  Jagmohan  Gupta has deposed that he recognizes  the   
     accused persons. He had also seen the wife of Suresh, who is
     dead.   He used to keep his goods in the house of  accused
     persons. He met wife of Suresh around 9-9.30, he told her that
     he is taking his goods, at that time accused persons were not
     present. Around 10.30 when he was in his shop, he heard about
     the  fire  and thereafter, heard that wife of  Suresh  has
     committed suicide by setting herself on fire.  He did not see
     deceased quarreling with any person on that day.  He has been
     cross-examined by the prosecution, however, he has  denied
     having made any statement as mentioned in the marked portion of
     Ex.P/5.
19.     PW-9 Ramprasad has deposed that he heard that Uttarabai  
died due to burning.  On hearing about the incident, he went to
the house of Suresh around 2.30, he saw that son of Suresh had
burn injuries and he was alive. The child was taken to
Pandariya on motorcycle, however, he died on way and brought 
back.  He had also seen the dead body of Uttarabai lying on the
floor.  He was present at the time of inquest being conducted
by the police. In the cross-examination, he has admitted that
Uttarabai was suffering from epilepsy. One day he saw that
Uttarabai had fallen on the ground, whereupon he rushed towards
her and found that froth was coming out of her mouth as a
result of epileptic attack.
  20.   PW-10  Dr. VP Jaiswal conducted postmortem over the  dead  
     body of Uttarabai and proved his report of Ex.P/8. He  has
     deposed that on both of her legs and hands i.e. upper and lower
     limb  rigor mortis was present, except the front and inner
     portion of her left hand, rest of her body was burnt and her
     skin had blackened due to burn, smell of kerosene was emanating
     from her body. Her eyes were closed, white portion of her eyes
     was  reddish, her tongue was inside her mouth and  in  the
     nostrils blood was present.  Upper left inciso teeth and lower
     central incisor of both side teeth are moving in their socket,
     little vesicles were present on the body, the line of redness
     between burnt portion and unburnt portion of skin was absent.
     Absence  of  line of redness is suggestive  of  postmortem
     injuries. Contusion is of size 3 cm x 4 cm on right axilla,
     circular contusion of 3 cm around external genital orifice.  On
     dissection of vesication, base was found pale coloured. After
     cutting of skin over neck, in thyroid region, an ecchymosed
     tissue was found and neck muscles over thyroid region seen.
     Contusion of axilla &amp; vaginal region showing ecchymosed blood,
     after  dissection trachea was found highly congested below
     thyroid region, right chamber of the heart was full of blood,
     whereas  in the left chamber, little amount of  blood  was
     present.  On dissection of sternum region, below neck clotted
     blood was found.  Contusion found in the thyroid region of
     neck,  and right axilla and genital organs' injuries  were
     antimortem. Highly congested trachea and blood in trachea with
     ecchymosed tissue was found. All these lead to impression that
     pressure has been applied over neck by hard and blunt object.
     The injury to teeth and contusion over right axilla and vaginal
     region wound, have been caused by hard and blunt object. The
     burn seen over body is postmortem in nature caused by flame.
     Time of death was 18-24 hours from the time of postmortem.
                The  doctor  has  further  opined that  mode  of  death  of
     Uttarabai  is due to asphyxia caused by strangulation,  it
     is  homicidal  in  nature, and  burn  seen  over  body  is
     postmortem  in  nature. In the cross-examination,  he  has
     admitted that in the fit of epilepsy, froth comes out from
     mouth and nose, froth may obstruct the passage of air if a
     person  burns.   In  this condition, it is  possible  that
     carbon particles may not be found in the trachea as person
     can stop his breathing for +-1 minutes and thereafter,  he
     has  to breathe and then carbon particles may be found  in
     trachea.   If  a person dies before further breathing,  in
     that  condition, carbon particles would not be found.   He
     has  also  admitted  that at times  it  is  possible  that
     epileptic  fits may continue for 10 minutes. The  base  of
     vesication caused due to antimortem burn would be reddish.
     If a lady dies due to throttling, she may sustain injuries
     over  elbow, lower part of leg; tongue and eyes  may  come
     out,  however, above symptoms are not necessary. Contusion
     may  be  caused  in  lungs due to  epilepsy.   It  is  not
     necessary  that  there  must  be  bleeding  from  ear   on
     throttling.  He did not find any fracture of any  bone  of
     neck  or  other  parts of the body.  The  extent  of  burn
     injury  over the person of Uttarabai was 98%,  though  the
     same has not been mentioned in the postmortem report.   He
     has  denied  the suggestion that with this  percentage  of
     burn, it was not possible to pinpoint the contusions. This
     witness  has further stated that the inner side of trachea
     was not found congested. He has denied the suggestion that
     cause of death of Uttarabai was suicidal.
  21.   The  trial Court relying upon the evidence of Dr. Jaiswal
     has arrived at a conclusion that the deceased died as a result
     of  asphyxia due to strangulation by pressing of neck. The
     doctor  after postmortem has opined that the neck  of  the
     deceased was pressed by hard and blunt object and cause of
     death is asphyxia and death was homicidal in nature.
  22.   In Modi's Medical Jurisprudence, 23rd Edition, at page 575
     strangulation is defined as the compression of the neck by a
     force other than hanging.  Types of strangulation has been
     given as (i) ligature strangulation, (ii) throttling (manual
     strangulation-compressing  with   hand),   (iii)   mugging
     (compressing with forearm or foot or wrist), (iv) Bansdola
     (wooden stick is used to compress the neck), (v) garroting (a
     rope or a loincloth and a wooden stick as a lever to tighten
     the ligation is used), and (vi) accidental strangulation (can
     arise in the course of a person's occupation when a neck tie or
     scarf is caught in moving machinery etc.).
                If   the  windpipe  is  not  completely  closed,  the  face
     becomes cyanosed, bleeding occurs from the mouth, nostrils
     and  ears, the hands are clenched and convulsions  precede
     delayed death.
                If    the    fingers    are    used    for    strangulation
     (throttling),   marks  of  pressure  by  thumb   and   the
     fingertips  are  usually  found  on  either  side  of  the
     windpipe. The thumb mark is ordinarily higher and wider on
     the  one  side  of the front of the neck, and  the  finger
     marks  are  situated on its other side obliquely downwards
     and  outwards and one below the other. At times, marks are
     found   clustered  together  so  that   they   cannot   be
     distinguished separately.
                If  the  throat  is  pressed  by both  the  hands,  bruises
     and  abrasions may be found on the front of  the  neck  as
     well  as  on its back.  Besides these marks, abrasion  and
     bruises on the mouth, nose, forehead, cheeks, lower jaw or
     any  other  part of the body if there has been a struggle.
     Fractures  of ribs and injuries to thoracic and  abdominal
     organs may be present if the assailant kneels on the chest
     or abdomen of his victim while pressing his throat.
                If  a  stick  or  a  foot is used, there  is  a  bruise  in
     the  middle of the front of the neck, generally across the
     windpipe,  corresponding in width to the  substance  used.
     There  will be a similar mark on the nape of the neck,  if
     two sticks are used.  In such a case, several local injury
     will be evident.
                Describing   appearance   due   to   asphyxia   caused   by
     strangulation, it has been observed that face is puffy and
     cyanosed,  and  marked  with  petechiae.  The   eyes   are
     prominent  and  open. In some cases, they may  be  closed.
     The conjunctivae are congested and the pupils are dilated.
     Petechiae  are  seen in the eyelids and the  conjunctivae.
     The  lips are blue. Bloody foam escapes from the mouth and
     nostrils, and sometimes, pure blood issues from the mouth,
     nose and ears, especially if great violence has been used.
     The  tongue is often swollen, bruised, protruding and dark
     in   colour,   showing   patches  of   extravasation   and
     occasionally bitten by the teeth. There may be evidence of
     bruising  at  the back of the neck. The hands are  usually
     clenched.   The genital organs may be congested and  there
     may be discharge of urine, faeces and seminal fluid.
                Internal   appearance   :   There   is   extravasation   of
     blood  into  the sub-cutaneous tissues under the  ligature
     mark  or  finger marks, as well as in the adjacent muscles
     of  the  neck,  which  are usually lacerated.   Sometimes,
     there is laceration of the sheath of the carotid, as  also
     their  internal  coats with effusion of blood  into  their
     walls.  The cornua of the hyoid bone may be fractured also
     the  superior cornua of thyroid cartilage but fracture  of
     the cervical vertebrae is extremely rare.
                The   larynx  and  trachea  are  congested,  and   contains
     frothy mucus. The cartilages of the larynx or the rings of
     the  trachea may be fractured, when considerable force  is
     used.   The hyoid bone and superior cornuae of the thyroid
     cartilage are not, as a rule, fractured by any other means
     other  than by strangulation, although the larynx and  the
     trachea may, in rare cases, be fractured by a fall.  Lungs
     are   usually   markedly  congested  showing  haemorrhagic
     patches  and  petechiae and exuding dark  fluid  blood  on
     section. Right side of the heart is full of the dark fluid
     blood  and left empty. The bronchial tubes usually contain
     frothy, bloodstained mucus.
                To   arrive  at  a  conclusion  that  death  was   due   to
     strangulation,  it is necessary, therefore,  to  note  the
     effects  of violence in the underlying tissues in addition
     to  ligature mark or bruise marks caused by the fingers or
     by  the  foot,  knee and other appearances of  death  from
     asphyxia.  At  the  same time, the  possibility  of  other
     causes of suboxic or asphyxial death should be excluded.
                Dealing  with  deaths  from  asphyxia,  term  `suffocation'
     has  been defined as that form of death that results  from
     the  exclusion of air from the lungs, by means other  than
     that  of  the  compression of the neck  and  it  has  been
     observed  that choking or obstruction of the air  passages
     from within may occur occasionally during fit of epilepsy.
        In  the  matter  of  Mulakh Raj  and  others  Vs.  Satish
     Kumar and others3, the Hon'ble Supreme Court referring  to
     Taylor's Principles and Practice of Medical Jurisprudence,
     observed that asphyxia is a state in which the body  lacks
     oxygen  because of some mechanical interference  with  the
     process  of breathing. Cyanosis indicates the blue  colour
     of  the  skin,  mucous membranes and of  internal  organs,
     notably spleen, liver and kidneys.
        General  features  of asphyxia: the  head  and  face  may
     show   intense  congestion  and  cyanosis  with   numerous
     petechiae.  Blood exudes from the mouth  and  nose.  Blood
     tinged frothy fluid is present in air passages. Mucus  may
     be  found  at the back of the mouth and throat. The  lungs
     which are of particular interest, usually show in addition
     to  congestion of inter-alveolar capillaries, the presence
     of  the  oedema fluid in the alveoli, areas of haemorrhage
     and collapse with intervening emphysema.
                General   Internal   appearances:   internally   the    air
     passages  contain  fine froth, often  blood  stained.  The
     lungs    are    congested   with   subpleural   petechiae.
     Microscopically  there  is usually  intense  interalveolar
     congestion with haemorrhages of varying size, fluid in the
     alveoli,  areas  of  collapse  and  intervening  areas  of
     ruptured  alveoli.  The air passages often  contain  large
     areas  of  desquamated  respiratory type  epithelium,  red
     blood  cells  and  fluid. The remaining organs  show  only
     congestive changes.
                The  mark  of  the  neck is usually of the  same  width  as
     the  constricting object and the depth is about  half  its
     diameter.
                In  manual  strangulation the marks  of  bruising  will  be
     on  the  front  or  sides of the neck, chiefly  about  the
     larynx  and  about it. Marks of pressure of  fingers  may,
     however  be  slight. The distribution of these marks  when
     present  will  vary  with the circumstances,  and  factors
     which will affect it include the relative position of  the
     assailant and the victim, the manner of gripping the neck,
     being greater if the grip is shifted or has been reapplied
     if  the victim struggles, and the degree of pressure.  The
     solid  tissues  of the neck are of extreme  importance  in
     cases  of  suspected strangulation. The  solid  structures
     comprise  the  hyoid bone and the cartilages  forming  the
     larynx.  If the body is found to have died with  marks  on
     the  neck which indicate manual strangulation and this  is
     subsequently confirmed in the mortuary and laboratory  the
     case  must be regarded as a killing by another person.  It
  is inconceivable  that anyone could die from  compression  of
     the  neck  by  his own hand because loss of  consciousness
     would cause relaxation of the constricting fingers.
                From   perusal   of  factual  finding  on  the   postmortem
     report  of  the deceased and the evidence of Dr.  Jaiswal,
     which  we  have  already  reproduced  in  detail  in   the
     foregoing  paragraphs, we observe that  the  same  do  not
     correspond by medical jurisprudence on numerous aspects as
     would  be evident from comparison of the findings recorded
     in   the   postmortem  report  and  internal  &amp;   external
     appearances  that may be found in cases of  death  due  to
     strangulation as a result of external pressure  over  neck
     by  hard and blunt object resulting in obstruction of  air
     passage and asphyxia.  The doctor has opined that neck was
     pressed  by  hard and blunt object only on  the  basis  of
     internal examination that on dissection clotted blood  was
     founding  thyroid  region,  excessive  congested  trachea,
     ecchymosed  tissues  in  the trachea  region  were  found.
     However, it is not clear whether above symptoms were  also
     possible due to choking of air passage as a result of  fit
     of epilepsy.
                Distinction   between  antemortem  and   postmortem   burns
     has  been  underlined by Modi at page  637,  according  to
     which three main points to differential between antemortem
     and  postmortem burns have been laid, which are: (a)  line
     of   redness,   (ii)  vesication;  and  (iii)   reparative
     processes.
  (a)   Evidence of Vital Reactions - Line of Redness: In the case
       of a burn caused during life, a line of redness involving the
       whole true skin is formed around the injured part.  It is a
       permanent line, persisting even after death, but redness or
       erythema, which is found beyond this line of redness due to
       distension of the capillaries, is transient, disappears under
       pressure during life and fades after death. The line  of
       redness, being a vital function, separates living from dead
       tissues, and is often present in burns caused during life,
       though it takes some time to appear. It is however, possible
       that it may be absent (in the case of a person of a very weak
       constitution who dies immediately from shock due to burns).
  (b)   Vesication:  Vesication  caused by  a  burn  during  life
       contains a serous fluid consisting of albumen, chlorides, and
       often a few polymorphonuclear white blood cells and has a red,
       inflamed base with raised papillae.  The skin  surrounding it
       is of a bright red or copper colour.  This is known as true as
       compared with false vesication which is produced after death.
       False vesication contains air only but may contain a very small
       quantity of serum comprising traces of albumen and chloride.
       Again, its base is hard, dry, horny and yellow instead of being
       red and inflamed.
  (c)   Reparative Processes: Reparative processes, such as signs 
       of inflammation, formation of granulation tissue pus and
       sloughs, will indicate that the burns were caused during life.
       Burns caused after death show no vital reaction and have a dull
       white appearance with the openings of the skin glands coloured
       grey.  The internal organs are roasted, and emit a peculiar
       offensive odour.  However, Spitz and Fisher have pointed out
       that it is not possible to establish, either with the naked eye
       or by histological examination, whether burns occurred shortly
       before death or soon after.  Circumstantial evidence alone will
       provide the answer. Malik has described enzyme changes in the
       early phase of healing skin burns, in guinea pigs.
        In   Mulakh   Raj3,  the  Hon'ble  Supreme  Court   while
     condiering   the   distinction  between   antemortem   and
     postmortem burns has observed in para-13 thus:
            "13. Regarding the distinction between ante-
            mortem  and  post-mortem burns,  he  pointed
            out  the lines of redness, of vasication and
            reparative    processes    as    distinctive
            features.  He elaborated the same  later.  A
            reading  of  it  gives the  distinction  and
            would be concluded thus:
            (1)    Ante-mortem   burn    injuries    are
            characterised  by  the  presence  of   burnt
            carbon   particles  (soot)  in  the  trachea
            which  is  absent in the case of post-mortem
            burn injuries.
            (2)  Carbodyhaemoglobin is  present  in  the
            heart blood in ante-mortem burning which  is
            absent in case of post-mortem burning.
            (3)   Ante-mortem  burns  are  usually   red
            owning  to  the  tendency of the  system  to
            rush  blood  towards the injured  parts  for
            repairs, which is distinctly different  from
            post-mortem   burns  which  are   hard   and
            yellowish in colour.
            (4)  Blisters  are  prominently  present  in
            ante-mortem burns. Some blisters may  appear
            in   post-mortem   burns,   but   they   are
            distinctly    different   from   ante-mortem
            burns,  where blisters are full  of  protein
            rich   fluid  that  contains  a  substantial
            amount   of  white  cells,  caused  by   the
            tendency  of  the system to  rush  in  white
            cells   to  fight  against  infection.   The
            presence  of  protein is  so  high  that  it
            becomes   solid   on  heating.   Post-mortem
            blisters  hardly  contain  any  protein   in
            their  fluid and whatever fluid is contained
            has  so little protein that on heating  only
            a  faint  opalescence is seen. The fluid  in
            post-mortem  blisters does not  contain  any
            white blood cells.
            (5)   In   ante-mortem   burns,   reparative
            enzymes  are  present  in  the  vicinity  of
            burnt  areas as the reparative enzymes would
            try   to  repair  the  burnt  areas.   Their
            presence  could also be used for  predicting
            the   time  since  the  person  was   burnt.
            Various  enzymes  appear  at  the  following
            time:
            (a)   Enzyme  esterase  -  30  minutes.  (b)
            Leucine  aminopeptidase -  2  hours  approx.
            (c)  Acid Phosphatase - 3 hours approx.  (d)
            Alkaline  Phosphatase - 5 hours.  Reparative
            enzymes  are  not  detected  in  post-mortem
            burns.
            (6)  Signs  of  infection in a  burn  injury
            only  lead to the conclusion that  the  burn
            injury  is  ante-mortem in nature  as  there
            cannot  be  infection in a post-mortem  burn
            injury,  only putrefaction. Since  infection
            occurs roughly 36 hours after the burn,  one
            can  easily predict the time since the  burn
            injuries occurred."

        In  the  present  case, in the postmortem  report  it  is
     not  observed  whether burnt carbon  particles  (soot)  in
     trachea  were  present or not.  Blood found in  the  heart
     chamber  has  not  been sent for chemical examination  for
     confirmation whether Carbodyhaemoglobin is present  in  it
     or  not.  On the basis of finding that the line of redness
     between burnt and unburnt skin was absent and base of  the
     vesication present over the dead body was of pale coloured
     and  not  reddish,  it  has been held  that  the  injuries
     present over the dead body were postmortem in nature.
  23.   The trial Court has convicted the appellants on the basis
     of  circumstantial evidence.  The circumstances, on  which
     conviction is based are that: (i) relationship of appellant
     Shantibai with deceased Uttarabai was strained as she did not
     approve the way deceased discharged her domestic work, (ii) the
     neighbourers had overheard the appellants quarreling with the
     deceased and beating her, (iii) appellant Suresh  and  the
     deceased resided together under one roof; (iv) the deceased
     died  as  a  result of throttling and her dead  body  was,
     thereafter, set on fire to cause disappearance of evidence, and
     (v) the appellants did not offer any explanation as to how she
     died  due to throttling. The trial Court has rejected  the
     defence of the appellants that at the time of incident, they
     were  not present at home, by disbelieving the version  of
     defence witnesses. The incident, admittedly, occurred in day
     time around 12.30 hours. There is no evidence available on
     record that the appellants were present inside the house when
     the  incident  took  place.  On  the  contrary,  there  is
     unchallenged version of prosecution witness Narendra Singh (PW-
     6), who has deposed that appellants Suresh and Rakesh had gone
     to  their work whereas Shantibai informed him that she  is
     returning from river side. Defence witnesses Laxmi Thakur (DW-
     1) and Krishan Kumar (DW-2) have also deposed in the similar
     line.
  24.   The trial Court heavily relying upon the evidence of PW-4
     and  PW-5  reached to the conclusion that relationship  of
     appellants Shantibai and Suresh was strained with deceased
     Uttarabai and they used to beat her.  However, from  their
     evidence, we find that PW-4 Mohanlal is not a witness of truth
     as  he  has  deliberately suppressed  the  fact  that  his
     relationship with appellants was strained since before, they
     did  not visit each other and they are not even on talking
     terms, whereas, he has stated that he had cordial relationship
     with the appellants, which is falsified from the evidence of
     his wife, who has admitted regarding strained relationship.
     This aspect has been ignored on conjecture and surmises that
     the neighbourer, who has to live with the appellants, would not
     implicate them in a false case and their evidence is natural.
  25.   On  overall  appreciation of the  evidence  available  on
     record, including the medical evidence, we are of the opinion
     that motive attributed to the appellants for committing this
     ghastly act, is entirely far fetched and weak. No reasonable
     person would commit a ghastly act of murdering his own wife,
     through whom he has given birth to a child, only because his
     mother is not satisfied with the way the deceased discharged
     her domestic work.  We also observe that the trial Court has
     ignored this aspect also that infant Satyendra died in the same
     incident as a result of burn injuries sustained by him while he
     was  being taken to hospital on way.  If the case  of  the
     prosecution is to be believed, in that case, the appellants
     first murdered deceased Uttarabai by pressing her neck by some
     hard and blunt object, after she died they poured kerosene on
     her dead body and set her on fire. This hypothesis does not
     explain as to how the infant, aged 1-1 + years, sustained burn
     injuries.  If it is the case of the prosecution that after
     setting the dead body of Uttarabai on fire, the appellants
     threw the child on the burning body of the deceased and thus,
     he  caught fire, in that case, under what circumstances he
     survived and died later?
  26.   In  the  matter of Trimukh Maroti Kirkan1, the appellant,
     who was husband of the deceased,  used to ill treat his wife
     for dowry of Rs.25,000/-, which could not be fulfilled because
     of poor financial condition of her parents. The appellant gave
     information to the police that his wife died as a result of
     snake biting. He also showed the place where she was allegedly
     bitten by the snake.  However, postmortem report discloses that
     she died due to asphyxia as a result of compression of neck.
     The accused was acquitted of the charge of murder, however, the
     husband and other accused persons were convicted under Section
     498A/34 of the IPC.  Appeal preferred by the State was allowed
     and the appellants were convicted under Section 302 of the IPC.
     Dismissing the appeal preferred by the appellants, it  was
     observed  that the offence of dowry death is committed  in
     complete  secrecy inside the house. Nature and  amount  of
     evidence required to establish charge cannot be of the same
     degree as required in other cases of circumstantial evidence.
     Silence of inmates of the house about cause of death would
     become  an  additional  link in  chain  of  circumstances.
     Considering the evidence of ill treatment for dowry and also
     considering that husband gave information to others that she
     died due to snake bite, whereas medical evidence showing the
     death due to strangulation on the basis of injuries found on
     her body, conviction under Section 302 of IPC was upheld.
  27.   In the matter of Swamy Shraddananda2, wife of the accused 
     was missing since 28th May, 1991. On queries by her daughter,
     the accused gave false information that she had gone abroad to
     deliver a child and other false explanations.  When daughter of
     the deceased came to Mumbai to meet the accused, she also found 
     the passport of her mother, from perusal of which it was clear
     that she had not visited USA or London as represented to her.
     She   lodged  a  missing  report.   During  investigation,
     interrogation of the accused led to recovery of dead body of
     his wife.  Thereafter, the accused was charged for murder. In
     these circumstances, it was held that conviction based  on
     circumstantial evidence, where wife dies an unnatural death in
     her bedroom shared by her and her husband, the husband has to
     explain the circumstances, in which she died.  Absence of any
     explanation would lead to a circumstance against the accused.
  28.   However,  in  the instant case, we have already  observed
     that  evidence of motive attributed to the appellants  for
     causing death of deceased Uttarabai is too weak.  There is
     total absence of any evidence that at the time of incident, the
     appellants were present in the house.  On the contrary, there
     is unchallenged evidence that appellants No. 1 &amp; 3 had gone out
     in connection with their work, and appellant No.3 had gone to
     river  to  have  both. Evidence of PW-4 &amp; 5 regarding  ill
     treatment meted out to the deceased by the appellants does not
     inspire confidence as even the parents of the deceased have not
     alleged that the deceased was beaten by appellant Suresh and
     opinion  of  the doctor based on finding recorded  in  the
     postmortem report and acted upon by the trial Court, is not of
     such a clinching quality, on the basis of which it could be
     conclusively held beyond all reasonable doubt that the deceased
     died as a result of asphyxia caused due to strangulation by
     hard and blunt object by applying external pressure over neck
     and  burn  injuries found on the person of  deceased  were
     postmortem injuries. Therefore, we are of the opinion that it
     would not be safe to convict the appellants on the basis of
     aforesaid circumstantial evidence, and the appellants  are
     entitled for benefit of doubt.
  29.   It  is settled law that in a case based on circumstantial
     evidence, the circumstances from which the conclusion of guilt
     is to be drawn have not only to be fully established but also
     that  all the circumstances so established should be of  a
     conclusive nature and consistent only with the hypothesis of
     the guilt of the accused. Those circumstances should not be
     capable of being explained by any other hypothesis except the
     guilt of the accused and the chain of the evidence must be so
     complete as not to leave any reasonable ground for the belief
     consistent with the innocence of the accused. It needs  no
     reminder that legally established circumstances and not merely
     indignation of the court can form the basis of conviction and
     the more serious the crime, the greater should be the care
     taken to scrutinize the evidence lest suspicion takes the place
     of proof.
  30.   On  the  basis of aforesaid discussions, we  are  of  the
     opinion that the trial Court was not justified in convicting
     appellants No.1 &amp; 2 under Sections 498A, 302 &amp; 201 of  the
     I.P.C. and appellant No.3 under Section 302/34 &amp; 201 of the
     I.P.C. and the trial Court ought to have extended them benefit
     of doubt.
  31.   In  the result, the appeal is allowed. Conviction of  the
     appellants  under aforesaid sections and sentence  imposed
     thereon, are set aside. They are acquitted of the aforesaid
     charges. They be set at liberty forthwith, if not required to
     be detained in connection with any other offence.

         J U D G E                                                  J U D G E

