Transfer Petition (Civil) No.8 of 2007 Smt.  Rajani Gupta Vs. Rakesh   Kumar  Gupt

HIGH COURT OF CHATTISGARH AT BILASPUR      




             Transfer Petition (Civil) No.8 of 2007





                        Smt.  Rajani Gupta
                                        ...Petitioners



                             Versus


                      Rakesh   Kumar  Gupt
                                           ...Respondents






   (Transfer application under Section 24 of the Code of Civil
  Procedure, 1908 read with Section 7 of the Family Courts Act)



!     Mr. H.S. Ahluwalia, counsel for the applicant



^     Mr. Santosh Yadu, counsel for the non-applicant




Honble Mr. T.P. Sharma, J 



       Dated:23/06/2009




:       Judgment



                            O R D E R
                   (Passed on 23rd June, 2009)

1.    This  petition  is for transfer of matrimonial  suit  filed
  under Section 13 of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 (for short `the
  Act') pending before the 3rd Additional Principal Judge, Family
  Court,  Durg bearing Civil Suit No.50A/2007, on the  ground  of
  threat.

2.    Undisputed facts of the case are that the present applicant
  and the non-applicant are wife &amp; husband, the non-applicant has
  filed  a  suit  under Section 13 of the Act for dissolution  of
  marriage  which is pending before the 3rd Additional  Principal
  Judge, Family Court, Durg bearing Civil Suit No.50A/2007.   The
  present applicant has also filed an application for maintenance
  under  Section  125  of the Cr.P.C. before the  criminal  Court
  situated at Shahdol.  Krishna Gopal Gupta is father of the non-
  applicant and Harish Sinha is a practicing Advocate of the non-
  applicant.  Ravindra Gupta is brother of the applicant.  At the
  instance of the present applicant offence under Section 498A read
  with  Section  34  of  the  I.P.C. &amp; Section  4  of  the  Dowry
  Prohibition  Act has been registered at Durg against  the  non-
  applicant &amp; his relatives and offence under Sections 448, 294 &amp;
  506B  read  with  Section 34 of the I.P.C. has been  registered
  against the non-applicant &amp; his counsel Harish Sinha at Shahdol.
  At the instance of the non-applicant &amp; his counsel Harish Sinha,
  criminal case under Section 107-116 (3) of the Cr.P.C. has been
  registered against the brother of the applicant at Durg.

3.   Learned counsel for the applicant submits that the applicant
  who  is  resident  of Shahdol is required to attend  the  Court
  situated  at Durg where the non-applicant is residing  and  has
  filed the aforesaid petition for divorce.  Relations between the
  parties  are strained and both the parties have lodged  reports
  against  each  other  at Shahdol &amp; Durg where  brother  of  the
  applicant,  non-applicant  and his  counsel  were  arrested  in
  connection with the aforesaid offences.  Learned counsel further
  submits that the applicant who is a lady is in danger, her life
  is  not  safe and she is not in a position to attend the  Court
  situated at Durg.  He also submits that the aforesaid  case  be
  transferred from Family Court, Durg to any other Court situated
  in  any  district  within the State of  Chhattisgarh.   Learned
  counsel placed reliance in the matter of Fajlor Rahman @ Mohamod 
  Fajloo  @  Raju &amp; Ors. v. State of Punjab &amp; Anr. (2006 Cri.L.J.
  3281) in which the Apex Court has transferred the criminal case
  pending before the Court of Punjab to the Court of Assam  under
  Section 407 of the Cr.P.C.

4.   I have heard learned counsel for the parties.

5.    Factual  matrix relating to the dispute, lodging of  F.I.R.
  and arrest of the parties are not disputed by learned counsel for
  the non-applicant.  Learned counsel for the non-applicant frankly
  admitted that at the instance of parties different offences have
  been registered at Durg &amp; Shahdol.

6.    This is a case of transfer of matrimonial suit on the basis
  of  threat  and endanger to life of the applicant.  It  is  not
  substantially disputed by the parties that both the parties had
  lodged reports against each other and were arrested at Shahdol &amp;
  Durg.   Admittedly, the present applicant is a lady and she  is
  resident of District Shahdol (M.P.).  Fair and impartial  trial
  without  any  fear  is a sine qua non for dispensing  civil  or
  criminal  justice and the Courts are required to  ensure  fair,
  impartial and fearless trial.  In this case, both the parties had
  lodged  reports  against each other and have been  arrested  at
  different Police Stations.  This shows the factum of threat and
  fear.  It appears from the documents and contents of the petition
  that the applicant will not be getting fearless justice at  the
  Family Court situated at Durg and to ensure dispensation of fair
  and impartial justice, the aforesaid dispute pending before the
  3rd  Additional Principal Judge, Family Court, Durg  should  be
  transferred to any other Court situated at another district.

7.    Consequently, the petition is allowed.  Matrimonial dispute
  bearing Civil Suit No.50A/2007 (Rakesh Kumar Gupta v. Smt Rajani
  Gupta)  pending  before the Court of 3rd  Additional  Principal
  Judge, Family Court, Durg is hereby transferred to the Court of
  Principal Judge, Family Court, Raipur.  No order as to costs.

8.   Parties are directed to appear before the said Court on 13-7-
  2009  for  further proceeding of the case.  The 3rd  Additional
  Principal Judge, Family Court, Durg is directed to transfer the
  file  immediately to the Court of Principal Judge, Family Court
  Raipur.

9.    A copy of this order be sent to the Principal Judge, Family
  Court, Raipur &amp; the 3rd Additional Principal Judge, Family Court,
  Durg, forthwith.

                                                       J U D G E

