Criminal Appeal No 1117 of 2007 and Criminal Reference No 3 of 2007 1.  Ramnaresh Vs. State   of   Chhattisgarh

HIGH COURT OF CHATTISGARH AT BILASPUR        

                Division Bench

Coram         Hon'ble Shri Dilip Raosaheb Deshmukh and Hon'ble Shri Rajeshwar Lal Jhanwar, JJ.


           Criminal Appeal No 1117 of 2007 and Criminal Reference No 3 of 2007

                    1.  Ramnaresh

                     2.  Vishwanath Singh

                     3.  Amar Singh

                     4.  Ranjeet  Kewat

                         All Ro Village Gullidand
                                                   ...Petitioners



                       versus

                        State   of   Chhattisgarh
                                                   ...Respondents




!         Smt. Fouzia Mirza and Shri R.K.Pali,counsel for the appellants accused.

^          Shri Bhaskar Payashi, Panel Lawyer for the State/respondent.



#                State   of   Chhattisgarh
                                          ...Petitioners
                       versus

$                    1.  Ramnaresh

                     2.  Vishwanath Singh

                     3.  Amar Singh

                     4.  Ranjeet  Kewat


                       All Ro Village Gullidand
                                               ...Respondents


!  Shri Bhaskar Payashi, Panel Lawyer for the State/appellant.

^ Dr. Rajesh Pandey, counsel for respondents No.1 and 3/accused.Shri Arun Kochar, counsel for respondents No.2 and 4/accused. 



Hon'ble Shri Dilip Raosaheb Deshmukh, Hon'ble Shri Rajeshwar Lal Jhanwar, JJ.

   Dated:24/07/2009

:   Judgement

 Criminal Appeal under Section 374(2) of the Code of
                 Criminal Procedure

 Criminal Reference under Section 366(1) of the Code
                of Criminal Procedure



                      JUDGMENT

     (Delivered on this 24th day of July, 2009)

     The   following  judgment  of  the   Court   was
delivered  by                                   Dilip
Raosaheb Deshmukh, J.:  

      This  judgment  shall  govern  Criminal  Appeal

No.1117/2007   preferred  by  the  appellants/accused

Ramnaresh,  Vishwanath Singh, Amar Singh and  Ranjeet   

Kewat  and Criminal Reference No.3/2007 under Section 

366(1)  of the Code of Criminal Procedure (henceforth

`the  Code') by Shri Ram Kumar Tiwari, the Additional

Sessions  Judge,  Pendra Road, District  Bilaspur  in

Sessions Trial No.403/2006.


(2)   The  Additional  Sessions Judge,  Pendra  Road,

District Bilaspur has, vide judgment dated 20-11-2007

delivered  in  Sessions Trial No.403/2006,  convicted

the  appellants/accused Ramnaresh, Vishwanath  Singh,  

Amar  Singh  and  Ranjeet Kewat under  Sections  449, 

376(2)(g) and 302 read with Section 34 of the  Indian

Penal  Code  and  sentenced them to undergo  rigorous

imprisonment  for 10 years and fine of Rs.200/-  each

and in default additional rigorous imprisonment for 1

month under Section 449 of the Indian Penal Code,  to

imprisonment for life and fine of Rs.200/-  each  and

in  default  additional rigorous imprisonment  for  1

month  under  Section 376(2)(g) of the  Indian  Penal

Code.  Under Section 302 read with Section 34 of  the

Indian   Penal  Code,  the  appellants/accused   were

sentenced to death.


(3)  Admittedly, appellant Ranjeet is the brother  of

Indrajeet  P.W.-1 and lives next door to  his  house.

Sugaribai  P.W.-12  is  the mother  of  the  deceased

Rajkumari.  Dhaniram P.W.-6 is also known as Rottam.  


(4)   Prosecution case is that on the night  of  9-8-

2006, the date of Rakshabandhan, Indrajeet P.W.-1 had 

gone  to  Rajnagar  to  meet his  father.   His  wife

Rajkumari,  the deceased was alone in the house  with

her  two  minor children aged about 7  months  and  3

years respectively.  Sunita P.W.-2, Anita P.W.-3  and

Belabai P.W.-5 had left the house of Rajkumari around

7   P.M.  after  watching  television  with  her  for

sometime.   Servant Dhaniram P.W.-6, aged  16  years, 

was  present  at  the  house and  continued  watching

television after Rajkumari slept at about  9:30  P.M.

Sunita  P.W.-2,  Anita  P.W.-3,  Belabai  P.W.-5  and

Dhaniram P.W.-6 had seen the appellants/accused  with 

one   Kamlesh  P.W.-10  at  the  adjacent  house   of

appellant  Ranjeet.   At about 10:30  P.M.,  all  the

appellants/accused consumed liquor at  the  house  of

appellant  Ranjeet.  At about 12 in  the  night,  the

appellants/accused arrived at the house of  Rajkumari

and  told  Dhaniram  P.W.-6 that  they  would  ravish

Rajkumari  and  would kill him if  he  told  this  to

anyone.  Appellants Ramnaresh and Amar Singh sat with  

Dhaniram  P.W.-6.  Appellants Ranjeet and  Vishwanath 

committed rape on Rajkumari after bringing  her  down

from  the  cot.  Thereafter, appellants  Ranjeet  and

Vishwanath took Dhaniram P.W.-6 to the courtyard  and 

appellants Ramnaresh and Amar Singh entered the  room  

of  Rajkumari.  After sometime, appellants  Ramnaresh

and  Amar  Singh  emerged from  the  room  and  asked 

Dhaniram  P.W.-6  to  go  inside.   Dhaniram   P.W.-6

denied,  whereupon appellants Ranjeet and  Vishwanath 

threatened  to kill him if he did not go  inside  the

room.  Dhaniram P.W.-6 entered the room and saw  that 

Rajkumari  could  not speak and  was  breathing  very

heavily.  Blood was coming out of her mouth and nose.

On  seeing this, Dhaniram P.W.-6 left the room.   The

appellants/accused threatened Dhaniram P.W.-6 that he 

would be killed if he did not keep quiet.  Appellants

Ranjeet  and  Vishwanath  asked  Dhaniram  P.W.-6  to 

inform  Sugaribai P.W.-12, mother of  Rajkumari  that

Rajkumari  was not awaking from sleep  and  left  for

their  homes after threatening to kill him.  Dhaniram

P.W.-6 went and informed Sugaribai P.W.-12 at about 3 

A.M.  that  Rajkumari was fast asleep and  would  not

awake.   Sugaribai  P.W.-12  came  to  the  house  of

Rajkumari and saw her lying dead with injury  on  the

throat  and private parts and blood oozing  from  her

mouth and nostrils.


(5)   On receiving information, Indrajeet P.W.-1 came

to  Village  Gullidand  and  saw  the  dead  body  of

Rajkumari.   Merg  Intimation Ex.P-1  was  lodged  by

Indrajeet P.W.-1 in P.S. Marwahi at 10:50 A.M. on 10-

8-2006.    Head  Constable  Jagmohan  Panna   P.W.-14  

reached the place of occurrence and noticed that dead

body of Rajkumari was lying in a supine position on a

black blanket.  He prepared Naksha Panchayatnama Ex.P-   

3  on  10-8-2006 at 4 P.M.  As mentioned  therein,  a

small  white piece of saree having blood like  stains

and  red  coloured pieces of broken bangles of  right

hand  were  seen lying near the dead body.  On  10-8-

2006, the piece of saree (Article A) approximately 1+

feet  in length and 3 feet in width having blood like

stains at 6-7 places and 7 pieces of red bangles were

seized by Head Constable Jagmohan Panna P.W.-14  from    

the place of occurrence.


(6)   Post  mortem on the dead body of  the  deceased

Rajkumari   was  conducted  by  a  team  of   doctors

comprising  of Dr. Sheela Saha P.W.-7 and Dr.  Mahesh 

Singh  on 10-8-2006 at 2:10 P.M (Ex.P-12).  The  body

was  cold.   Rigor Mortis was present in lower  limbs

and  absent in both upper limbs.  Eyes and mouth were

semi-open.   Blood  mixed froth had  oozed  from  the

nostril and mouth.  There were two abrasions  of  the

size  0.5"x0.5" with scratch mark by nails below  the

angle  of right mandible just in front of the  sterno

cleado mastoid muscle with another scratch mark 1" in

length  above it.  There was an abrasion on the  left

side  of  neck below the angle of mandible to mastoid

process  with  scratch mark as shown in the  diagram.

There  was  an abrasion in the thigh of the  size  of

1"x0.5"  with contusion 1"x1" present on both  medial

aspects of thigh.  On internal examination, petechial

haemorrhage was present in both lungs, right side  of

heart  was filled with blood while the left ventricle

was  empty.  There were lacerations with abrasions  3

to  4  in  number  over  perineum  with  blood  mixed

discharge.  Uterus was ante-verted normal size.   Two

vaginal  glass  slides  (Articles  G1  and  G2)  were

prepared,  sealed  and  handed  over  to  the  Police

Constable  for chemical analysis.  One  orange  saree

and  one green petticoat (Article F) with blood  like

and  white  stains, which were encircled and  sealed,

were  also  handed  over to Police  Constable  No.310

Suresh Lakda, P.S. Marwahi for chemical analysis.  It

was opined that death was as a result of asphyxia due

to strangulation (throttling).  There was evidence of

rape.   All  injuries  were ante  mortem  in  nature.

Nature  of  death was homicidal.  Time elapsed  since

death was 12 to 14 hours.


(7)   Statement of Indrajeet P.W.-1 under Section 161

of  the  Code was recorded on 12-8-2006 in  which  he

stated  that  his servant Dhaniram P.W.-6  had  shown

complete ignorance about cause of death of Rajkumari.

A  doubt regarding involvement in the offence of  one

Bhupendra  whom Rajkumari had married about  3  years  

prior   to  marrying  Indrajeet  P.W.-1,  was   cast.

Statement of Dhaniram P.W.-6 under Section 161 of the 

Code  was  recorded on 12-8-2006 in which he narrated

for  the first time regarding the commission of  rape

by the appellants/accused on Rajkumari.  Statement of

Dhaniram  P.W.-6 under Section 164 of  the  Code  was 

recorded  by  the  Judicial Magistrate  First  Class,

Bilaspur  on 19-9-2006.  The appellants/accused  were

arrested on 13-8-2006 between 3:30 and 4:10 P.M.   On 

13-8-2006  at  4:30  P.M.,  one  full  sleeves  shirt

(Article B) having blood like stains was removed from

the body of appellant Ranjeet and seized vide Ex.P-7.

On  the  same  day at 4:50 P.M. one  blue  old  nylon

underwear  (Article C) having blood like  stains  was

removed  from the body of appellant Vishwanath  Singh

and seized vide Ex.P-8.  On the same day at 5:10 P.M. 

one  old  green  nylon underwear (Article  D)  having

blood  like  stains  was removed  from  the  body  of

appellant Amar Singh and seized vide Ex.P-9.  On  the

same  day  at  5:15 P.M., one maroon nylon  underwear 

(Article E) having blood like stains was removed from

the body of appellant Ramnaresh and seized vide Ex.P-

10.   Slides Articles H1 and H2 of appellant Ranjeet,

I1 and I2 of appellant Vishwanath Singh, J1 and J2 of

appellant  Amar  Singh and K1  and  K2  of  appellant

Ramnaresh were seized vide Ex.P-13 at 5:20 P.M. on 19- 

8-2006  from Police Constable Brijnandan Singh  P.W.-

13.    Report  of  the  medical  examination  of  the

appellants/accused was not produced in the  documents 

under  Section  173  of  the Code.   The  doctor  who

examined the appellants/accused was also not cited as 

a  witness.  Seizure memo Ex.P-13 did not  show  that

the  slides  were  seminal slides.  By  memo  Ex.P-21

dated  25-10-2006  of  the Senior  Superintendent  of

Police,  Bilaspur  the abovementioned  articles  were

sent   for  chemical  analysis  to  Forensic  Science

Laboratory,  Raipur through Police  Constable  No.310

Suresh  Lakda  and  were  received  in  the  Forensic

Science   Laboratory,  Raipur   on   6-11-2006   vide

acknowledgment   Ex.P-22.    After   completion    of

investigation,   challan  was   filed   against   the

appellants   on   6-11-2006   before   the   Judicial

Magistrate First Class, Pendra Road, who committed it

for trial to the Court of Session on 15-12-2006.  The

learned Additional Sessions Judge, Pendra Road framed 

charges  under Sections 449, 376(2)(g) and  302  read

with Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code against  the

appellants, who abjured the guilt.


(8)     During trial, report of the Forensic  Science

Laboratory,   Raipur  Ex.P-23  dated  31-7-2007   was

produced  and admitted in evidence under Section  293

of the Code by which presence of blood on Articles A,

B, C, D, E, F1, F2 and presence of seminal stains and

human  spermatozoa on Articles C, D, E, F1,  F2,  G1,

H1,  I1, J1 and K1 was confirmed.  Seminal stains and

human spermatozoa was not found on Articles A and  B.  

The  seminal stains on Articles C, D, E,  F1  and  F2

were not sufficient for serological examination.  The

Slides  Articles G2, H2, I2, J2 and K2 were preserved

if  D.N.A.  Test was felt necessary.  The prosecution

examined    as    many   as   16   witnesses.     The

appellants/accused examined Samelal D.W.-1 and  Kamla   

D.W.-2   wife  of  Ranjeet  to  establish  that   the

appellants/accused  had  slept  in  their  respective

houses between 9 to 10 P.M. on 9-8-2006. 


(9)  Relying upon the sole testimony of Dhaniram P.W.-

6, which was duly corroborated by medical evidence of

Dr.  Sheela  Saha P.W.-7 and Sugaribai  P.W.-12,  the

learned   Additional  Sessions  Judge,  Pendra   Road

convicted  and  sentenced the  appellants/accused  as

shown in paragraph 2 supra.


(10) Smt. Fouzia Mirza, learned counsel appearing for

the    appellants/accused    in    Criminal    Appeal

No.1117/2007  argued that the testimony  of  Dhaniram

P.W.-6  was not reliable because he did not  disclose

the names of the appellants/accused to anyone or even

to  the police till 12-8-2006.  Laying stress on  the

testimony of Indrajeet P.W.-1 in paragraph  10  which

revealed  that on arrival at the scene of  occurrence

he had noticed that shining material (Jalposh) of the

bangles worn by his wife Rajkumari was present on the

right  side of the body of Dhaniram P.W.-6  who  told

him  that  he had collected the broken bangles  in  a

container  which he did not hand over to the  police,

it was argued that the possibility that Dhaniram P.W.-

6,  who  was  undoubtedly present  at  the  scene  of

occurrence,   had  committed  rape  and   murder   of

Rajkumari  and had falsely implicated the  appellants

could  not  be ruled out.  According to  the  learned

counsel  for the appellants/accused, this possibility

was further strengthened by the admission of Dhaniram

P.W.-6  in paragraph 11 that the police had  detained

him at the police station for 8 days and in the lock-

up  for  4  days and had also beaten him.   Appellant

Ranjeet was not only married but was also the brother-

in-law  of  the  deceased.  The fact  that  appellant

Vishwanath was present at the time of taking the body

of   Rajkumari   for  post  mortem  examination   and

according to Sugaribai P.W.-12 on reaching the  place

of  occurrence, appellant Ranjeet was  seen  carrying

the  minor daughter of Rajkumari in his arms and  had

also  gone to call Rewa Lohar for Jhaadphoonk  belies

the  prosecution case that they were responsible  for

rape and murder of Rajkumari.  The testimony of Kamla

D.W.-2,  the  wife of appellant Ranjeet that  on  the

date  of occurrence appellant Ranjeet had slept at  9

P.M.   in   the  house  completely  ruled   out   the

participation  of appellant Ranjeet in  the  offence.

It  was  also  argued that the testimony of  Dhaniram

P.W.-6   revealed  that  appellants  Vishwanath   and

Ranjeet  had, after entering the room where Rajkumari

was  sleeping,  emerged from the room after  half  an

hour  and  thereafter appellants Ramnaresh  and  Amar

Singh went inside the room and came out after half an

hour.   Thus,  if Rajkumari was alive when  Ramnaresh

and  Amar  Singh  entered the room,  the  charge  for

commission  of murder of Rajkumari against appellants

Vishwanath and Ranjeet could not be held to have been

established.   The fact that hyoid bone of  Rajkumari

was  not  fractured  ruled out the  possibility  that

Rajkumari was throttled by four able bodied young men

while causing her death after ravishing her.  Lastly,

it  was  argued that the testimony of Dhaniram P.W.-6

was  neither  wholly reliable nor  wholly  unreliable

and,   therefore,  unless  it  was  corroborated   in

material particulars by reliable testimony, direct or

circumstantial,   conviction  and  sentence   awarded

against  the  appellants  by the  learned  Additional

Sessions  Judge,  Pendra Road was liable  to  be  set

aside.   Learned  counsel  further  argued  that  the

prosecution   had  failed  to  establish   that   the

appellants   were  potent  and  capable   of   sexual

intercourse  since no material was placed  on  record

with  the documents under Section 173 of the Code  to

show  that  the appellants were subjected to  medical

examination  as  required under Section  53A  of  the

Code.   So  far  as the presence of semen  and  human

spermatozoa  on  the slides H1, I1,  J1  and  K1  was

concerned,   no   material  was   produced   by   the

prosecution as to who had prepared these slides.   In

other  words, there was no material to show that  the

slides  H1, I1, J1 and K1 were the seminal slides  of

the appellants.  The memo Ex.P-13 also did not reveal

that  the  slides seized by the police  were  seminal

slides  or  were  seized  from  the  person  who  had

prepared such slides.  In the absence of any material

to  connect  the  slides H1, I1, J1  and  K1  to  the

appellants the report Ex.P-23 of the Forensic Science

Laboratory, Raipur was of no avail to the prosecution

against  the appellants.  It was further argued  that

Sunita  P.W.-2,  Anita  P.W.-3,  Belabai  P.W.-5  and

Kamlesh  P.W.-10, who were alleged to have  seen  the 

appellants in the house of appellant Ranjeet  on  the

night  of  9-8-2006 did not support  the  prosecution

story  and  had  turned hostile.   The  testimony  of

Dhaniram P.W.-6 not being of a sterling quality could

not  therefore  form  the basis  for  convicting  the

appellants under Sections 449, 376(2)(g) and 302 read

with Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code.  So far  as

Criminal   Reference   No.3/2007   by   the   learned

Additional Sessions Judge, Pendra Road under  Section 

366(1)  of  the  Code  is  concerned,  on  the  above

premises,   Smt.   Fouzia  Mirza,   learned   counsel

appearing  for  the  appellants/accused  in  Criminal

Appeal      No.1117/2007     argued     that      the

appellants/accused were liable to be acquitted  after

giving them benefit of a reasonable doubt.


(11)  Shri  Bhaskar  Payashi,  learned  Panel  Lawyer

appearing   for   the   State  in   Criminal   Appeal

No.1117/2007 and Criminal Reference No.3/2007  argued  

in  support  of  the impugned judgment and  contended

that  presence  of Dhaniram P.W.-6 at  the  place  of

occurrence was established by the prosecution  beyond 

doubt.   The  non-disclosure  of  the  occurrence  by

Dhaniram P.W.-6 to anyone till recording of statement

under  Section 161 of the Code by the police on 12-8-

2006  is  explained by the fact that Dhaniram  P.W.-6

was  a  boy of tender age of 16 years and would  have

been aghast and extremely frightened after witnessing

the    gruesome    rape    and    murder    by    the

appellants/accused  on  the  wife   of   his   master

Indrajeet P.W.-1.  Besides, the evidence led  by  the

prosecution  revealed  that  appellant  Ranjeet   was

present  through  out when Indrajeet P.W.-1  returned

home.   Similarly,  appellant  Vishwanath  had   also

accompanied  the body of Rajkumari for  post  mortem.

Thus, two of the appellants were constantly keeping a

close watch on Dhaniram P.W.-6, who, therefore, could

not  gather enough courage to disclose the commission 

of  offence  by  the  appellants/accused  to  anyone.

Besides, according to Dhaniram P.W.-6, he was under a 

threat by the appellants/accused that if he disclosed

the  incident  to anyone, they would also  kill  him,

which showed that the appellants/accused had not only

intended  but  did commit murder of  Rajkumari  after

committing  gang rape on her.  It was further  argued

that  since Rajkumari had bled from mouth  and  nose,

the  fact that presence of blood stains was confirmed

on  a white piece of saree showed that the appellants

had  gagged  Rajkumari by that cloth and,  therefore,

she  could  not  shout while being  ravished  by  the

appellants/accused.  It was further  argued  that  in

the examination under Section 313 of the Code and the

reply  to  Question No.28, the appellants,  on  being

confronted with the testimony of Dhaniram P.W.-6, did

not deny that they had gone to the house of Indrajeet

P.W.-1  at  night  but merely showed  ignorance.   As

regards   the  testimony  of  Indrajeet   P.W.-1   in

paragraph 10 referred above in paragraph 10 supra, it

was  argued  that  Dhaniram P.W.-6 and  Investigating

Officer R.P.Ahirwar Sub-Divisional Officer of  Police

P.W.-15  were not confronted with it by the  defence.

While    deriving   support   from   Modi's   Medical

Jurisprudence  and Toxicology (Twenty-Third  Edition,

Editors   Shri  K.  Mathiharan  and  Shri  Amrit   K.

Patnaik),  it  was  argued that  asphyxial  death  of

Rajkumari  due  to throttling was clearly  proved  in

view  of  the  finding that petechial haemorrhage  of

lungs  was  present, right chamber  was  filled  with

blood  while left chamber was empty and bloody  froth

was emerging from nostrils and mouth.  During autopsy

the  hands of the deceased were not clenched  because 

Rigor Mortis had passed away in the upper limbs.   It

was  argued  that if the windpipe was not  completely

closed, then by application of pressure on the throat

bleeding would occur from the mouth and nostrils  and

death  may  not be instantaneous, but may be  delayed

and   the   person   would  be  rendered   insensible

thereafter.   So  far  as the confirmation  of  death

penalty is concerned, it was argued that the gruesome

rape  and murder of the hapless sister-in-law on  the

Rakshabandhan  Day by the brother-in-law  in  concert

with  three  other co-accused was  one  of  the  most

aggravating  circumstances which  would  justify  the

extreme  penalty,  i.e.,  death  sentence.   It   was

further argued that the act of the appellants/accused

was premeditated since before commission of rape they 

had  assembled in the house of appellant Ranjeet  and

had  consumed liquor.  The manner in which a  hapless

young married woman with two minor children was raped 

and  murdered by the appellants/accused in her house,

the  case  squarely  fell into the  category  of  the

rarest  of  rare cases and, therefore, death  penalty

awarded  by  the  learned Additional Sessions  Judge,

Pendra   Road  was  wholly  justified  and   deserved

confirmation by the High Court.


(12) Dr. Rajesh Pandey, learned counsel appearing for

respondents  No.1 and 3/accused namely Ramnaresh  and    

Amar  Singh in Criminal Reference No.3/2007, replying

to  the  death reference, argued that the conduct  of

Dhaniram  P.W.-6, the solitary witness was  unnatural

inasmuch  as  he did not disclose the  names  of  the

respondents/accused to anyone for  2  days.   Learned

counsel   further  argued  that  the   testimony   of

Sugaribai P.W.-12 did not disclose that when Dhaniram

P.W.-6  informed her, he was perplexed or  was  in  a

state of shock.  It was further argued that according

to  Dhaniram P.W.-6 the offence had occurred sometime 

before  midnight whereafter he had informed Sugaribai

P.W.-12   and  the  testimony  of  Sugaribai  P.W.-12

revealed that Dhaniram P.W.-6 had informed her  at  3

A.M.  Thus, there is material contradiction regarding

the  time  when  Dhaniram  P.W.-6  actually  informed

Sugaribai  P.W.-12.  If  the respondents/accused  had

committed  the gruesome rape and murder of Rajkumari, 

they  would not have asked Dhaniram P.W.-6 to  inform

Sugaribai  P.W.-12, but would have simply  threatened

him  to  keep  quiet.  It was also  argued  that  the

testimony  of  Indrajeet  P.W.-1  revealed  that  his

brother  Harjeet  Prasad  (which  according  to  Shri

Bhaskar  Payashi, learned Panel Lawyer appearing  for

the  State  is a typographical error while  recording

evidence  and  should  have been  Ranjeet)  was  also

present  at the house on the date of occurrence,  but

during   investigation  the  whereabouts  of  Harjeet

Prasad were not explored.  It was further argued that

the  delay  of  2  days  in  recording  statement  of

Dhaniram  P.W.-6 rendered his testimony  unworthy  of

credit.   The  prosecution had  miserably  failed  to

prove that the respondents/accused had been medically 

examined to find out traces of skin in their nails or

to  prove that they were potent and capable of sexual

intercourse.   Breach  of Section  53A  of  the  Code

during investigation was thus a serious lacuna, which

created a serious dent in the prosecution story.  The

testimony  of Dhaniram P.W.-6 would reveal  that  the

needle  of suspicion for being involved in commission

of  the  offence also revolved around him.   It  was,

therefore,  incumbent upon the investigating  officer

to  have got the pattern of nails of Dhaniram  P.W.-6

examined during investigation.  Learned counsel  also

submitted that conduct of respondent/accused  Ranjeet

in  being present through out on the following day on

arrival   of  Indrajeet  P.W.-1  at  the   place   of

occurrence  also ruled out his participation  in  the

crime.  The fact that the police had on 19-9-2006 got

the  statement  under Section  164  of  the  Code  of

Dhaniram  P.W.-6 recorded would go to show  that  the

police  wanted  to  pin  him down  to  the  statement

recorded  under  Section 161 of the  Code  per  force

while  detaining him in the lock-up.  Learned counsel

argued  that  the  possibility that Dhaniram  P.W.-6,

whose presence at the scene of occurrence was not  in

dispute,  had committed rape and murder of  Rajkumari

could not be ruled out.  It was also argued that  the

prosecution had failed to bring home the guilt of the

respondents/accused beyond the shadow of doubt and in  

the facts and circumstances awarding death penalty to

the   respondents/accused  was  wholly  uncalled  for

because  the  case did not fall into the category  of

the rarest of rare cases.


(13) Shri Arun Kochar, learned counsel appearing  for

respondents  No.2  and  4/accused  namely  Vishwanath  

Singh   and   Ranjeet  Kewat  in  Criminal  Reference

No.3/2007  adopted  the  arguments  advanced  by  Dr.

Rajesh  Pandey, learned counsel for respondents  No.1

and 3/accused namely Ramnaresh and Amar Singh.    


(14) Having considered the rival submissions, we have

perused the record with utmost circumspection.  There

is  absolutely no material on record to show that the

appellants/accused Ramnaresh, Vishwanath Singh,  Amar   

Singh  and Ranjeet Kewat had consumed liquor  in  the

house of appellant Ranjeet prior to commission of the

offence.  Sunita P.W.-2, Anita P.W.-3, Belabai P.W.-5

and  Kamlesh  P.W.-10  turned  hostile  and  did  not

support the prosecution story.  Even Dhaniram  P.W.-6

did   not  depose  that  the  appellants/accused  had

consumed  liquor  in the house of  appellant  Ranjeet

before  commission  of the offence.   Sunita  P.W.-2,

Anita P.W.-3, Belabai P.W.-5 and Kamlesh P.W.-10  did  

not  depose that the appellants/accused had assembled 

at  the  house of appellant Ranjeet while  they  were

watching    television    with    Rajkumari.     Only

circumstantial   evidence   available   against   the

appellants/accused  is  the  opinion  given  by   the

Forensic  Science Laboratory, Raipur  in  the  report

Ex.P-23,  whereby  presence of  blood  on  the  shirt

Article  B of appellant Ranjeet, underwears  Articles

C, D and E of appellants Vishwanath Singh, Amar Singh 

and  Ramnaresh  respectively  and  the  presence   of

seminal  stains and human spermatozoa on  the  slides 

H1,  I1,  J1  and  K1  of the appellants/accused  was

confirmed.  However, the prosecution did not  produce

report   of   the   medical   examination   of    the

appellants/accused  and  also  did  not  examine  the

doctor  who  had prepared their seminal slides.   The

seizure  memo  Ex.P-13 does not, in any manner,  show  

that the slides were seminal slides.  Thus, there  is

no  evidence as to who had prepared the slides of the

appellants/accused  and when.   Blood  group  of  the

stains  found  on the shirt `Article B' of  appellant

Ranjeet was not matched with the blood group  of  the

deceased.   Serological test  was  not  performed  to

prove  that blood found on the shirt `Article B'  was

human  blood.  By any stretch of imagination  if  the

seminal slides were prepared on the date when seized,

i.e., on 19-8-2006, it would, in no manner, show  the

complicity   of   the   appellants/accused   in   the

commission of rape on Rajkumari on 9-8-2006. 


(15) The memo Ex.P-21 of the Senior Superintendent of

Police,  Bilaspur  clearly  shows  that  the  seminal

slides  of  the appellants/accused had been preserved

after they were medically examined.  It is true  that

the   prosecution   did  not  produce   the   medical

examination  report  of  the  appellants/accused   as

contemplated  by Section 53A of the  Code.   However,

neither in their examination under Section 313 of the

Code nor in their defence the appellants/accused took

the  plea  that  they were impotent or  incapable  of

sexual  intercourse.  Kamla D.W.-2, wife of appellant

Ranjeet  also did not state anything in this  regard.

Had  the  appellants/accused taken the  defence  that

they were impotent or incapable of sexual intercourse

then  non-compliance of Section 53A of the Code could

have  enured to their benefit.  In this view  of  the

matter,  in the absence of any specific defence  that

the appellants/accused were impotent or incapable  of

sexual intercourse, non-production of report of their

medical examination and non-examination of the doctor

conducting   the   medical   examination    of    the

appellants/accused  would  not  be   fatal   to   the

prosecution.   The argument of Shri Bhaskar  Payashi,

learned Panel Lawyer for the State that as the  names

of  the appellants/accused were disclosed by Dhaniram

P.W.-6  as  late  as 12-8-2006, the possibility  that

during  this period due to bathing and cleaning  etc.

by   the  appellants/accused  the  evidence   as   to

commission   of  the  offence  of  rape  would   have

disappeared  and,  therefore, non-production  of  the

report     of    medical    examination    of     the

appellants/accused was not fatal to the  prosecution,

is  well  merited.  Under Section  53A  of  the  Code

during  investigation the medical  examination  of  a

person  accused  of  rape would be non-productive  if

there  are  no reasonable grounds for believing  that

such medical examination would afford evidence as  to

the  commission of such offence.  Since  the  seminal

stains and traces of skin in the nails, if any, would

have  disappeared due to bathing and cleaning  for  3

days,  it  cannot be said that there were  reasonable

grounds for the investigating officer to believe that

production  of  the report of medical examination  of

the  appellants/accused would afford evidence  as  to

the commission of rape.  It is also pertinent to note

that despite there being no material to show that the

appellants/accused  were  medically   examined,   the

appellants/accused  did  not  take  the   plea   till

culmination  of the trial that they were impotent  or

incapable  of  sexual intercourse.  To reiterate,  in

the   facts  and  circumstances  of  the  case,  non-

production  of  the report of medical examination  of

the appellants/accused would not enure to the benefit

of      the     appellants/accused     since      the

appellants/accused did not take the  plea  that  they

were impotent or incapable of sexual intercourse.


(16)  The findings and opinion recorded by Dr. Sheela

Saha  P.W.-7 after conducting the autopsy on the body

of  the  deceased  Rajkumari have been  mentioned  in

paragraph 6 supra which are fully established by  her

wholly  unrebutted testimony and proves beyond  doubt

that  gang rape was committed on Rajkumari  and  that

thereafter  she had died a homicidal  death.   It  is

pertinent to note that Dhaniram P.W.-6 was not at all

confronted  by  the defence with his statement  under

Section 161 of the Code.  It is well settled that the

statement of a witness recorded under Section 161  of

the  Code  can  be  used  only  for  the  purpose  of

contradicting the witness or for proving an  omission

therein  and  for no other purpose.  It is  thus  not

permissible  under  law  to  read  any  part  of  the

statement  of a witness recorded by the police  under

Section  161 of the Code unless the witness has  been

confronted   during   cross-examination   with    his

statement to the police. The substantive evidence  of

a  witness  is  his testimony before a Court  of  law

during trial.


(17)  Dhaniram  P.W.-6  deposed  that  while  he  was

watching  television  at  about  10-11  P.M.  in  the

Parchhi,  all  the  appellants/accused  arrived   and

hurling filthy abuses told him that they would commit

rape on Rajkumari and brought him from the Parchhi to

the  courtyard.  Appellants Ramnaresh and Amar  Singh 

held  him  in  the  courtyard  while  Vishwanath  and

Ranjeet   went  in  the  room  where  Rajkumari   was

sleeping.   Vishwanath and Ranjeet emerged  from  the

room after half an hour and thereafter Ramnaresh  and

Amar   Singh  went  inside  the  room.   It  is  very

important  to  notice that Dhaniram  P.W.-6  did  not

depose  that Vishwanath and Ranjeet had held  him  in

the  courtyard  while Ramnaresh and  Amar  Singh  had 

entered the room where Rajkumari was sleeping.  It is

also very important to notice that during inquest  by

Head Constable Jagmohan Panna P.W.-14 he had found  a    

white piece of saree having blood like stains by  the

side  of the dead body of Rajkumari. There is an  old

saying  that witnesses may lie, but circumstances  do

not.   The  autopsy report Ex.P-12 proves that  blood

mixed  froth had oozed from the nostril and mouth  of

Rajkumari,  abrasions and scratch mark  were  present

around the neck and petechial haemorrhage was present  

in  both  lungs,  which according to  Modi's  Medical

Jurisprudence and Toxicology are positive indications

of  asphyxial death. There is no room for  any  doubt

that  the  appellants/accused had used the  piece  of

saree for gagging the mouth of Rajkumari at the  time

of  commission of rape, which is precisely the reason

why  Rajkumari could not shout.  Dhaniram P.W.-6  did

not  depose  as  to  what appellants  Vishwanath  and

Ranjeet did after appellants Ramnaresh and Amar Singh 

entered  the room.  He deposed that after  appellants

Ramnaresh and Amar Singh came out of the room all the  

four  appellants/accused  had  threatened  that  they

would  also kill him if he disclosed the incident  to

anyone.   His  testimony in paragraph 3  that  before

visiting  the  house of Rajkumari all the  appellants

had  assembled at the house of appellant Ranjeet  and

consumed  liquor  is  wholly  unrebutted  in   cross-

examination  as nothing has been elicited  in  cross-

examination to discredit this testimony.   In  cross-

examination, the defence even did not deny the  above

assertion  made  by  Dhaniram P.W.-6.   Testimony  of

Dhaniram  P.W.-6 that all the four appellants/accused

had  threatened that they would also kill him  if  he

disclosed  the  incident to anyone has also  remained

unrebutted in cross-examination.  Dhaniram P.W.-6 was 

not  at  all  confronted  with  his  statement  under

Section  161  of  the Code.  Dhaniram P.W.-6  deposed

that before going to inform Sugaribai P.W.-12, he had

seen a glimpse of the body of Rajkumari lying covered

on  the  cot.  Considering the testimony of  Dhaniram

P.W.-6  in  its  totality there does not  remain  any

doubt   that   the  appellants/accused   had,   after

committing  gang rape on Rajkumari throttled  her  to

death  and  had only thereafter threatened   Dhaniram

P.W.-6  that they would also kill him if he disclosed

the incident to anyone.


(18)  The  testimony  of  Sugaribai  P.W.-12  further

proves that on reaching the house of Indrajeet P.W.-1

upon  information received from Dhaniram P.W.-6,  she

saw  that  Rajkumari was lying dead on the cot.   Her

hair and clothes were untidy.  Bangles of a hand  and

an  ear ring were missing.  The blouse was raised and

her body was covered by a blanket.  She also saw that

impressions of fingers and thumb were present on  the

throat  of  Rajkumari.   Blood  had  oozed  from  her

private  parts.  Testimony of Dr. Sheela Saha  P.W.-7

proves beyond doubt that there were two abrasions  of

the  size 0.5"x0.5" with scratch mark by nails  below

the  angle  of  right mandible just in front  of  the

sterno  cleado  mastoid muscle with  another  scratch

mark  1"  in length present above it.  There  was  an

abrasion on the left side of neck below the angle  of

mandible  to  mastoid process with  scratch  mark  as

shown  in  the  diagram drawn by her.  There  was  an

abrasion  in  the  thigh  of  size  of  1"x0.5"  with

contusion  1"x1"  present on both medial  aspects  of

thigh.  There were lacerations with abrasions 3 to  4

in  number  over perineum with blood mixed discharge.

Eyes and mouth were semi-open.  Blood mixed froth had  

oozed  from  the  nostril and mouth.  These  findings

leave    no    room   for   any   doubt   that    the

appellants/accused  had  throttled  Rajkumari   after

commission  of  gang  rape on her.   So  far  as  the

absence of a finding that there was fracture  of  the

hyoid  bone is concerned, according to Modi's Medical

Jurisprudence  and  Toxicology  the  hyoid  bone  and

superior cornuae of the thyroid cartilage are not, as

a  rule,  fractured in a case of death by throttling.

All   the   appellants/accused  shared   the   common

intention  to  commit murder of Rajkumari,  which  is

also  borne out from the fact that after causing  the

death  of  Rajkumari, all the four appellants/accused

had asked Dhaniram P.W.-6 that he should not disclose 

the  incident to anyone or else they would also  kill

him.   The  exact words used by Dhaniram P.W.-6  need 

reproduction. He deposed in paragraph 2 that "eSa  ml

le;  jktdqekjh ds ?kj ds ijNh esa Vhoh ns[k  jgk  Fkk

rks  pkjksa  vfHk0x.k  vk;s vkSj  eq&gt;s  ekWa  cgu  dh

xkfy;ka  nsrs gq, cksys fd jktdqekjh ds lkFk  cykRdkj

djsaxs  vkSj  eq&gt;s  ?kj  ds  vkaxu  esa  fudky  fn;sA

..............   eSa vkaxu esa  gh  Fkk  A  mlds  ckn

pkjksa  vkjksih eq&gt;s cksys fd fdlh dks ?kVuk ds  ckjs

esa  er crkuk ugha rks rq&gt;s Hkh ekj nsaxsA" (emphasis 

supplied by me)  It is wholly immaterial as to  which

of    the   appellants/accused   actually   throttled

Rajkumari    to    death   since   all    the    four

appellants/accused  shared the  common  intention  to

commit  murder after committing gang rape  with  her.

Obviously, none of the appellants/accused would  have

wanted  Rajkumari to be alive since  she  would  have

named  them  as the persons who had gang  raped  her. 

Thus,   all  the  four  appellants/accused  had   the

requisite  intention  required under  law  to  commit

murder  of Rajkumari in furtherance of which  all  of

them  or  some of them throttled Rajkumari  to  death

after  committing  gang  rape  with  her.   All   the

appellants/accused  had  threatened  Dhaniram  P.W.-6 

that  they would also kill him (emphasis supplied  by

me)  if  he  disclosed the incident to  anyone  which

shows  that while committing murder of Rajkumari  the

appellants/accused  were  acting  in  furtherance  of

their common intention.  Thus, absence of evidence as

to which of the appellants/accused actually throttled

Rajkumari  to  death does not, in any manner,  either

dilute  the  guilt  of  the appellants/accused  under

Section 302 read with Section 34 of the Indian  Penal

Code  or justify imposition of the lesser penalty  on

them.  Thus, the testimony of Dhaniram P.W.-6 an  eye 

witness, medical evidence of Dr. Sheela Saha  P.W.-7,

the  findings recorded in the memo of inquest  Ex.P-3

and  the testimony of Sugaribai P.W-12 leave no  room

for  any doubt that the appellants/accused had, after

committing house trespass with intent to commit  gang

rape  and  murder of Rajkumari, committed  gang  rape

with  her  and  committed her  murder  thereafter  by

throttling her.


(19)  The question which arises for our consideration

now is whether the learned Additional Sessions Judge,

Pendra   Road   was  justified  in   convicting   the

appellants/accused under Sections 449, 376(2)(g)  and

302 read with Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code  on

the basis of the sole testimony of Dhaniram P.W.-6, a

lad aged 16 years.


(20)  The  law  is well settled that  the  Court  may

convict on the basis of the testimony of a single eye

witness,  but  the Court must be satisfied  that  the

testimony  of  the solitary eye witness  is  of  such

sterling quality that it is safe to base a conviction

solely  on the testimony of such witness.   In  doing

so,  the  Court  must  test the  credibility  of  the

witness  by reference to the quality of his evidence.

The  evidence of such witness must be free  from  any

blemish  or suspicion and must impress the  Court  as

wholly  truthful  and so convincing  that  the  Court

would  have  no hesitation in recording a  conviction

solely  on the testimony of such witness.  In  Joseph

vs.  State  of Kerala, (2003) 1 SCC 465, the  Supreme

Court of India held as under:


     "When  there  is  a  sole  witness  to  the
     incident  his evidence has to  be  accepted
     with an amount of caution and after testing
     it   on  the  touchstone  of  the  evidence
     tendered by other witnesses or evidence  as
     recorded.    Section  134  of  the   Indian
     Evidence  Act  provides that no  particular
     number  of witnesses shall in any  case  be
     required  for  the proof of any  fact  and,
     therefore, it is permissible for a court to
     record  and  sustain a  conviction  on  the
     evidence of a solitary eyewitness.  But, at
     the same time, such a course can be adopted
     only  if  the  evidence  tendered  by  such
     witness  is  cogent, reliable and  in  tune
     with  probabilities and  inspires  implicit
     confidence.   By  this standard,  when  the
     prosecution case rests mainly on  the  sole
     testimony  of an eyewitness, it  should  be
     wholly reliable."

(21) We shall now undertake a very close scrutiny  of

the  evidence  of  Dhaniram P.W.-6  with  a  view  to

ascertain whether it is of such sterling quality that

the  conviction  of  the appellants/accused  for  the

offence of house trespass, gang rape and murder could

safely rest on it.


(22) The presence of Dhaniram P.W.-6 at the scene  of

occurrence  is  beyond doubt.  He is the  servant  of

Indrajeet P.W.-1 and also works for appellant Ranjeet

as  narrated by his wife Kamla D.W.-2.  Kamla  D.W.-2

has  clearly  mentioned that alias name  of  Dhaniram

P.W.-6  is  Rottam.  It has been argued  by  all  the

learned      counsel      appearing      for      the

appellants/respondents/accused Ramnaresh,  Vishwanath   

Singh,  Amar  Singh  and Ranjeet  Kewat  in  Criminal

Appeal  No.1117/2007 and Criminal Reference No.3/2007  

that  the  possibility of Dhaniram P.W.-6  committing

rape  and murder of Rajkumari and falsely implicating

the appellants/respondents/accused could not be ruled

out.   Thus, the presence of Dhaniram P.W.-6  at  the

place  of  occurrence  at  the  time  of  offence  is

unquestionable.


(23) Rajkumari was a married woman aged 24 years  and  

had two children sleeping by her side.  The testimony

of   Dhaniram  P.W.-6  in  paragraph  8  shows   that

occasionally Sugaribai P.W.-12 used to sleep  at  the

house  of Rajkumari in the absence of Indrajeet P.W.-

1,  but on the date of occurrence, she did not  come.

He  further deposed that he had gone to sleep at  the

house  of  Rajkumari because she had met him  at  the

shop  and  had  asked  him to  sleep  at  the  house.

Dhaniram   P.W.-6  is  a  young  boy  of  16   years.

Stretching  our imagination to the farthest,  we  are

unable  to  accept the argument of the  defence  that

possibly  Dhaniram  P.W.-6  had  committed  rape  and

murder of Rajkumari.


(24)  If Dhaniram P.W.-6 alone had committed rape  on

Rajkumari,  there would have been a struggle  between

them  as the 24 years old Rajkumari, a mother of  two

children  who  were sleeping by her side,  would  not

have  allowed Dhaniram P.W.-6 to have an easy go with 

her.   She would have resisted by scratching Dhaniram

P.W.-6  and resisting to the maximum.  Her hands  and 

feet  would  have been free to resist and  defend  if

Dhaniram  P.W.-6  alone had attempted  rape  on  her.

Injuries,  scratch  marks would have  been  found  on

Dhaniram P.W.-6.  Had Dhaniram P.W.-6 committed  rape   

and  murder of Rajkumari, he would not have  gone  to

inform  Sugaribai  P.W.-12 that Rajkumari  would  not

awake  from sleep.  He would have disappeared.  After

Sunita  P.W.-2, Anita P.W.-3 and Belabai P.W.-5  left

the  house  after watching television, he  would  not

have  waited till 11-12 P.M. if Rajkumari had already

slept  at 9:30 P.M.  Thus, while presence of Dhaniram

P.W.-6  at the time and place of occurrence is proved

beyond  doubt,  the possibility that  he  might  have

committed  rape and murder of Rajkumari  is,  in  our

considered  opinion,  not even the  remotest  by  the

farthest stretch of our imagination.


(25)  Indrajeet P.W.-1 deposed in paragraph  10  that

the  shining material of the bangles of his wife  was

noticed  by  him  on the right side of  the  body  of

Dhaniram P.W.-6.  He further narrated that while they

were  cleaning  the  house and the  room,  pieces  of

bangles  were  found in a box, which Dhaniram  P.W.-6

had  collected in the box.  However, Dhaniram  P.W.-6

was  not at all confronted with this evidence by  the

defence.   It  appears  that  Indrajeet  P.W.-1   was

completely  misled  by the skillful cross-examination

by  the  defence  as it would be impossible  for  any

human  being to identify the shining material of  the

bangles   of  his  wife  on  the  body  of   another.

Panchnama  of  the dead body Ex.P-3  shows  that  the 

bangles of only the right hand and not the left  hand

were  found broken and the bangles were lying by  the

side of Rajkumari on the bed.  Thus, it is not a case

where  there was a struggle with Rajkumari  all  over

the place where she was sleeping so as to scatter the

pieces  of  her bangles all over.  The  testimony  of

Indrajeet  P.W.-1 in paragraph 10 would clearly  show

that  it  is  only after the holding of  inquest  and

removing  of the dead body, the cleaning of the  room

would  have  taken  place.   Being  the  servant,  if

Dhaniram P.W.-6 had found some bangles and kept  them   

in a box, it would not, by any stretch of imagination

raise  any  suspicion of Dhaniram  P.W.-6  being  the

perpetrator of the crime.


(26)  If  Dhaniram  P.W.-6, a lad of  16  years,  had

committed  the gruesome rape and murder of  Rajkumari 

alone,  he  would not have been able to maintain  his

equilibrium  so  as to calmly stay at  the  house  of

Sugaribai  P.W.-12 till she returned  after  visiting

the place of occurrence and then work at the house of

Indrajeet  P.W.-1 the very next day when  the  police

held the inquest.


(27)  The  defence did not ask a single  question  to

Dhaniram  P.W.-6  in  his  entire  cross-examination,

which  would  indicate that he had any axe  to  grind

against  the  appellants/accused or bore  any  grudge

against  them.   No  reason has  been  shown  by  the

defence  as  to why Dhaniram P.W.-6 would shield  the

real culprit and implicate the appellants/accused, if

they  were  innocent.   Kamla  D.W.-2,  the  wife  of

appellant Ranjeet also did not divulge any reason  as

to  why  Dhaniram P.W.-6 would falsely implicate  her

husband.  She deposed that at 3-4 A.M., Rottam  alias

Dhaniram  P.W.-6 had knocked at her door and informed 

her  that  Rajkumari was unconscious.  She thereafter

sent  Dhaniram  P.W.-6 to inform  Sugaribai  P.W.-12.

This  conduct  of  Dhaniram  P.W.-6  also  completely

belies the possibility of his involvement in the rape

and murder of Rajkumari.


(28) The delay in recording the statement of Dhaniram

P.W.-6  under Section 161 of the Code has been  blown 

out of proportion by the defence.  Dhaniram P.W.-6 is

a  lad  of 16 years.  The learned trial Judge rightly

relied  on  the observation of the Supreme  Court  in

Narayan Singh and others vs. State of M.P., AIR  1985

SC 1678 that it is not uncommon for persons when they 

see a ghastly and dastardly murder being committed in

their  presence that they almost lose their sense  of

balance  and remain dumb founded until they are  able

to  compose themselves.  This is precisely what  must

have  happened  to Dhaniram P.W.-6 when  he  saw  the 

hapless  wife  of his master Indrajeet  P.W.-1  being

gang  raped and murdered by his master's brother  and

three   other  able  bodied  appellants/accused   who

threatened to kill him.


(29) Dhaniram P.W.-6 made no effort to flee from  the

place   of   occurrence  but  remained  present   and

available  through out.  He kept mum  when  asked  by

Indrajeet P.W.-1 and Sugaribai P.W.-12 and  the  merg

intimation by Indrajeet P.W.-1 also did not  disclose

suspicion   on  anyone.   Nobody  tried  to   falsely

implicate anyone.  Even during inquest, suspicion was

not  raised on anyone since the actual culprits  were

not known.  It is only in the statement under Section

161  of  the  Code of Indrajeet P.W.-1  that  he  had

pointed  a  mere  suspicion on  one  Bhupendra,  whom

Rajkumari had married 3 years before he married  her.

Investigating   Officer  R.P.Ahirwar   Sub-Divisional

Officer of Police P.W.-15 has deposed in paragraph  7

that the suspicion raised by Indrajeet P.W.-1 was not

found   to  be  true  during  investigation.    Since

Dhaniram P.W.-6 was undoubtedly present at the  scene  

of  occurrence and did not divulge the names  of  the

real  culprits, he was detained at the police station

and  probably  given  some  beating  by  the  police.

Placed  in  such  a  situation a person  even  though

innocent,  on  being called by the  police  would  be

scared  and  apprehensive of the  likelihood  of  his

being  implicated  for the crime  which  he  did  not

commit.   Therefore,  his statement  that  he  feared

false  implication by police for the crime  which  he

did  not commit is natural. The detention of Dhaniram

P.W.-6  at  the police station or in the  lock-up  is

thus  natural  and can, by no stretch of imagination,

be  taken  to raise a doubt that the police suspected

his  involvement in the gruesome gang rape and murder

of  Rajkumari.   If the witness, who was  undoubtedly

present  at  the scene of occurrence did not  divulge

the  names  of the culprits for 2 days, the treatment

given by the police to Dhaniram P.W.-6 was not at all

unnatural or uncalled for.  For the foregoing reasons

the  mere  fact  that Dhaniram P.W.-6  disclosed  the

involvement   of   the  appellants/accused   in   the

commission  of gang rape and murder of Rajkumari  for

the  first  time on 12-8-2006 does not in any  manner

render him unworthy of credit.


(30) So far as the statement of Dhaniram P.W.-6 under

Section  164  of  the Code recorded by  the  Judicial

Magistrate  First  Class, Bilaspur  on  19-9-2006  is

concerned, suffice it to say that Dhaniram P.W.-6 was

the  sole  eye witness to the gruesome gang rape  and

murder    of    Rajkumari   and   had    named    the

appellants/accused for the first time on 12-8-2006 in

his   statement  under  Section  161  of  the   Code.

Considering  his  age  and the threat  given  by  the

appellants/accused  and to rule out  the  possibility

that  he  would  retract  from  his  statement  under

Section  161, the police must have got his  statement

under  Section  164  recorded  before  a  Magistrate.

However,  no  inference can  be  drawn  that  he  was

compelled by the police to depose under pressure.  In

any  case, since Dhaniram P.W.-6 did not resile  from

his   statement   under  Section  161   and   deposed

truthfully against the appellants/accused before  the

trial Court, his statement under Section 164 is of no

avail  to the defence especially because the  defence

did not contradict Dhaniram P.W.-6 from his statement

under  Section 164.  A perusal of the statement under

Section 164 recorded by the Judicial Magistrate First

Class,  Bilaspur on 19-9-2006 also goes to show  that

it  was  not recorded in conformity with law  because

the  Magistrate did not append beneath the  statement

the  essential certificate that she had explained  to

Dhaniram  P.W.-6  that he is  not  bound  to  make  a

confession and that, if he does so, any confession he

may  make may be used as evidence against him and she   

believed  that this confession was voluntarily  made,

taken in her presence and hearing, and was read  over

to  Dhaniram P.W.-6 and admitted by him to be correct

and   contained  a  full  and  true  account  of  the

statement made by him.  In other words, the recording

of  statement of Dhaniram P.W.-6 under Section 164 is

of no avail to the defence in this case.


(31)  Perusing the testimony of Dhaniram P.W.-6  with

utmost  circumspection, we  thus  find  that  he  has

withstood  the test of skillful cross-examination  by

the defence counsel.  When he was asked as to whether  

he  went to call appellant Ranjeet when Rajkumari was

struggling  for  life, he replied  that  Ranjeet  was

involved in the crime and, therefore, why would he go

to call him.  The testimony of Dhaniram P.W.-6 proves

that  all  the four appellants/accused after  hurling

filthy abuses told him that they would commit rape on

Rajkumari and had drawn him out in the courtyard.  It

could be that the son of Rajkumari, who was lying  by

her side, was also given by the appellants/accused to

Dhaniram  P.W.-6, who admitted that he  was  carrying

the  son  of Rajkumari while the daughter was crying.

The  counsel for the defence made the best  endeavour

to  elicit favourable answers from Dhaniram P.W.-6 by

skillful  cross-examination  but  the  learned  trial

Judge rightly ensured that the witness has understood

the  questions  before answering  them  which  is  in

conformity with the decision of the Supreme Court  of

India  in Zahira Habibulla H. Sheikh and another  vs.

State  of  Gujarat and others, (2004) 4  SCC  158  in

which the Court held as under:


     "The  courts  have to take a  participatory
     role  in a trial. They are not expected  to
     be  tape  recorders to record  whatever  is
     being stated by the witnesses.  Section 311
     of the Code and Section 165 of the Evidence
     Act   confer  vast  and  wide   powers   on
     presiding  officers of court to elicit  all
     necessary  materials by playing  an  active
     role  in  the evidence-collecting  process.
     They have to monitor the proceedings in aid
     of  justice  in  a  manner that  something,
     which is not relevant, is not unnecessarily
     brought into record."


(32)   The   purpose   of  asking  questions   during

examination  under  Section 313 of  the  Code  is  to

afford  the  accused  personally  an  opportunity  of

explaining   any   incriminating   circumstance    so

appearing  in evidence against him.  The accused  may

or  may  not  avail the opportunity for offering  his

explanation.   The appellants/accused did  not  avail

the  opportunity  and  on being confronted  with  the

testimony  of Dhaniram P.W.-6 that they  had  visited

the  house of appellant Ranjeet at 9 P.M. by question

No.28  stood short by simply stating that they  would

not  know.  The appellants/accused did not deny  that

they  had assembled at the house of appellant Ranjeet

around 9 P.M. 


(33)  It  is  also pertinent to note that  after  the

occurrence  the  appellants/accused  were  keeping  a

constant   watch  over  Dhaniram  P.W.-6.   Appellant

Ranjeet  was present near the dead body of  Rajkumari

till  it  was  taken for post mortem examination  and

appellant  Vishwanath had even accompanied  the  dead 

body  of Rajkumari for post mortem.  In other  words,

due  to  the presence of his master appellant Ranjeet

and  co-accused Vishwanath who had threatened to kill

Dhaniram P.W.-6 if he disclosed their involvement  in

the  offence  to anyone, it was natural for  Dhaniram

P.W.-6, a lad of 16 years, to have kept quiet  for  2

days till he was questioned by the police.


(34)  The  testimony  of  Dhaniram  P.W.-6  is  fully

corroborated by medical evidence of Dr.  Sheela  Saha

P.W.-7  and the testimony of Sugaribai P.W.-12.   The

confirmation of blood on the piece of saree used  for

gagging  the  mouth of Rajkumari and the confirmation

of  presence  of semen and human spermatozoa  on  the  

vaginal  slides of Rajkumari and the findings  during

autopsy  duly proved by Dr. Sheela Saha P.W.-7  leave

no room for any doubt that the appellants/accused had

committed  house trespass with intent to commit  gang

rape and murder, an offence punishable with death and

had thereafter committed gang rape with Rajkumari and

thereafter committed her murder by throttling her  to

death.


(35) So far as the mention of the name of Harjeet  in

paragraph  1 of his testimony by Indrajeet P.W.-1  as

being present in his house with servant Dhaniram P.W.-

6  at  the  time of occurrence, it is nothing  but  a

typographical  error.  No question  was  put  to  any

witness  that  besides appellant  Ranjeet,  Indrajeet

P.W.-1 also had a brother named Harjeet.


(36) Having thus undertaken a very close and critical

scrutiny of the evidence of Dhaniram P.W.-6,  we  are

of  the  considered opinion that his evidence  is  of

such   sterling  quality  that  conviction   of   the

appellants/accused for the commission  of  gang  rape

and  murder after house trespass with that  intention

can  safely  be  rested  on it.   We  find  that  the

evidence of Dhaniram P.W.-6 is free from any  blemish

or  suspicion  and  impresses us as wholly  truthful,

natural  and so convincing that we have no hesitation

in upholding the conviction of the appellants/accused

recorded  by  the learned Additional Sessions  Judge,

Pendra  Road  for  the offences under  Sections  449,

376(2)(g) and 302 read with Section 34 of the  Indian

Penal  Code  solely on the basis of the testimony  of

Dhaniram P.W.-6 the lone eye witness. 


(37)  The evidence led by the appellants/accused does

not  prove  the defence of alibi.  The  testimony  of

Samelal  D.W.-1 and Kamla D.W.-2 wife of  Ranjeet  is

nothing but an afterthought.  It is unbelievable that

Samelal  D.W.-1 an agriculturist was keeping a  watch

as  to  when  they would go to sleep.  His  testimony

that he would frequently go to the house of Ramnaresh

to  confirm  that he was sleeping, is nothing  but  a

bundle  of falsehood.  The testimony of Kamla  D.W.-2

wife of Ranjeet that she had slept with Ranjeet at  9

P.M.  on  the  date of occurrence is contradicted  by

Samelal D.W.-1 who stated in paragraph 3 that Ranjeet

had  gone to sleep at his house at 10 P.M.  Thus, the

evidence  led  by  the  defence  is  nothing  but  an

afterthought  and does not provide any alibi  to  the

appellants/accused.


(38)  Having thus carefully scrutinised the  evidence

led  by  the  prosecution  and  the  defence  in  its

entirety and for the foregoing reasons, we are of the

considered   opinion  that  the  learned   Additional

Sessions  Judge, Pendra Road was wholly justified  in

convicting the appellants/accused under Sections 449,

376(2)(g) and 302 read with Section 34 of the  Indian

Penal  Code.   The sentence awarded  by  the  learned

Additional  Sessions  Judge,  Pendra  Road  for   the

offences  under  Sections 449 and  376(2)(g)  of  the

Indian  Penal  Code  are wholly commensurate  to  the

offences committed by the appellants/accused  and  do

not   call  for  any  interference.  Criminal  Appeal

No.1117/2007   preferred  by  the  appellants/accused

Ramnaresh,  Vishwanath Singh, Amar Singh and  Ranjeet   

Kewat  is,  thus, without merit and is liable  to  be

dismissed. 


(39)  The  only  question which now remains  for  our

consideration  is whether the case  in  hand  is  the

rarest  of  rare cases and whether the learned  trial

Judge  was justified in awarding the extreme  penalty

to  the  appellants/accused  for  the  offence  under

Section 302 read with Section 34 of the Indian  Penal

Code. 


(40)  It  is well settled that death penalty  can  be

awarded  only in the rarest of rare cases.   For  the

offence  of murder life imprisonment is the rule  and

death sentence is an exception.  Death sentence  must 

be  imposed only when life imprisonment appears to be

an  altogether inadequate punishment having regard to

the relevant circumstances of the crime.


(41)  In Machhi Singh and others vs. State of Punjab,

(1983)  3  SCC  470,  the Supreme Court  observed  as

under:


     "The  following questions may be asked  and
     answered as a test to determine the `rarest
     of  rare' case in which death sentence  can
     be inflicted:

          (a)  Is there something uncommon about
               the  crime which renders sentence
               of    imprisonment    for    life
               inadequate and calls for a  death
               sentence?
          (b)  Are   the  circumstances  of  the
               crime  such  that  there  is   no
               alternative  but to impose  death
               sentence   even  after  according
               maximum    weightage    to    the
               mitigating  circumstances   which
               speak in favour of the offender?"


(42)  In  Shivu and another vs. R.G., High  Court  of

Karnataka  and  another,  2007  Cri.L.J.  1806,   the

Supreme  Court narrated the guidelines emerging  from

the  case of Bachan Singh vs. State of Punjab, (1980)

2  SCC  684 which have to be applied to the facts  of

each individual case where the question of imposition

of death sentence arises.  They are as under:


     "(i) The  extreme penalty of death need not
          be  inflicted except in gravest  cases
          of extreme culpability.

     (ii) Before opting for the death penalty the
          circumstances of the `offender' also require to be
          taken into consideration along with the circumstances
          of the `crime'.

     (iii)     Life imprisonment is the rule and death
          sentence is an exception.  Death sentence must be
          imposed only when life imprisonment appears to be an
          altogether inadequate punishment having regard to the
          relevant circumstances of the crime, and provided,
          and only provided, the option to impose sentence of
          imprisonment for life cannot be conscientiously
          exercised having regard to the nature and
          circumstances of the crime and all the relevant
          circumstances.

     (iv) A balance sheet of aggravating and mitigating
          circumstances has to be drawn up and in doing so the
          mitigating circumstances have to be accorded full
          weightage and a just balance has to be struck between
          the aggravating and the mitigating circumstances
          before the option is exercised.

     In  rarest  of  rare cases when  collective
     conscience  of the community is so  shocked
     that  it  will  expect the holders  of  the
     judicial  power  centre  to  inflict  death
     penalty   irrespective  of  their  personal
     opinion   as   regards   desirability    or
     otherwise of retaining death penalty, death
     sentence can be awarded.  The community may  
     entertain  such sentiment in the  following
     circumstances:

          (1)  When the murder is committed in an extremely
               brutal, grotesque, diabolical, revolting or dastardly
               manner so as to arouse intense and extreme
               indignation of the community.

          (2)  When the murder is committed for a motive which
               evinces total depravity and meanness; e.g. murder by
               hired assassin for money or reward or a cold-blooded
               murder for gains of a person vis--vis whom the
               murderer is in a dominating position or in a position
               of trust, or murder is committed in the course for
               betrayal of the motherland.

          (3)  When murder of a member of a Scheduled Caste or
               minority community etc., is committed not for
               personal reasons but in circumstances which arouse
               social wrath, or in cases of `bride burning' or
               `dowry deaths' or when murder is committed in order
               to remarry for the sake of extracting dowry once
               again or to marry another woman on account of
               infatuation.

          (4)  When the crime is enormous in proportion.  For
               instance when multiple murders, say of all or almost
               all the members of a family or a large number of
               persons of a particular caste, community, or
               locality, are committed.

          (5)  When the victim of murder is an innocent child,
               or a helpless woman or old or infirm person or a
               person vis--vis whom the murderer is in a dominating
               position or a public figure generally loved and
               respected by the community.

          If  upon taking an overall global view
          of  all the circumstances in the light
          of   the  aforesaid  propositions  and
          taking into account the answers to the
          questions posed by way of the test for
          the   rarest   of  rare   cases,   the
          circumstances  of the  case  are  such
          that death sentence is warranted,  the
          court would proceed to do so."

(43)  In  Shivu and another vs. R.G., High  Court  of

Karnataka  and another (supra), a young  girl  of  18

years  was  murdered by the appellants and  to  avoid

detection  the appellants committed the  heinous  and

brutal  act  of  her  murder.  Considering  the  view

expressed  by  the Supreme Court of India  in  Bachan

Singh  vs.  State of Punjab (supra) and Machhi  Singh

and  others vs. State of Punjab (supra), it was  held

that  the  case fell in rarest of rare  category  and

death  sentence  awarded  by  the  trial  Court   and

confirmed by the High Court was affirmed.


(44) In Dhananjoy Chatterjee alias Dhana vs. State of

W.B.,  (1994) 2 SCC 220, it was held that the  sordid

episode of the security guard, whose sacred duty  was

to   ensure  the  protection  and  welfare   of   the

inhabitants of the flats in the apartment, to gratify

his lust and murder a resident of one of the flats in

retaliation  for his transfer on her  complaint,  the

appellant committed the most heinous type of barbaric

rape and murder on a helpless and defenceless school-

going  girl of 18 years.  The Supreme Court  held  as

under:


     "16.  The  sordid episode of  the  security
     guard, whose sacred duty was to ensure  the
     protection  and welfare of the  inhabitants
     of  the flats in the apartment, should have
     subjected the deceased, a resident  of  one
     of  the  flats,  to gratify  his  lust  and
     murder  her in retaliation for his transfer
     on her complaint, makes the crime even more
     heinous.   Keeping  in  view  the   medical
     evidence and the state in which the body of
     the  deceased was found, it is obvious that
     a  most  heinous type of barbaric rape  and
     murder  was  committed on  a  helpless  and
     defenceless school-going girl of 18  years.
     If  the  security  guards  behave  in  this
     manner  who  will  guard the  guards?   The
     faith of the society by such a barbaric act
     of  the guard, gets totally shaken and  its
     cry  for  justice becomes loud  and  clear.
     The   offence  was  not  only  inhuman  and
     barbaric  but  it  was a  totally  ruthless
     crime  of  rape  followed by  cold  blooded
     murder  and an affront to the human dignity
     of  the society.  The savage nature of  the
     crime  has shocked our judicial conscience.
     There  are  no  extenuating  or  mitigating
     circumstances whatsoever in the  case.   We
     agree  that a real and abiding concern  for
     the dignity of human life is required to be
     kept   in   mind   by  the   courts   while
     considering   the   confirmation   of   the
     sentence  of  death  but  a  cold   blooded
     preplanned   brutal  murder,  without   any
     provocation, after committing  rape  on  an
     innocent and defenceless young girl  of  18
     years,  by  the  security  guard  certainly
     makes  this  case a "rarest  of  the  rare"
     cases  which calls for no punishment  other
     than   the   capital  punishment   and   we
     accordingly confirm the sentence  of  death
     imposed  upon the appellant for the offence
     under Section 302 IPC.  ......."


  (45)      In Molai and another vs. State of  Madhya

Pradesh, AIR 2000 SC 177, the appellants had,  taking

advantage  of  the prosecutrix a girl aged  16  years

being  alone,  committed rape on her  and  thereafter

strangulated  her by using her undergarments,  caused

injuries on her person with a sharp edged weapon  and

threw her body into a septic tank at the backside  of

the  house.  The Supreme Court held that it  was  the

rarest  of  rare  cases where capital punishment  was

rightly awarded to each appellant.


(46)  In  Shivaji @ Dadya Shankar Alhat vs. State  of

Maharashtra,  AIR  2009 SC 56, in a  case  where  the

appellant  who was residing nearby and was  known  to

the  deceased  and  her  family  and  had  asked  the

deceased a minor girl of 9 years to accompany him  to

a  hill  on  the pretext of giving her  firewood  and

thereafter committed rape and murder, it was held  by

the Supreme Court of India that the case at hand fell

in  the  rarest  of rare category.  The circumstances

established cruel acts of the accused and called  for

only   one   sentence,  i.e.,  death  sentence.    In

paragraphs 25 and 26, it was observed as under:


     "25. ...... It will be a mockery of justice
     to permit the accused to escape the extreme
     penalty   of  law  when  faced  with   such
     evidence and such cruel acts.  To give  the
     lesser punishment for the accused would  be
     to  render  the  justicing  system  of  the
     country suspect.  The common man will  lose
     faith   in  courts.   In  such  cases,   he
     understands and appreciates the language of
     deterrence   more   than  the   reformative
     jargon.

     26.   Therefore, undue sympathy  to  impose
     inadequate sentence would do more  harm  to
     the  justice system to undermine the public
     confidence  in  the  efficacy  of  law  and
     society  could not long endure  under  such
     serious  threats.   It is,  therefore,  the
     duty   of  every  court  to  award   proper
     sentence having regard to the nature of the
     offence  and  the manner in  which  it  was
     executed  or committed etc.  This  position
     was illuminatingly stated by this Court  in
     Sevaka Perumal etc. v. State of Tamil  Nadu
     (AIR 1991 SC 1463)."

(47) Having gone through the various decisions of the

Supreme Court of India, the gruesome and ghastly gang 

rape  and  murder  of the hapless  Rajkumari  on  the

Rakshabandhan  Day  by  her brother-in-law  appellant

Ranjeet  and  three  other appellants/accused,  i.e.,

Ramnaresh, Vishwanath Singh and Amar Singh shows  the    

depravity  and  meanness  of the  appellants/accused,

who,  to  satisfy  their lust, did  not  hesitate  to

commit  gang  rape on a married woman and  thereafter

murdered  her inside her house when her  husband  had 

gone   out.    The   injuries  found  on   Rajkumari,

externally  as well as on her private parts,  narrate

the  ghastly  act committed by the appellants/accused

who  were  all able bodied young men.  The action  of

the  appellants/accused  was  premeditated  and  well

planned.   Gang  rape  and murder  of  the  helpless,

defenceless  and innocent Rajkumari was cold-blooded, 

premeditated and gruesome.  The manner in which  four 

able  bodied  young men, i.e., the appellants/accused

had,  for satisfying their lust, committed gang  rape

on  Rajkumari and throttled her to death  shows  that

the act of the appellants/accused was so uncommon and  

so aggravating that sentence of imprisonment for life

would  be inadequate and imposition of death  penalty

alone  would be justified for the offence of  murder.

It  is a case of gravest and extreme culpability.  It

shocks  the  collective conscience of  the  community

which  would expect the holders of the judicial power

centre  to inflict death penalty in a case of  murder

of  a  hapless  woman inside her house by  four  able

bodied  young  men  after satisfying  their  lust  by

committing gang rape on her.  The commission of  gang 

rape and murder of a hapless woman by four young  and 

able   bodied  appellants/accused  is  an   extremely

brutal,   grotesque,   diabolical,   revolting    and

dastardly  so  as  to  arouse  intense  and   extreme

indignation  of  the  community.  Appellant  Ranjeet,

being  the  brother-in-law of the hapless  Rajkumari,

was  in  a position of trust at least on the  day  of

Rakshabandhan when he, Ramnaresh, Vishwanath and Amar      

Singh  found  the lonely Rajkumari an easy  prey  and

after  overpowering  her gang raped  her  purely  for

satisfying  their  lust  and brutally  committed  her

murder by throttling her thereafter.  The act of  the

appellants/accused was not on account of  any  enmity

or revenge.  There are no mitigating circumstances in

this case which would call for imposition of a lesser

penalty.   Gang  rape of a woman  is  a  most  brutal

offence  against humanity and destroys the very  soul

of  the woman completely.  If after gang rape she  is

murdered, nothing more is required to be done  so  as

to  make  the act so brutal and diabolical so  as  to

justify  the  extreme penalty since the act  of  gang

rape  by four men on a lonely woman inside her  house

and  the  commission  of  her  murder  thereafter  by

throttling  her surpasses all acts of brutality  that

one can imagine. 


(48)  In State of H.P. vs. Shree Kant Shekari, (2004)

8  SCC  153, it was observed by the Supreme Court  of

India as under:


     "3.   Sexual  violence apart from  being  a
     dehumanising  act is an unlawful  intrusion
     on  the right of privacy and sanctity of  a
     female.   It  is  a  serious  blow  to  her
     supreme  honour and offends her self-esteem
     and  dignity  - it degrades and  humiliates
     the  victim  and  where  the  victim  is  a
     helpless  innocent child  or  a  minor,  it
     leaves  behind  a traumatic experience.   A
     rapist  not  only causes physical  injuries
     but  more  indelibly leaves a scar  on  the
     most  cherished possession of a woman  i.e.
     her dignity, honour, reputation and not the
     least  her  chastity.  Rape is not  only  a
     crime against the person of a woman, it  is
     a  crime  against the entire  society.   It
     destroys,  as  noted  by  this   Court   in
     Bodhisattwa  Gautam v. Subhra  Chakraborty,
     (1996) 1 SCC 490 the entire psychology of a
     woman  and  pushes her into deep  emotional
     crisis.  It is a crime against basic  human
     rights,  and  is  also  violative  of   the
     victim's  most cherished of the fundamental
     rights, namely, the right to life contained
     in  Article  21  of the Constitution.   The
     courts  are,  therefore, expected  to  deal
     with  cases  of sexual crime against  women
     with  utmost sensitivity.  Such cases  need
     to  be dealt with sternly and severely.   A
     socially  sensitised Judge, in our opinion,
     is  a  better statutory armour in cases  of
     crime  against women than long  clauses  of
     penal    provisions,   containing   complex
     exceptions and provisos."

(49)  Taking  an  overall  global  view  of  all  the

circumstances, we are of the considered opinion  that

the  circumstances  of the case  are  such  that  the

present case falls into the category of the rarest of

rare   cases  and  death  penalty  awarded   to   the

appellants/accused  under  Section  302   read   with

Section  34  of  the  Indian  Penal  Code  is  wholly

justified.  We do hope and trust that Parliament does

consider  providing for the extreme penalty  for  the

offence  of gang rape, which completely destroys  the

soul of a woman and her right to live with dignity.


(50)  In  the  result,  we  dismiss  Criminal  Appeal

No.1117/2007  by  the  appellants/accused  Ramnaresh, 

Vishwanath  Singh, Amar Singh and Ranjeet  Kewat  and  

allow  Criminal  Reference  No.3/2007  under  Section

366(1)  of  the  Code by Shri Ram Kumar  Tiwari,  the

Additional  Sessions  Judge,  Pendra  Road,  District

Bilaspur   in  Sessions  Trial  No.403/2006.    Under

Section  368(a) of the Code, we confirm the  sentence

of  death  awarded  to  the appellants/accused  under

Section 302 read with Section 34 of the Indian  Penal

Code by the learned Additional Sessions Judge, Pendra 

Road.  We also confirm the sentences awarded  to  the

appellants/accused by the learned Additional Sessions

Judge,  Pendra Road under Sections 449 and  376(2)(g) 

of  the Indian Penal Code.  We further order that the

death  sentence  awarded  by the  learned  Additional

Sessions Judge, Pendra Road to the appellants/accused  

under  Section 302 read with Section 34 of the Indian

Penal  Code and confirmed by us shall not be executed

until the period allowed for preferring an appeal has

expired,  or, if an appeal is presented  within  such

period, until such appeal is disposed of.


(51)   The  Additional  Registrar  (Judicial)  shall,

without delay, send a copy of this judgment and order

under  the  seal of the High Court and attested  with

his  official  signature to the  Additional  Sessions

Judge,  Pendra Road, District Bilaspur under  Section

371 of the Code.


     JUDGE                               JUDGE
        24-7-2009                                24-7-2009

