Criminal Appeal No.585 of 2005 Santoshdhari Vs. The State of Chhattisgarh

HIGH COURT OF CHATTISGARH AT BILASPUR      




                Criminal Appeal No.585 of 2005




                        Santoshdhari
                                   ...Petitioners


                            Versus



                      The State of Chhattisgarh
                                                ...Respondents





     (APPEAL UNDER SECTION 374 (2) OF THE CODE OF CRIMINAL          
                       PROCEDURE, 1973)


!     Mr.K.A.Ansari,  Senior  Advocate with  Mrs.Meera  Jaiswal, Advocate for the appellant



^     Mr.Akhil     Mishra,     Dy.Govt.Advocate     for      the State/respondent





Honble Mr. T.P. Sharma, J 



       Dated:27/07/2009



:       Judgment

---------------------------------------------------------------
-----------------------

                           JUDGMENT
                (Delivered on 27th July, 2009)

     The  appellant  who is husband of deceased Prema  Bai  has
challenged  the  legality  and propriety  of  the  judgment  of
conviction and order of sentence dated 29.6.2005 passed by  the
Additional  Sessions Judge, Korba, in Sessions Trial  No.1/2004
whereby  and  whereunder the learned Additional Sessions  Judge
after  holding the appellant guilty for the offence  punishable
under  Sections  498-A  and  304-B of  the  Indian  Penal  Code
sentenced him to undergo rigorous imprisonment for 2 years  and
to  pay  a fine of Rs.3000/-, in default of payment of fine  to
further undergo rigorous imprisonment for 6 months and rigorous
imprisonment for 7 years.

2.   Judgment of conviction and order of sentence is challenged
on  the  ground  that without there being an iota  of  evidence
relating  to  commission of cruelty and torture  in  connection
with  demand of dowry soon before death of Prema Bai, the Court
below   has   convicted   and  sentenced   the   appellant   as
aforementioned and thereby committed an illegality.
3.    Case  of  the prosecution, in brief, is that the  present
appellant is husband of deceased Prema Bai who married with the 
appellant in the month of June, 2003 and died on 27.4.2004 as a
result of hanging herself in the house of the appellant.  After
marriage  of Prema Bai, the appellant and their relatives  used
to demand of dowry especially television, motor-cycle and other
articles  and as a result of such demand, torture and  cruelty,
she  committed  suicide. Merg intimation  was  registered  vide
Ex.P/6  on  27.4.2004  and  on the  basis  of  merg  intimation
registered merg was recorded vide Ex.P/8. Investigating officer
proceeded  for the scene of occurrence and after summoning  the
witnesses,  inquest was prepared over the body of the  deceased
vide  Ex.P/8.  Dead  body  was sent for  autopsy  vide  Ex.P/9.
Autopsy  was  conducted by the team of doctor vide  Ex.P/5  and
opined  that  cause  of  death was  asphyxia  as  a  result  of
antemortem  hanging.  Spot  map was prepared  by  patwari  vide
Ex.P/2. Sealed clothes of the deceased were seized vide Ex.P/7.
Spot  map  was  prepared vide Ex.P/10. F.I.R. was  lodged  vide
Ex.P/12. 

  4.   After  recording the statements of the  witnesses  under
Section  161 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (in  short
`Code') and after completion of investigation, one charge sheet
was filed before the Chief Judicial Magistrate, Katghora who in
turn committed the case to the Court of Sessions, Bilaspur from
where  learned  Additional Sessions Judge, Korba  received  the
same on transfer for trial.

5.    In order to prove the guilt of the accused/appellant, the
prosecution has examined as many as 20 witnesses. Statement  of  
the accused was recorded under Section 313 of the Code where he  
denied  the  circumstances appearing against him and  innocency
and  false  implication  is  pleaded.  Appellant  has  examined
himself as defence witness and taken the defence that Prema Bai
was  married to him in the year 2003 and at that time there was
no  demand  of dowry. After her marriage behavior of Prema  Bai
with the appellant was abnormal. Sometime she used to press his 
neck  and used to bite the ear. She used to misbehave with  the
accused/appellant. He has also stated that even  there  was  no
consumption of marriage. He has tried his level best but he was
not  succeeded to maintain physical relation with the deceased.
He  has  lodged  the report (Ex.D/2) on 3.10.2003  against  the
deceased   and   also   examined    Daulatram   Dhari   (DW-2),
Smt.Ramkunwar Bai (DW-3), Ku. Uma (DW-4), Bharat  Ratre  (DW-5)    
and Milan Ratre (DW-6), A.Tirki (DW-7) and Awadh Ram (DW-8)  as  
defence witnesses. Defence witnesses have also deposed that the 
accused  persons  had  not committed cruelty  or  torture  upon
deceased  Prema Bai. Deceased Prema Bai was residing  with  the  
present  appellant  after her marriage. They  have  denied  any
demand of dowry. A.Tirki (DW-7) has proved Ex.D/2.

6.    Learned  Additional  Sessions Judge  after  affording  an
opportunity of hearing to the parties, convicted and  sentenced
the appellant as aforementioned.
7.    I  have  heard Mr. K.A.Ansari, Senior Counsel Mrs.  Meera
Jaiswal, counsel for the appellant and Mr.Akhil Mishra,  Deputy
Government  Advocate for the State/respondent and  perused  the
judgment impugned and record of the court below.

8.    Learned counsel for the appellant vehemently argued  that
the  appellant was married with deceased Prema Bai but behavior
of  Prema Bai was not normal and cordial. She did not like  the
appellant and used to misbehave with him. Sometime she tried to
press her neck. Sometime she used to bite his ear and even  she
has  refused  to  maintain matrimonial  relation.  The  present
appellant  never  demanded  motorcycle,  television  and  other
articles  and  after  death of Prema Bai he  has  been  falsely
implicated  the  present appellant. The present  appellant  has
lodged the report on 3.10.2003 against the deceased relating to
her  misbehavior. Learned counsel further submits that  on  the
date  of alleged incident, the appellant was juvenile and below
the  age  of  18 years but the Court below has disbelieved  the
claim of the appellant. Conviction by the Sessions Judge to the
juvenile  is apparently and in the absence of any credible  and
clinching evidence, conviction and sentence of the appellant is
not sustainable under the law.

9.     On   the   other   hand,   learned   counsel   for   the
State/respondent supported the judgment impugned.  

10.   In order to appreciate the contentions of the parties,  I
have examined the material available on record. As regards  the
age  of the appellant is concerned, present offence took  place
on  27.4.2004 and according to inquiry conducted by  the  trial
Court  relating to age of the appellant, his date of birth  was
noticed  as  15.3.85 and at the time of incident  he  was  aged
about  more  than 18 years. The finding has not been challenged
by the appellant and it reached into finality.

11.   The appellant was married with deceased Prema Bai in  the
year  2003  and  she  died within 7 years of  her  marriage  on
27.4.2004  as a result of hanging in the house of the appellant
in   abnormal   circumstances  is   not   disputed,   otherwise
established  by  the  statement  of   Smt.Harihar  Bai  (PW-1),
Ku.Manjulata (PW-2), G.S.Bhaskar (PW-3), Malik Ram Tandon  (PW-    
4),  merg intimation (Exs.P/6 and 8), F.I.R. (Ex.P/12), inquest
report  (Ex.P/4), statement of Dr.R.K.Divya (PW-13) and autopsy
report (Ex.P/5). On 27.4.2004 the deceased committed suicide by 
hanging  herself and she died as a result of hanging. Cause  of
death was due to asphyxia. 

12.   The  present  appellant  has taken  specific  defence  of
misbehavior  and   insanity  of the  deceased  and  has  lodged
written  report  (Ex.D/2)  which is  admitted  by  the  defence
witness  A.Tirki (DW-7) that he has received written report  on
3.10.2003  and also admitted that he has directed the appellant
for  treatment of his wife but he has not taken any  action  on
the basis of such report. Ex.D/2 is written report. But, it  is
a  matter  of  surprise that no action has been  taken  by  the
police even they have not care to record Rojnamcha of the same.
In  Ex.D/2  the  appellant  has not  mentioned  that  even  the
deceased refused to maintain matrimonial relation. The  present
appellant   has  examined  himself  as  defence   witness   and
specifically  deposed  that  as  a  result  of  resistance  and
misbehavior  of  the  deceased, he has  not  maintain  physical
relation   with   the  deceased.  Autopsy  was   conducted   by
Dr.R.K.Divya  (PW-13) who has noticed that size of  uterus  was
normal  and no external injury was found over the private  part
of  the  deceased  but nothing has been asked  by  the  defence
relating to presence of hymen or anything which would show that
marriage has not been consumed. It shows that the appellant has
not  consumed  the marriage is admittedly false defence  though
prosecution  cannot take help of weakness of  defence  and  the
prosecution is required to prove its case beyond all shadow  of
doubt and requires to stand on its own leg.

13.   Smt.Harihar Bai (PW-1) mother of the deceased has deposed 
that  just  after marriage the accused persons used  to  demand
colour television and motorcycle and used to torture Prema  Bai
and  even they do not provide proper meal to her daughter. When
she  came  back  to her maternal house after two  days  of  her
marriage  then even she told to her mother that their  in-law's
and  relatives used to quarrel with her and demands  television
and  motorcycle. She has also deposed that when she went to the 
house  of  the  appellant  with her  daughter  then  they  also
demanded colour television and motorcycle, then she called some 
persons  of  the  Village Gumiya where the  appellant  and  her
relatives were residing and narrated the incident to them.  She
has  also deposed that before 20 to 25 days of the incident she
took  the  deceased  to  her house for festival  and  again  on
25.4.2004  she  went along with deceased to the  house  of  the
appellant  where the appellant and his relatives have quarreled
with  her  and again demanded motorcycle and colour  television
and  threat  her that if she will not provide colour television
and motorcycle then she will see dead body of her daughter. She
left  the deceased in the house of the appellant and came  back
to  her house. On 27.4.2004, she came to know that her daughter
had  committed  suicide. Ku. Manjulata  (PW-2)  sister  of  the
deceased  has  also corroborated the statement  of  her  mother
Smt.Harihar  Bai  (PW-1).  G.S.Bhaskar  (PW-3)  brother-in-law,
Malik  Ram  Tandon  (PW-4), maternal  uncle  of  the  deceased,
Ghasiram (PW-5), brother-in-law of the deceased, Phulsai (PW-7)
grandfather  of the deceased, Manharan Singh (PW-8) grandmother  
of the deceased and  Jagmohan (PW-9) neighbour of father of the
deceased  have deposed that the appellant, father,  mother  and
other relatives used to demand motorcycle, television and other
articles  and  used  to  commit cruelty and  torture  upon  the
deceased. The appellant has examined himself as defence witness 
but  he has admitted that on 25.4.2004 his wife was not present
in his house and she was at her mother house. The other defence
witnesses have deposed that Bharat was present at the  time  of
incident and Bharat who is son-in-law of the co-accused  Daulat
Ram did not frequently visit the house of Daulat Ram. He is not
connected anything with the incident. Other witnesses have also
deposed  that  according  to  their  information,  the  accused
persons have not demanded dowry but in their cross-examination,
they were having no knowledge about the incident.

14.  In the present case, the deceased was died within one year
of  her marriage in abnormal circumstances in the house of  the
appellant.

15.  Learned counsel for the appellant also argued and attacked
upon the propriety of the investigation on the ground that  the
present   investigating   officer  Emil   Lakda   (PW-20)   has
specifically  deposed  that  he has  started  investigation  on
30.4.2004 and registered the offence on 29.4.2004 vide Ex.P/12.
He  has also admitted that on 29.4.2004 or 30.4.2004, relatives
of  the  deceased have not lodged any report and also  admitted
that he used to investigate the offence in accordance with law.
Learned  counsel further argued that the investigating  officer
recorded the statements of the witnesses whose residence are 50
to  100  km. away from police chowki. He has admitted in para-4
of  his  evidence that he has recorded the statements at police
chowki Hardi Bazaar. 

16.   Virtually  defence has tried to show that alleged  F.I.R.
(Ex.P/12) has been lodged on 30.4.2004, then how it is possible
for  the investigating officer to record the statements of  the
witnesses  under Section 161 of the Code on 29.4.2004.  Present
F.I.R. (Ex.P/12) is based on the F.I.R. registered under 0/2004
by  the  investigating officer on 29.4.2004  and  on  29.4.2004
after  recording  the  F.I.R.  the  investigating  officer  has
recorded  the  statements of the witnesses.  The  investigating
officer has not committed any illegality or any departure  from
the  law or rules when all the witnesses were present at police
chowki  Hardi  Bazaar.  The  investigating  officer  was  under
obligation  to record the statements of the witnesses  on  same
day which he has done. 

17.   In the present case, in order to establish the charge  of
Section  304-B  of  the Indian Penal Code, the  prosecution  is
required to prove the demand of dowry `soon before the death of
Pushpa  Bai'.  Pushpa  Bai died on 27.4.2004  as  a  result  of
hanging in the house of the present appellant who is husband of
the  deceased within one year of her marriage. Smt.Harihar  Bai
(PW-1) mother of the deceased has specifically stated in para-6
of  her  evidence that just before two days the  deceased  came
back  to  the house of the appellant where they threatened  the
deceased and her mother in connection with demand of dowry  and 
she committed suicide within two days.

18.   In  order to prove demand of dowry soon before her death,
there  must  be  nexus  between demand  of  dowry  and  alleged
commission  of suicide of the deceased. In the matter  of  Prem
Kunwar v. State of Rajasthan1, the Apex Court has held that for
raising a presumption of dowry death under section 113-B of the
Evidence Act there must be proximity and live-link between  the
effect  of  cruelty  based on dowry demand  and  the  concerned
death. Para 12 of the said judgment reads as under:-
          "12.  A  conjoint reading of Section 113-B of  the
          Evidence  Act  and Section 304-B, IPC  shows  that
          there  must  be material to show that soon  before
          her  death the victim was subjected to cruelty  or
          harassment.  Prosecution  has  to  rule  out   the
          possibility of a natural or accidental death so as
          to  bring  it  within the purview  of  the  `death
          occurring otherwise than in normal circumstances'.
          The  expression  `soon before'  is  very  relevant
          where  Section  113-B  of  the  Evidence  Act  and
          Section  304-B,  IPC  are  pressed  into  service.
          Prosecution  is obliged to show that  soon  before
          the occurrence there was cruelty or harassment and
          only  in  that case presumption operates. Evidence
          in that regard has to be led by prosecution. `Soon
          before' is a relative term and it would be  depend
          upon  circumstances of each case  and  no  strait-
          jacket  formula can be laid down as to what  would
          constitute a period of soon before the occurrence.
          It  would  be  hazardous  to  indicate  any  fixed
          period,  and  that brings in the importance  of  a
          proximity test both for the proof of an offence of
          dowry  death  as well as for raising a presumption
          under  Section  113-B  of the  Evidence  Act.  The
          expression  `soon before her death'  used  in  the
          substantive  Section 304-B, IPC and Section  113-B
          of  the  Evidence Act is present with the idea  of
          proximity  test.  No  definite  period  has   been
          indicted and the expression `soon before'  is  not
          defined.  A reference to expression `soon  before'
          used  in  Section  114, Illustration  (a)  of  the
          Evidence  Act  is relevant. It lays  down  that  a
          Court  may  presume  that a  man  who  is  in  the
          possession  of  goods `soon after' the  theft,  is
          either the thief or has received the goods knowing
          them  to be stolen, unless he can account for  his
          possession. The determination of the period  which
          can come within the term `soon before' is left  to
          be  determined by the Courts, depending upon facts
          and  circumstances of each case. Suffice, however,
          to  indicate  that  the expression  `soon  before'
          would normally imply that the interval should  not
          be   much   between  the  concerned   cruelty   or
          harassment  and the death in question. There  must
          be  existence of a proximate and live-link between
          the  effect  of cruelty based on dowry demand  and
          the  concerned  death.  If  alleged  incident   of
          cruelty  is  remote in time and has  become  stale
          enough  not to disturb mental equilibrium  of  the
          woman concerned, it would be of no consequence."

19.   In the present case statements of the witnesses supported
by the prompt lodged F.I.R. (Ex.P/12) is sufficient for drawing
inference   that  the  accused  has  demanded  motorcycle   and
committed cruelty and torture upon the deceased even just after
two  days  before the death of the deceased and as a result  of
such  cruelty and torture, no option except to end of her  life
was  left  to the deceased and deceased has ended her  life  by
committing  suicide. The alleged act of torture and cruelty  is
independently  punishable offence under Section  498-A  of  the
Indian Penal Code.

20.   After  appreciating  the evidence  available  on  record,
learned  Court  below  has acquitted other  co-accused  on  the
ground  that  evidence  adduced  by  the  prosecution  was  not
sufficient to warrant conviction against them and has convicted
and   sentenced   the  present  appellant  as   aforementioned.
Conviction  and sentence of the appellant is based on  credible
and  clinching evidence sustainable under the law. As a  result
of  cruelty, one young woman i.e. wife has ended her life.  The
sentence  awarded by the Court below is neither  excessive  nor
unjust.  I  do  not  find any illegality or  infirmity  in  the
judgment impugned.  

21.    For the foregoing reasons, the appeal has no merit, same
is liable to be dismissed and is accordingly dismissed.
                                                  JUDGE

