Misc. Criminal Case No.877 of 2002 1.  Gulabrao Vs. State of Chhattisgarh

HIGH COURT OF CHATTISGARH AT BILASPUR      






             Misc. Criminal Case No.877 of 2002





                   1.  Gulabrao

                    2.  Mukesh

                    3.  Ramesh
                             ...Petitioners



                           Versus




                   State of Chhattisgarh
                                        ...Respondents





     {Petition under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal
                      Procedure, 1973}




!     Mr.  P.K.C.  Tiwary,  Senior Advocate  with  Mr.  Shashi Bhushan, Advocate for the applicants



^     Mr.   Akhil  Mishra,  Deputy  Govt.  Advocate  with  Mr. Rajendra Tripathi, Panel Lawyer for the State



Honble Mr. T.P. Sharma, J 


       Dated:24/04/2009



:       Judgment
                         ORAL ORDER
                         (24-4-2009)

1.    This  is a petition for quashment of the order  framing
  charge dated 6-9-2001 passed by the Judicial Magistrate First
  Class,  Durg,  in Criminal Case No.559/99  which  has  been
  affirmed  by  the 1st Additional Sessions  Judge,  Durg  in
  Criminal Revision No.410/2001 vide order dated 19-1-2002.

2.    Quashment of the order framing charge is prayed on  the
  ground that without any whisper of evidence against Mukesh &amp;
  Ramesh  the  Court below has framed charge and without  any
  prima facie material against the applicants relating to dowry
  or its demand the Court below has framed charge against them
  for  offence punishable under Sections 3 &amp; 4 of  the  Dowry
  Prohibition Act, 1961 (for short `the Act').

3.    I  have  heard learned counsel for the parties, perused
  the order impugned and records of the Courts below.

4.    Learned  Senior  Advocate appearing on  behalf  of  the
  applicants submits that applicant No.2 Mukesh is bridegroom,
  applicant  No.1 Gulabrao is father of Mukesh and  applicant
  No.3  Ramesh  is brother-in-law of Mukesh.  Applicant  No.1
  Gulabrao  agreed  to  marry his son with  Mukesh  with  the
  daughter  of Rambhau namely, Meenakshi.  According  to  the
  F.I.R.  it  was  decided  that the bride  party  will  give
  Rs.75,000/- to the bridegroom party as the cost of marriage
  on 1-11-1998. The applicants namely Gulabrao, Mukesh &amp; Ramesh   
  along with Chandrakala and two other relatives went to  the
  house of Rambhau where they took their meals and thereafter,
  Rambhau  gave  Rs.75,000/-  to them.   Again  on  3-11-1998
  applicant  No.1 Gulabrao and another person i.e. mother  of
  Mukesh   namely  Chandrakalavati  demanded  Rs.1  lakh   by
  telephone.   Ultimately  the marriage  was  not  solemnized
  between the parties and Rambhau lodged the first information
  report  on 19-1-1999 after lapse of 2 + months against  the
  present applicants and others for offence punishable  under
  Sections 3 &amp; 4 of the Act.  Learned Senior Advocate further
  submits that according to the definition of dowry under the
  Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961, cost of marriage is not dowry,
  therefore,  even  if  cost  of marriage  was  paid  to  the
  applicants it would not come within the purview  of  dowry.
  Even  the  allegation  of demand of Rs.1  lakh  is  against
  applicant No.1 Gulabrao, however, no telephone details have
  been collected by the prosecution to substantiate the charge.
  At the time of framing charge in terms of Sections 227 &amp; 228
  of  the  Cr.P.C. the prosecution is required to show  prima
  facie material for framing of charge although at the time of
  framing charge no meticulous scrutiny is required.  But  in
  this case the prosecution has utterly failed to collect the
  material to show prima facie ground for framing of  charge.
  Learned Senior Counsel placed reliance in the matter of State
  of M.P. v. S.B. Johari and others1 in which it has been held
  by  the  Apex Court that at the time of framing charge  the
  Court is required to evaluate the material and documents on
  record  with  a  view to finding out if the facts  emerging
  therefrom taken at their face value disclose the existence of
  all  the  ingredients  constituting  the  alleged  offence.
  Learned Senior Counsel further placed reliance in the matter
  of Sunil Bajaj v. State of M.P.2 in which it has been held by
  the  Apex Court that the prosecution is required to  adduce
  cogent &amp; reliable evidence and in the case of conversation on
  telephone,  it is required to collect evidence relating  to
  conversation  by  telephone.  Learned Senior  Counsel  also
  placed  reliance in the matter State of Madhya  Pradesh  v.
  Ashwinkumar Vishnudutta Jha and others3 in which it has been
  held by the Madhya Pradesh High Court that "Framing of charge
  -   Court  is  bound  to  consider  documents  referred  by
  prosecution under section 173 of the Cr.P.C. - Material, if
  un-rebutted,  not  sufficient to carry conviction  -  Court
  justified in discharging accused."

5.   On the other hand, learned counsel for the State opposed
  the petition and submitted that the prosecution has collected
  sufficient  material  against the  present  applicants  for
  framing of charge for offence punishable under Sections 3 &amp; 4
  of the Act.  Learned State Counsel further submits that even
  according to the F.I.R. both the parties agreed that  bride
  party  will pay Rs.75,000/- to bridegroom party as cost  of
  marriage and the said cost was paid to the applicants on 1-11-
  1998 in the house of bride party before the witnesses and at
  that time, the applicants namely Gulabrao, Mukesh, Ramesh &amp; 
  others were present before whom the money was paid.  Learned 
State  Counsel also submits that even according to the F.I.R.
  Gulabrao &amp; his wife have demanded Rs.1 lakh by telephone.  At
  the stage of framing charge detail scrutiny is not required
  and  the  prosecution is required to adduce evidence  which
  substantiates the charge so framed.  Learned counsel for the
  State further submits that any money or valuable thing agreed
  for marriage or at the time of marriage would come under the
  definition of dowry, under the Act.

6.    The  word  `dowry' is defined in Section 2 of  the  Act
  which reads as follows: -
          "In  this Act, "dowry" means any property  or
          valuable security given or agreed to be given
          either directly or indirectly-
          (a)  by one party to a marriage to the other party to the
            marriage; or
(b)  by the parent of either party to a marriage or by any
other person, to either party to the marriage or to any other
person,
          at  or  before or any time after the marriage
          in  connection with the marriage of the  said
          parties, but does not include dower  or  mahr
          in  the  case of persons to whom  the  Muslim
          Personal Law (Shariat) applies.

          Explanation   II.-The  expression   "valuable
          security" has the same meaning as in  section
          30 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860)."

7.    According to the definition of `dowry' any property  or
  valuable security given or agreed to be given either directly
  or indirectly by one party to a marriage to the other party
  to  the marriage will come under the ambit of dowry.   Rs.1
  lakh  demanded by the applicants will definitely come under
  the  ambit  of  the definition of dowry.   As  regards  the
  question that Rs.75,000/-, which was agreed to be  paid  on
  behalf of bride party to bridegroom party as the entire cost
  of  marriage, is dowry or not, the F.I.R. shows that it was
  agreed to be paid as cost of marriage and it was required to
  be paid on behalf of bride party to bridegroom party.  This
  shows that this is a consideration for marriage and it will
  come  under the definition of dowry under Section 2 of  the
  Act.  At the stage of framing charge no meticulous scrutiny
  of evidence is required and the Court is required to evaluate
  the material and documents on record with a view to finding
  out if the facts emerging therefrom taken at their face value
  disclose  the existence of all the ingredients constituting
  the  alleged offence or not.  As has been held by the  Apex
  Court in S.B. Johari's case,
          "It  is  settled  law that at  the  stage  of
          framing  the charge, the court has  to  prima
          facie  consider whether there  is  sufficient
          ground  for  proceeding against the  accused.
          The  court is not required to appreciate  the
          evidence  and  arrive at the conclusion  that
          the  materials produced are sufficient or not
          for convicting the accused.  If the court  is
          satisfied that a prima facie case is made out
          for  proceeding further then a charge has  to
          be  framed.  The charge can be quashed if the
          evidence  which  the prosecutor  proposes  to
          adduce  to  prove the guilt of  the  accused,
          even   if   fully  accepted  before   it   is
          challenged  by cross-examination or  rebutted
          by defence evidence, if any, cannot show that
          the accused committed the particular offence.
          In  such  case, there would be no  sufficient
          ground  for  proceeding with the  trial.   In
          Niranjan   Singh  Karam  Singh   Punjabi   v.
          Jitendra  Bhimraj Bijjayya4 after considering
          the   provisions  of  Sections  227  and  228
          Cr.P.C.,  the court posed a question, whether
          at the stage of framing the charge, the trial
          court  should  marshal the materials  on  the
          record  of  the case as he would  do  on  the
          conclusion of the trial.  The Court held that
          at  the  stage of framing the charge  inquiry
          must  necessarily be limited to  deciding  if
          the   facts   emerging  from  such  materials
          constitute the offence with which the accused
          could  be charged.  The court may peruse  the
          records for that limited purpose, but  it  is
          not  required to marshal it with  a  view  to
          decide  the reliability thereof.   The  Court
          referred  to  earlier decisions in  State  of
          Bihar  v.  Ramesh Singh5, Union of  India  v.
          Prafulla   Kumar   Samal6   and   Supdt.    &amp;
          Remembrancer of Legal Affairs, W.B.  v.  Anil
          Kumar Bhunja7 and held thus: (SCC p. 85, para
          7)
                    "From the above discussion it seems
               well  settled that at the Sections  227-
               228  stage  the  court  is  required  to
               evaluate  the material and documents  on
               record with a view to finding out if the
               facts  emerging therefrom taken at their
               face value disclose the existence of all
               the ingredients constituting the alleged
               offence.  The Court may for this limited
               purpose  sift the evidence as it  cannot
               be expected even at the initial stage to
               accept  all that the prosecution  states
               as gospel truth even if it is opposed to
               common  sense or the broad probabilities
               of the case.""
                                          (Emphasis supplied)

8.    At the stage of framing charge the Court is required to
  see the telephone call and by which mode the demand is made. 
  It  is  specifically mentioned in the F.I.R. that applicant
  No.1 has demanded Rs.1 lakh by telephone.  First information
  report clearly shows that the present applicants visited the
  house of Rambhau and after taking their meals Rs.75,000/- was
  given  by Rambhau to the bridegroom party where the present
  applicants &amp; other persons were present.  At this stage  it
  cannot be said that the present applicants at that time were
  not  members of bridegroom party.  This is not the case  in
  which  applicants  Ramesh or Mukesh have objected  or  have
  resisted  that the bridegroom party will not receive  money
  especially Rs.75,000/-.

9.    On  careful examination of the charge sheet it  reveals
that all the applicants were party to the proceeding in which
  Rs.75,000/- was agreed to be paid and was paid, and applicant
  No.1 Gulabrao also demanded Rs.1 lakh in connection with the
  said  marriage.  On the basis of the material collected  on
  behalf of the prosecution the Court below has framed charge
  against the applicants for offence punishable under Sections
  3 &amp; 4 of the Act.  The Court below has neither committed any
  illegality or any irregularly in framing charge against the
  present applicants.  I do not find any scope for interference
  in exercise of inherent jurisdiction in terms of Section 482
  of  the Cr.P.C.  Consequently, the petition is liable to be
  dismissed and it is hereby dismissed.

10.   Interim order dated 29-10-2002 stands vacated.  As  the
  case is pending since 1999, the Court below is directed  to
  expedite the trial and decide the case as early possible.

                                                        JUDGE

