Criminal Appeal No. 420 of 2008 Murlidhar Sahu and others Vs. State of Chhattisgarh

HIGH COURT OF CHATTISGARH AT BILASPUR      




                    Criminal Appeal No. 420 of 2008




                  Murlidhar Sahu and others
                                        ...Petitioners



                   VERSUS

                      State of Chhattisgarh
                                              ...Respondents



!               Shri  Prakash Tiwari counsel for  the
                appellants

^               Shri  Pankaj Shrivastava PL  for  the
                respondent/State


Hon. Mr. Justice Pritinker Diwaker


       Dated:28/10/2009



:       Judgment


  CRIMINAL APPEAL UNDER SECTION 374 OF THE CODE OF            
                 CRIMINAL PROCEDURE.

                    J U D G M E N T
                                 (28 .10.2009)

     In the instant appeal an attack is sought to be
made  by  the  accused/appellants  to  the  impugned
judgment   dated  31.7.2007  passed  by   Additional
Sessions  Judge,  Sarangarh,  District  Raigarh   in
Sessions  Trial  No.  129/2006 holding  them  guilty
under  Sections 306/34 and 498-A of the Indian Penal
Code and sentencing to undergo rigorous imprisonment 
for  six  years with fine of Rs. 5000  and  rigorous
imprisonment for 2 years with fine of Rs.  2000,  on
each count respectively, plus default stipulations.

2.    Narrowed  factual configuration  of  the  case
leading to presentation of this appeal is put  forth
thus.  Deceased  Dhanmati and  appellant  No.1  were
husband  and  wife  and  their  marriage  had   been
solemnized 16-17 years prior to the date of incident
i.e.16.8.2006  and  out of their wedlock  they  were
blessed  with  children  also.  However,  with   the
passage   of  time  the  accused/appellants  started
meting   out  cruel  treatment  against  her   which
culminated  in  end  of her life  on  16.8.2006.  On
16.8.2006    deceased    Dhanmati    -    wife    of
accused/appellant No.1 committed suicide by  pouring
kerosene on her body and setting herself afire. Merg
intimation (Ex. P-3) was given by one Chitrasen (PW-
5)  on the same day. Thereafter, FIR (Ex. P-17)  was
registered  on 31.8.2006 and the dead  body  of  the
deceased  was  sent for post mortem  examination  to
Primary  Health  Centre,  Baramkela  where  Dr.   J.
Choudhary (PW-16) conducted the post mortem and vide   
his report (Ex. P-16) opined that cause of death was
asphyxia due to 100 per cent burn.  After completion
of  investigation charge sheet was filed against the
accused/appellants.

3.    So  as to hold the accused/appellants  guilty,
prosecution  has examined as many as  22  witnesses. 
Statement   of  the  accused/appellants   was   also
recorded  under section 313 of the Code of  Criminal
Procedure  in  which  they have denied  the  charges
levelled  against them and pleaded  their  innocence
and false implication in the case.

4.    After hearing the parties the trial Court  has
convicted  and  sentenced the accused/appellants  as
mentioned above. Hence this appeal. 

5.    Heard counsel for the parties and perused  the
material  available on record including the judgment
impugned. 

6.    Counsel  for the appellants submits  that  the
appellants have been convicted mainly on  the  basis
of  evidence  of  Tularam (PW-1) -  brother  of  the
deceased,  Nanbai  (PW-2), father  of  the  deceased
namely Ganpat Sahu (PW-3), Kaushaliya (PW-6), Durjan   
(PW-7)  -  neighbours of the deceased  and  Sewakram 
Sahu  (PW-8) - the President of the Sahu  Samaj.  He
further   submits   that   Tularam      (PW-1)   has
categorically  stated in his cross examination  that
at  the  time  when  the marriage of  deceased  with
appellant  No.1 Murlidhar was fixed,  no  dowry  was
settled by anyone and whichever articles were  given
at  the  time of  marriage, they were given  as  per
their own wishes. According to him, this witness has
further  stated  that appellant  Murlidhar  used  to
maintain   his  family  by  earning  livelihood   as
labourer. He further referred to paragraph 11 of the
cross  examination of this witness in which  he  has
categorically stated that the deceased used to visit
her   parents  very  frequently  with  her   husband
(appellant  No.1 Murlidhar). He further referred  to
paragraph  17  of  the  cross  examination  of  this
witness  in which he has stated that he was informed
by  his  sister  (the  deceased)  that  her  husband
(appellant  Murlidhar) was asking for the  financial
aid  as he wanted to go somewhere else in search  of
some  better  livelihood. This witness  has  however
stated  that  such financial aid asked  for  by  the
appellant  Murlidhar was as loan on the  promise  of
repayment  of  the same. According to  him,  in  the
entire  statement  of  this  witness,  there  is  no
allegation  of  harassment  by  the  appellants   on
account of demand of dowry. He submits that  so  far
as  the  allegation  of cruelty  is  concerned,  her
brother Tularam (PW-1) has stated that deceased  was 
subjected  to harassment by the appellants  as  they
used  to taunt her saying that she was less educated
and  was not aware of the household work. He submits 
that even if the entire statement of this witness is
taken  as  it  is, neither a case of  cruelty  under
section     498-A  nor  that of abetment  to  commit
suicide  under  section 306 IPC would  be  made  out
against   the  appellants  as  the  ingredients   of
abetment  as enshrined in section 107 of the  Indian
Penal Code are not attracted in this case.

7.    Counsel for the appellants further referred to
the  statement  of Nandai (PW-2)  -  mother  of  the
deceased    who    has    stated    therein     that
accused/appellants  used  to  harass  the   deceased
saying  that she was less educated and thick  headed
and  not  versatile in the household  matters.  This
witness  has also stated about the disputes  on  two
three   occasions  between  the  deceased  and   the
appellants.  This  witness has further  stated  that
accused/appellant  Phulbai  used  to   deprive   the
deceased  of the company of her children by  keeping
them  with  her and ask the deceased to go  to  some
other  State  for  livelihood. She has  stated  that
accused/appellants used to prevent the deceased from 
visiting  her  maternal  home.  According  to   this
witness,   once   accused/appellant  Murlidhar   had
demanded Rs. 25,000 from the deceased and threatened   
her of her life in case of failure to do so. Counsel
for   the   appellants  submits  that   though   the
allegation of demand of Rs. 25,000 has been made  by 
this  witness, no such allegation has been  made  by
Tularam  (PW-1)  and therefore the  same  cannot  be
worth acceptance. Likewise, Ganpat Sahu - father  of
the  deceased (PW-3) has stated in his evidence that
the  accused/appellants used to taunt  his  daughter
saying  that  she was less educated and had  brought
less  dowry. However, in paragraph nine of his cross
examination  this witness has admitted that  in  the
Panchayat meeting the appellant No.1 (Murlidhar) had
agreed  to  keep the deceased with him, and  it  was
decided by the Panchayat that if this witness failed
to  send  his daughter to her matrimonial  house  he
would  have  to pay fine of Rs. 50,000  and  if  the
appellant  No.1  -  Murlidhar failed  to  bring  the
deceased,  he  would be liable to pay  fine  of  Rs.
50,000.  Counsel for the appellants further referred
to   the  statement  of  Kaushaliya  (PW-6)  -   the
neighbour of the deceased and submitted that  though
this  witness has stated that the accused/appellants
and  the  deceased used to have quarrels  with  each
other  and the appellants used to taunt the deceased
saying that she did not know the household work,  in
paragraph  nine  of  her cross examination  she  has
admitted  that she has never visited  the  house  of
appellants  and was not on talking terms with  them.
The  other  witness Durjan (PW-7) - the  husband  of
Kaushaliya (PW-6) has not supported the case of  the
prosecution  and therefore he was declared  hostile.
However,  in  paragraph  7 of  his  deposition  this
witness  has categorically stated that he had  never
seen the appellants beating the deceased and he  was 
not  in  a  position to say as to why  the  deceased
died.   Counsel  for  the  accused/appellants   also
referred to the evidence of Sewakram Sahu (PW-8) who 
in  paragraph  No.1 thereof has stated  that  on  an
enquiry made by him, the deceased has once told  him 
that  the  appellants  used to  harass  her  on  the
pretext  that she did not know the house  hold  work
including  the cooking. When this witness separately
asked  the  accused/appellant  Murlidhar  about  the
deceased,  he  told him that he  did  not  have  any
problem with her. On a further question being put by
this  witness  to  the deceased as  to  whether  she
wanted  to  go to her matrimonial home, she  replied
that she did not have any complaint with her husband
and thus she consented for the same. Counsel for the
appellants  further  referred  to  the  evidence  of
Jogiram  (PW-10), the grand father of  the  deceased
who  has  categorically stated in his evidence  that
deceased  had  never informed her about  having  any
dispute  between her and the appellants. He  further
stated  that the appellant No.1 - Murlidhar and  the
deceased used to visit his house. Thus after  taking
this  Court through the entire evidence led  by  the
prosecution,   counsel  for  the  accused/appellants
submits  that  none  of  the  witnesses  has  stated
anything   against   the   accused/appellants    and
therefore the appellants are entitled for acquittal.

8.     On   the   other   hand   counsel   for   the
respondent/State supports the impugned judgment  and  
submits  that  as  the  accused/appellants  used  to
harass  the  deceased and the  cruelty  was  to  the
extent  that the deceased decided to put an  end  to
her  life  and therefore the Court below was  wholly
justified   in   convicting   and   sentencing   the
accused/appellants and no interference with the same
is called for.

9.    Heard counsel for the parties and perused  the
evidence available on record.

10.   The main point to be decided by this Court  is
whether  the  prosecution has adduced  any  evidence
sufficient   to   necessitate  conviction   of   the
appellants  under  Section 306 of the  Indian  Penal
Code?  To  find  an  answer to  this  question,  the
evidence  led  by  the prosecution  is  obviously  a
determinative  factor.  Evidence of the  prosecution
witnesses  in this case though studded with  serious
contradictions needs to be tested in the  touchstone
of  section 107 of the Indian Penal Code to make out
a case under Section 306. To have a ready reference,
section 107 IPC is quoted below:

     Section 107.  A person abets the doing  of
     a thing, who -
     First. - Instigates any person to do  that
     thing; or
     Secondly - Engages with one or more  other
     person  or  persons in any conspiracy  for
     the  doing  of that thing, if  an  act  or
     illegal omission takes places in pursuance
     of  that conspiracy, and in order  to  the
     doing of that thing; or
     Thirdly.- Intentionally aids, by  any  act
     or  illegal  omission, the doing  of  that
     thing.
      Explanation 1. - A person who, by willful
     misrepresentation,    or    by     willful
     concealment of a material fact which he is
     bound  to disclose, voluntarily causes  or
     procures, or attempts to cause or procure,
     a  thing  to be done, is said to instigate
     the doing of that thing.
     Explanation 2.- Whoever, either  prior  to
     or  at  the time of the commission  of  an
     act,  does anything in order to facilitate
     the  commission of that act,  and  thereby
     facilitates  the  commission  thereof,  is
     said to aid the doing of that act.

A  composite perusal of entire provision  makes  it
explicitly   clear   that  there   should   be   an
instigation  to  do a particular  thing.  The  word
"instigation"  literally means to provoke,  incite,
urge  or bring about by persuasion to do any thing.
The  abetment may be by instigation, conspiracy  or
intentionally an aid to do a thing.  In  this  case
none  of the witnesses has stated that the deceased
was instigated by the accused/appellants to put  an
end  to her life. All the witnesses examined by the
prosecution  including  the  mother,   father   and
brother  of  the  deceased  have  stated  that  the
appellants used to harass the deceased saying  that
she was of week mental faculty and did not know the
household  work.  The  only  thing  which  can   be
gathered  from  the  entire evidence  available  on
record   happens   to  be  that  the   victim   was
hypersensitive to ordinary petulance,  discord  and
differences in domestic life which are quite common
in  the  society  and  all  these  things  are  not
expected  to  have  induced her  to  take  such  an
extreme  step.   Thus unfortunately,  even  if  the
entire  case of the prosecution is taken as it  is,
ingredients of section 107 of the Indian Penal Code
are  amiss in toto for the obvious reason that none
of  the  witnesses examined in this case  including
the  mother, father and brother of the deceased has
made any specific allegation against the appellants
except  that  they used to pass taunt  against  the
deceased  branding  her  to  be  of  weaker  mental
faculty  and  not well-versed with  the  house-hold
matters such as cooking etc., which cannot  at  all
be   termed  as  abetment.  Speaking  legally,  the
abetment  or instigation literally means  to  goad,
urge forward, provoke, incite or encourage to do an
act,   which  if  applied  in  the  instant   case,
conviction for abetment appears to be a distant and
envious neighbour and the same is liable to receive
a forceful jolt.

11.  Now let's turn to conviction under Section 498-
A  IPC. It is not in dispute that the deceased  had
stepped in the house of the accused/appellants as a
bride  17  years  prior to the  date  of  incident.
Prosecution  has not brought forth any material  to
show that the deceased was subjected to cruelty  at
the  hands of the accused/appellants as is provided
under  Section 498-A IPC. The taunts  made  by  the
accused/appellants to the deceased for not  knowing
the household work and that of her being a woman of
weaker  mental faculty as has been deposed  by  the
witnesses in their evidence, cannot be construed to
be cruelty in accordance with Section 498-A IPC.

12.    After  giving  a  patient  hearing  to   the
arguments of the parties and subjecting the overall
evidence  available on record to judicial  surgery,
this  Court reaches an unflinching conclusion  that
the impugned judgment convicting and sentencing the 
appellants  under sections 306/34 and 498-A/34  IPC
suffers  with  manifest illegality and irregularity
and is thus liable to be set aside.

13.   As  a result, the appeal is allowed. Impugned
judgment  dated 31.7.2007 is set aside.  Appellants
are acquitted of the offences under sections 306/34
and  498-A/34 IPC. They be set free if not required
in any other case.

                                             Judge

