Criminal Appeal No.715 of 2007 1.   Shailendra   Kumar Vs. State  of Chhattisgarh

HIGH COURT OF CHATTISGARH AT BILASPUR       




               Criminal Appeal No.715 of 2007




                   1.   Shailendra   Kumar

                    2.   Jawla  Prasad

                    3.   Smt   Shashi  Tiwari
                                         ...Petitioners



                           Versus


                    State  of Chhattisgarh
                                        ...Respondents




          (APPEAL UNDER SECTION 374 OF THE Cr.P.C.)    







!     Shri Surendra Singh, Senior counsel with Shri Tarun
      Dadsena, counsel for the appellants

^     Shri  Akhil Mishra, Deputy Government Advocate  for  the
      State/respondent



Honble Mr. T.P. Sharma, J 




       Dated:11/09/2009



:       Judgment


                          JUDGMENT
             (Delivered on 11th September, 2009)

  1.   Challenge in this appeal is the legality and propriety
     of the judgment of conviction and order of sentence dated
     3.8.2007 passed by the First Additional Sessions  Judge,
     Bilaspur, in Sessions Trial No.21/2007 whereby and whereunder
     learned First Additional Sessions Judge after holding the
     appellants guilty for the offence punishable under Section
     304B of the Indian Penal Code for commission of dowry death
     sentenced them to undergo rigorous imprisonment for 10 years.
  2.    Judgment  of  conviction and  order  of  sentence  is
     challenged  on the ground that without there  being  any
     evidence of torture and cruelty soon before the death of the
     deceased, learned Court below has convicted and sentenced the
     appellants  as  aforementioned  and  thereby   committed
     illegality.

  3.    Case  of  the prosecution, in brief, is that deceased
     Neera Tiwari was married to appellant No.1 Shailendra Kumar
     and appellants No.2 and 3 are father-in-law and mother-in-law
     of the deceased. Marriage between the deceased and appellant
     No.1 was performed on 30.5.2006 in Ratanpur Mahamaya Temple.  
     She committed suicide in the house of the appellants  by
     pouring kerosene upon her and setting herself on fire on
     9.8.2006. Merg intimation was recorded vide Ex.P/9 at the
     instance of appellant No.2 on 10.8.2006. Father  of  the
     deceased also lodged written compliant vide Ex.P/2 in which
     it  has been mentioned that the appellants have demanded
     dowry, committed cruelty and torture upon her daughter and as
     a result of such torture and cruelty, she committed suicide.
     After summoning the witnesses vide Exs. P/1 and P/4, inquest
     over  the  dead  body was prepared vide Ex.P/3.  Plastic
     container, burn piece of clothes, broken pieces of bangles
     and match stick were recovered from the spot vide Ex.P/5.
     Death body was sent for autopsy vide Ex.P/7. Autopsy was
     conducted by Dr.Vijay Kumar Verma vide Ex.P/6. Smell  of
     kerosene was coming from dead body, burn injuries were found.
     Brain membrane was congested, carbon particles were present
     incise brochia and lungs. Burn was ante-mortem and cause of
     death was shocked as a result of excessive burn and toximiya.
     Accused were arrested vide Exs.P/8, P/10 and P/11. Spot map
     was prepared by patwari vide Ex.P/13. F.I.R. was lodged vide
     Ex.P/16. Investigating officer has also prepared spot map
     vide Ex.P/17.

  4.   Statements of the witnesses were recorded under Section
     161 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (in short `the
     Code'). After completion of investigation, charge sheet was
     filed  in the Court of Judicial Magistrate, First Class,
     Bilaspur, who in turn committed the case to the Court of
     Sessions Judge, Bilaspur from where First Additional Sessions
     Judge, Bilaspur received the same on transfer for trial.

  5.    In order to prove the guilt of the appellants/accused,
     the  prosecution has examined as many as  15  witnesses.
     Statements of the accused/ appellants were also recorded
     under Section 313 of the Code where they denied the material
     appearing against them. The appellants have taken specific
     defence that prior to marriage, the deceased was working as
     Nurse and when she left her service after marriage, she was
     distressed, therefore she committed suicide.

  6.    I have heard Shri Surendra Singh, Senior counsel with
     Shri Tarun Dadsena, counsel for the appellants and Shri Akhil
     Mishra, Deputy Government Advocate for the State/respondent
     and perused the judgment impugned and record of the Court
     below.

  7.    Learned counsel for the appellants vehemently  argued
     that though deceased Neera Tiwari, wife of appellant No.1 and
     daughter-in-law of appellants No.2 and 3  has  committed
     suicide on 9.8.2006 in the house of the appellants within 2
     months  and 8 days of her marriage, she died in abnormal
     circumstances within 7 years of her marriage, but these facts
     are not sufficient for drawing inference that the appellants
     have committed torture and cruelty in connection with demand
     of  dowry and that too soon before her death. This is  a
     criminal case, the prosecution is required to prove  all
     essential ingredients of the offence beyond all shadow of
     doubt. Only on the ground of death within 3 months under
     abnormal  circumstances  is not sufficient  for  drawing
     inference that the present appellants are the persons who
     have committed "dowry death" of the deceased. This was a case
     of "Samuhik Vivah" in the temple where several persons have
     married in a common platform in the presence of responsible
     persons of the society with a view to avoid any transaction
     of dowry. Learned counsel further argued that evidence of the
     relatives of the deceased reveals that before marriage the
     appellants had demanded motor-cycle for appellant No.1 which
     they  have  provided before the marriage and  they  have
     satisfied the dowry demand. After such satisfaction even
     there was no occasion for further demand because daughter of
     Shiv Kumar Tiwari (PW-3) and sister or daughter of other
     relatives  have  committed suicide and ended  her  life,
     therefore, maternal relatives of the deceased have deposed
     against the appellants. Statements given under sentiments or
     in ground of announce is not a true statement admissible
     under the law. In the absence of such demand, cruelty and
     torture and that too soon before death of the deceased, all
     appellants are entitled for acquittal. Learned counsel also
     argued that evidence of relatives of the deceased reveals
     that husband of the deceased i.e. appellant No.1 used to
     drink liquor and used to beat her excludes the possibility of
     cruelty and torture by appellants No.2 and 3. At the worst,
     it  appears from the evidence that the deceased was  not
     satisfied with the behavior of appellant No.1 who used to
     drink and beat her, therefore, she ended her life and the
     same does not fall within the category of torture and cruelty
     in connection with demand of dowry.

  8.    Learned counsel placed reliance in the matter of Kans
     Raj v. State of Punjab and others1 in which the Apex Court
     has held that in-laws of deceased cannot be roped in only on
     ground of being close relations of husband of deceased. Overt
     acts attributed to them should be proved beyond reasonable
     doubt. Learned counsel further placed reliance in the matter
     of Sharad Birdhichand Sarda v. State of Maharashtra2 in which
     it has been held by the Apex Court that close relatives of
     the victim have a tendency to exaggerate or add facts. The
  Court  should  examine their evidence with great  care  and
     caution. Learned counsel also placed reliance in the matter
     of Salamat Ali and another v. State of Bihar3 in which it has
     been held by the Apex Court that in the absence of clear and
     cogent evidence involving parents of accused in demands of
     dowry, evidence of prosecution witness stating that there
     were frequent quarrels, but only between husband and wife,
     parents are not liable for any conviction.

  9.   On the other hand, learned State counsel supported the
     judgment impugned and argued that this is a case of dowry
     death where the appellants i.e. husband and relatives of the
     husband had committed dowry death of the deceased within 2
     months and 8 days of her marriage. Learned counsel further
     argued that the prosecution has adduced sufficient evidence
     to show that the appellants are the persons who have demanded
     motor-cycle and after receiving         motor-cycle they have
     again  demanded Rs.50,000/- and when the parents of  the
     deceased failed to satisfy such demand, then they committed
     cruelty and torture upon the deceased and as a result of such
     torture and cruelty she committed suicide and took drastic
     action of ending her life. No person including a woman of
     common prudence will end his/her life on the trifle ground
     unless he/she was compelled to take such action. Learned
     counsel  further argued that the Court below has rightly
     convicted the appellants and sentenced as aforementioned and
     taking into consideration the facts and circumstances of the
     case  they  do not deserve any sympathy. Conviction  and
     sentence imposed upon the appellants are just and proper.

  10.  In order to appreciate the contentions of the parties, I
     have  examined  the evidence adduced on  behalf  of  the
     prosecution. In the present case, it is undisputed  that
     deceased Neera Tiwari was married to appellant  No.1  on
     30.5.2006  at  Ratanpur Temple under social  arrangement
     (Samuhik Vivah). Appellants No.2 and 3 were father-in-law and
     mother-in-law of the deceased. She committed suicide by burn
     in  the  house of the appellants on 9.8.2006. Death  was
     abnormal by suicide within 7 years of her marriage, otherwise
     also established by the statements of Dr.Vijay Kumar Verma
     (PW-7), autopsy report (Ex.P/6) that deceased  Neera Tiwari
     died as a result of burn injuries. Burn was ante-mortem and
     cause of death was shocked as a result of excessive burn and
     toximiya.

  11.  Dowry death has been defined under Section 304B of the
     Indian Penal Code which reads as under:-
          "304B. Dowry death.-(1) Where the death of a  woman
          is  caused by any burns or bodily injury or  occurs
          otherwise  than  under normal circumstances  within
          seven  years of her marriage and it is  shown  that
          soon  before her death she was subjected to cruelty
          or harassment by her husband or any relative of her
          husband for, or in connection with, any demand  for
          dowry,  such  death shall be called "dowry  death",
          and  such  husband or relative shall be  deemed  to
          have caused her death.

               Explanation.-For  the  purpose  of  this  sub-
          section, "dowry" shall have the same meaning as  in
          section 2 of the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961 (28 of
          1961).

               (2)  Whoever  commits  dowry  death  shall  be
          punished  with imprisonment for a term which  shall
          not  be  less than seven years but which may extend
          to imprisonment for life.

  12.  Section 113-B of the Evidence Act provides presumption
     as to dowry death which reads as under:-
          "113-B.  When the question is whether  a  person
          has committed the dowry death of a woman and  it
          is  shown that soon before her death such  woman
          had been subjected by such person to cruelty  or
          harassment  for,  or  in  connection  with,  any
          demand  for dowry, the Court shall presume  that
          such person had caused the dowry death.

                 Explanation.-For  the  purpose  of   this
          section,  "dowry  death"  shall  have  the  same
          meaning  as in S.304BG of the Indian Penal  Code
          (45 of 1860).

  13.  Word cruelty has also been explained under Section 498A
     of the Indian Penal Code which reads as under:-
        "498A.  Husband  or relative of husband  of  a  woman
        subjecting   her  to  cruelty.-Whoever,   being   the
        husband  or the relative of the husband of  a  woman,
        subjects  such  woman to cruelty  shall  be  punished
        with  imprisonment  for a term which  may  extend  to
        three years and shall also be liable to fine.
          Explanation.-for  the  purpose  of  this   section,
        "cruelty" means-
        (a)  any wilful conduct which is of such a nature as is
        likely to drive the woman to commit suicide or to cause grave
        injury or danger to life, limb or heath (whether mental or
        physical) of the woman; or

        (b)  harassment of the woman where such harassment is with a
        view to coercing her or any person related to her tom et any
        unlawful demand for any property or valuable security or is
        on account of failure by her or any person related to her to
        meet such demand.

  14.   For  decision of this case, the substantial  question
     involve is whether the deceased was subjected to cruelty and
     torture soon before her death in connection with demand of
     dowry.  The prosecution has adduced evidence of maternal
     relatives of the deceased. Kumaribai Tiwari (PW-1) mother of
     the deceased has deposed that marriage of her daughter was
     performed at Ratanpur Mahamaya Temple. Just two days before 
     the marriage, appellants No.1 and 2 demanded two-wheeler then
     they sold some land and provided motor-cycle. After one month
     of the marriage, deceased Neera Bai telephoned to her nephew
     Rajesh Tiwari and told that there is danger to her life and
     she called them. Rajesh Tiwari informed them and then Rajesh
     Tiwari and her husband Shiv Kumar Tiwari went to the house of
     the appellants where both advised to the appellants that they
     should not beat his daughter. They also requested to permit
     the deceased to go with them, but the appellants refused
     their request. After 15 days, appellant No.1 came to her
     house  with  the deceased where appellant No.1  demanded
     Rs.50,000/- and when she shown her inability, at that time
     appellant No.1 annoyed. After sometime at the time of Raksha
     Bandan festival appellant No.1 came to her village and again
     demanded money and again annoyed. On the morning of Raksha   
     Bandan she came to know that her daughter has burn. She went
     to the hospital. Deceased died as a result of cruelty and
     torture committed by the appellants. Shiv Kumar Tiwari (PW-
     3),  father  of the deceased, has also corroborated  the
     statement of Kumaribai Tiwari (PW-1). Rajesh Tiwari (PW-2)
     cousin brother of the deceased has also corroborated the
     statement of Kumaribai Tiwari (PW-1). Rajesh Tiwari (PW-5)
     S/o Shri Chhedilal Tiwari, cousin brother of the deceased has
     also corroborated the same thing. He has deposed in  his
     evidence that one day deceased telephoned him and told that
     appellant No.1 used to consume liquor and used to assault
     her. She also requested him that they immediately took her,
     otherwise  members of in-laws house will kill her.  They
     advised and come back. He has also deposed that on the demand 
     of the appellants, father of the deceased sold the land and
     gave C.D.Down Hero Honda motor cycle. 

  15.  Admittedly, Kumaribai Tiwari (PW-1), Rajesh Tiwari (PW-
     2), Shiv Kumar Tiwari (PW-3), Dev Kumar Pathak (PW-4) and
     Rajesh Tiwari (PW-5) are mother, father and brothers of the
     deceased. As held by the Apex Court in the matter of Sharad
     (supra), in view of the close relationship and affection any
     person in the position of the witness would naturally have a
     tendency to exaggerate or add facts which may not have been
     stated to them at all. Not that this is done consciously but
     even unconsciously the love and affection for the deceased
     would create a psychological hatred against the supposed
     murderer  and, therefore, the Court has to examine  such
     evidence with very great care and caution.  Para 48 of the
     said judgment reads as under:-
          "48.   Before  discussing  the  evidence  of   the
          witnesses  we  might  mention  a  few  preliminary
          remarks against the background of  which the  oral
          statements  are to be considered. All  persons  to
          whom  the  oral statements are said to  have  been
          made  by Manju when she visited Beed for the  last
          time,  are  close  relatives and  friends  of  the
          deceased.  In  view of the close relationship  and
          affection  any  person  in  the  position  of  the
          witness   would  naturally  have  a  tendency   to
          exaggerate  or add facts which may not  have  been
          stated  to  them  at all. Not that  this  is  done
          consciously  but even unconsciously the  love  and
          affection   for  the  deceased  would   create   a
          psychological hatred against the supposed murderer
          and,  therefore,  the Court has  to  examine  such
          evidence with very great care and caution. Even if
          the witnesses were speaking a part of the truth or
          perhaps the whole of it, they would be guided by a
          spirit  of revenge or nemesis against the  accused
          person and in this process certain facts which may
          not or could not have been stated unconsciously by
          the witnesses in order to see that the offender is
          punished. This is human psychology and no one  can
          help it.

  16.   The  aforesaid witnesses are close relatives  of  the
     deceased, but their evidence cannot be discarded only on the
     ground that they are close relatives. Only it requires minute
     scrutiny and if the separation of exaggeration and falsehood
     from truth would possible, then the Court is required to
     separate the truth from falsehood.

  17.   In  the matter of Salamat (supra), the Apex Court has
     held that in the absence of clear and cogent evidence against
     the appellants, conviction of the appellants not proper. Para
     3 of the said judgment reads as under:-
          "3.  By  the conviction of Salim Ahmed, it  stands
          confirmed  that the deceased met a suicidal  death
          and  that  Salim  Ahmed was  responsible  for  it,
          whether by himself or conjointly with others.  The
          only  point  to  be examined is whether  there  is
          clear  and cogent evidence to involve the  parents
          in   the  demands  of  dowry  made  or  were  they
          otherwise  responsible for inflicting any  cruelty
          on  the  deceased. We have been taken through  the
          relevant  portions  of the  evidence  led  by  the
          prosecution. Uniformly every witness has said that
          the   family   members  of   the   husband,   i.e.
          Sasuralwale  had been making demands of  dowry  in
          the form of television and scooter. The nature  of
          the  demand  is  some indication.  The  demand  of
          scooter predominantly must have been raised by the
          husband. It cannot be expected that the father-in-
          law  would  be demanding a scooter for himself  or
          that  the  mother-in-law needed it  for  her  use.
          Different   considerations,  however,  could,   in
          certain  events,  apply to the television  demand,
          but  here again, it predominants that the  husband
          wanted it more than his parents. Evidence of P.W.1
          is  clear  on this point that there were  frequent
          quarrels,  but only between husband and  wife.  In
          other  words, the parents had no part to  play  in
          the  quarrels  between  the  spouses.  P.W.7,  the
          father  of  the  deceased also had said  that  his
          daughter  had  told him that the demand  had  been
          made by the husband, but he had then not taken  it
          seriously.  Thus,  the  allegations  against   the
          appellants are general in nature attributed to the
          husband's   family.  They  have  been   identified
          because they were members of his family. It is not
          clear on the record as besides them who else  were
          members of the family. It thus appears to us  that
          in  the  absence of clear and pointed evidence  it
          would be unsafe to maintain the conviction of  the
          parents,  on vague allegations that the demand  of
          dowry was made by the husband's family members. In
          this  view  of  the matter, we would record  their
          acquittal."

  18.  While dealing with the question of tendency of relatives
     of the deceased in the matter of Kans (supra), the Apex Court
     has held that in-laws of deceased cannot be roped in only on
     ground of being close relations of husband of deceased. Over
     acts attributed to them should be proved beyond reasonable
     doubt. Para 5 of the said judgment reads as under:-
          "5......In the light of the evidence in  the  case
          we find substance in the submission of the learned
          counsel for the defence that respondents  3  to  5
          were roped in the case only on the ground of being
          close relations of respondent No.2, the husband of
          the  deceased. For the fault of the  husband,  the
          in-laws  or  the  other relations cannot,  in  all
          cases,  be  held to be involved in the  demand  of
          dowry.  In  cases where such accusation are  made,
          the  over  acts attributed to persons  other  than
          husband   are   required  to  be   proved   beyond
          reasonable   doubt.   By  mere   conjectures   and
          implications such relations cannot be held  guilty
          for  the  offence  relating  to  dowry  deaths.  A
          tendency has, however, developed for roping in all
          relations of the in-laws of the deceased wives  in
          the   maters  of  dowry  deaths  which,   if   not
          discouraged, is likely to affect the case  of  the
          prosecution  even  against the real  culprits.  In
          their   over  enthusiasm  and  anxiety   to   seek
          conviction for maximum people, the parents of  the
          deceased have been found to be making efforts  for
          involving other relations which ultimately  weaken
          the  case of the prosecution even against the real
          accused as appears to have happened in the instant
          case."

  19.    In  the light of decisions of the Apex Court in  the
     matters of Sharad &amp; Kans (supra), minute scrutiny of the
     evidence of close relatives is required. Kumaaribai Tiwari
     (PW-1) has specifically deposed that her nephew Rajesh Tiwari
     and her husband went to the house of the appellants after
     receiving telephone call from her daughter. Appellant No.1
     came  two times to her village and demanded Rs.50,000/-.
     Appellant No.1 also used to beat her daughter after consuming
     liquor. In her detail cross-examination, she has stated that
     marriage of her daughter has performed in Adarsh Vivah and
     she knows that demand and receipt of dowry is a crime. She
     has denied the suggestion that the appellants No.1 and 2 have
     not demanded motor-cycle. She has also denied the suggestion
     that the deceased has not telephoned to Rajesh Tiwari and
     Rajesh  Tiwari and her husband have not advised  to  the
     appellants. She has also denied that after marriage at the
     instance of appellant No.1, deceased has left her service of
     nurse and she was perturbed and as a result of such mental
     problem, she committed suicide. Shiv Kumar Tiwari (PW-3)
     father  of  the deceased, has specifically deposed  that
     appellants  No. 1 and 2 came to his house  and  demanded
     Rs.50,000/- and again appellant No.2 demanded Rs.50,000/-. He
     has lodged written report (Ex.P/2) on 10.8.2006 in which it
     has been specifically mentioned that the appellants have
     demanded motor-cycle and has given C.D.Dawn motor cycle. 
     After marriage, appellant No.1 also demanded Rs.50,000/-. He
     has  admitted  in para-9  of  his                 cross-
     examination that he was in police service and he knows that
     demand  and  giving dowry is a crime. He has denied  the
     suggestion that who are unable to give dowry, performed the
     marriage in Adasrh Vivah system. He has also denied  the
     suggestion that appellants No.1 and 2 have not come to his
     house and demanded dowry. He has admitted in para-15 of his
     cross-examination that his daughter used to compel  that
     appellant No.1 used to consume liquor and used to beat her.
     Rajesh  Tiwari  (PW-5)  who has received  telephone  has
     specifically deposed that father of the deceased has given
     motor-cycle before the marriage of her daughter. He has given
     number of telephone. He has admitted in para-6 of his cross-
     examination  that  when they went to the  house  of  the
     appellants, his sister told him that appellant No.1 used to
     consume liquor and used to quarrel with her. She also told
     him that they immediately took her, otherwise appellant No.1
     will kill her.

  20.   There  are some contradictions and omissions  in  the
     statements of the witnesses with their previous statements
     recorded by the police (Exs.D/1 to D/3). Shiv Kumar Tiwari
     (PW-3), father of the deceased, has deposed that after 15
     days of marriage of his daughter, appellants No.1 and 2 came
     to his village and demanded Rs.50,000/-, but this evidence
     does not find place in his previous statement (Ex.P/2). This
     part has not been supported by other witnesses, but other
     witnesses have deposed that after receiving telephone call,
     he went to the house of the appellants where he met with the
     appellants. Statement of Shiv Kumar Tiwari (PW-2) reveals
     that demand of Rs.50,000/- was between appellants No.1 and 2,
     but he has exaggerated and tried to involve appellant No.3
     who is wife of appellant No.2.

  21.  Incident took place between 2 months and 8 days of the
     marriage of deceased Neera Tiwari within a short span of her
     marriage and first demand of motor-cycle by appellants No.1
     and 2 even before the marriage shows tendency of demand of
     dowry by appellants No.1 and 2 which they continued even
     after marriage till the death of the deceased. The deceased
     has committed suicide in the house of the appellants on the
     day of Raksha Bandhan festival. Evidence of           day-to-
     day conversation, demand or cruelty made by the husband and
     his relatives are not normally possible.

  22.  While dealing with the question of death soon before her
     death, the Apex Court in the matter of Baldev Singh v. State
     of Punjab4 has held that implies not much interval between
     concerned cruelty or harassment and death in question, there
     must be proximate and live link between the two. Para 13 of
     the said judgment reads as under:-
          "13.  A  conjoint reading of Section 113-B of  the
          Evidence  Act  and Section 304-B  IPC  shows  that
          there  must  be material to show that soon  before
          her  death the victim was subjected to cruelty  or
          harassment.  The prosecution has to rule  out  the
          possibility of a natural or accidental death so as
          to bring it within the purview of `death occurring
          otherwise  than  in  normal  circumstances'.   The
          expression  `soon before' is very  relevant  where
          Section 113-B of the Evidence Act and Section 304-
          B IPC are pressed into service. The prosecution is
          obliged  to  show that soon before the  occurrence
          there  was cruelty or harassment and only in  that
          case presumption operates. Evidence in that regard
          has to be led by the prosecution. `Soon before' is
          a  relative  term  and it would  depend  upon  the
          circumstances  of  each case and  no  straitjacket
          formula  can  be  laid  down  as  to  what   would
          constitute a period of soon before the occurrence.
          It  would  be  hazardous  to  indicate  any  fixed
          period,  and  that brings in the importance  of  a
          proximity test both for the proof of an offence of
          dowry  death  as well as for raising a presumption
          under  Section  113-B  of the  Evidence  Act.  The
          expression  `soon before her death'  used  in  the
          substantive Section 304-B IPC and Section 113-B of
          the  Evidence  Act  is present with  the  idea  of
          proximity  test.  No  definite  period  has   been
          indicated and the expression `soon before' is  not
          defined.  A  reference  to  the  expression  `soon
          before'  used in Section 114 Illustration  (a)  of
          the Evidence Act is relevant. It lays down that  a
          court  may  presume  that a  man  who  is  in  the
          possession  of  goods `soon  after  the  theft  is
          either the thief or has received the goods knowing
          them  to be stolen, unless he can account for  his
          possession'. The determination of the period which
          can come within the term `soon before' is left  to
          be  determined by the courts, depending upon facts
          and  circumstances of each case. Suffice, however,
          to  indicate  that  the expression  `soon  before'
          would normally imply that the interval should  not
          be   much   between  the  concerned   cruelty   or
          harassment  and the death in question. There  must
          be  existence of a proximate and live link between
          the  effect  of cruelty based on dowry demand  and
          the  concerned  death.  If  alleged  incident   of
          cruelty  is  remote in time and has  become  stale
          enough  not to disturb mental equilibrium  of  the
          woman concerned, it would be of no consequence."

  23.   In  the  present  case, dowry was demanded  prior  to
     marriage by appellants No. 1 and 2 shows their greediness.
     Shiv Kumar Tiwari     (PW-3) has specifically deposed that
     all the appellants have demanded dowry of Rs.50,000/- after
     marriage. Shiv Kumar Tiwari was responsible person for giving
     dowry or to satisfy the demand, but in Hindu Family, normally
     discussion take place with male members. In discussion or
     demand of dowry by mother-in-law of the deceased to father of
     the deceased is not common. The evidence of Shiv Kumar Tiwari
     relating  to  demand of dowry by appellant No.3  is  not
     supported by other independent sources, but statement reveals
     that appellants No. 1 and 2 have firstly demanded motor-cycle
     and subsequently they demanded Rs.50,000/- and within short
     span of time the deceased committed suicide and that too on
     the festival of Raksha Bandan in the house of the appellants.

  24.  In these circumstances, the only inference can be drawn
     that the appellants No.1 and 2 have committed cruelty and
     torture upon the deceased in connection with demand of dowry
     and as a result of such demand, no option except to end her
     life was left and she has taken drastic action for end of her
     life. The evidence adduced on behalf of the prosecution is
     sufficient for drawing inference of dowry death  against
     appellant No.1 Shailendra Kumar @ Shailu Tiwari (husband of
     the deceased) and appellant No.2 Jawla Prasad (father-in-law
     of  the deceased), but evidence adduced on behalf of the
     prosecution  is not sufficient for drawing inference  of
     commission of dowry death against appellant No.3 Smt.Shashi
     Tiwari. The suspicion, however, great cannot take place of
     evidence and only on the ground of suspicion, the conviction
     of appellant No.3 is not sustainable.

  25.  After appreciating the evidence available on record, the
     Court below have convicted and sentenced the appellants as
     aforementioned. Conviction of appellants No.1 and 2  are
     sustainable under the law. As relates to the conviction of
     appellant No.3, her conviction is not based on reliable and
     clinching evidence. Her conviction is not sustainable under
     the law.

  26.   As  regards the question of appellants No.1 and 2  is
     concerned, First Additional Sessions Judge has sentenced the
     appellants No.1 and 2 rigorous imprisonment for 10 years.
     Taking into consideration the death of bride within 2 months
     and 8 days of her marriage, sentence awarded to appellants
     No.1 and 2 is just and proper. I do not find any scope for
     interference in the judgment impugned.
  27.  For the foregoing reasons, the appeal is partly allowed.
     Conviction and sentence of appellant No.1 namely, Shailendra
     Kumar @ Shailu Tiwari (husband of the deceased) and appellant
     No.2 namely, Jawla Prasad (father-in-law of the deceased) are
     hereby  maintained, however, conviction and sentence  of
     appellant No.3 namely, Smt.Shashi Tiwari is hereby set aside.
     She is acquitted of the charge of Section 304B of the Indian
     Penal  Code.  She is in custody. She be set  at  liberty
     forthwith, if not required in any other case.
                                                    J U D G E

