First Appeal M No 39 of 2008 Smt Shilpi Jaiswal Vs. Alok Jaiswal

HIGH COURT OF CHATTISGARH AT BILASPUR          

 First Appeal M No 39 of 2008

 Smt Shilpi Jaiswal
                                               ...Petitioners

                    Versus

 Alok Jaiswal
                                               ...Respondents

! Shri D N Prajapati counsel for the appellant

^ Shri Sunil Otwani counsel for the respondent

 CORAM: Honble Shri Dhirendra Mishra &amp; Honble Shri Rangnath Chandrakar  J   

 Dated: 30/03/2010

: Judgement 

                         JUDGMENT

               Delivered on 30th  March 2010

     Appeal under Section 19 1 of the Family Court Act 1984

Per  Rangnath Chandrakar, J. 



      By this appeal, the appellant challenges the legality

and  propriety  of the judgment and decree dated  23-1-2008

passed  by  the Judge, Family Court, Korba   in civil  suit

No.  61-A/2007,  whereby  the learned  Judge  Family  Court

refusing  the  application under Section 13  of  the  Hindu

Marriage  Act,  1955  (for  short,  "the  Act,  1955")  for

dissolution  of  marriage, granted  a  decree  of  judicial

separation  under Section 10 of the Act in  favour  of  the

respondent/husband.    The decree is impugned on the ground 

that  without  any  proof of cruelty the  court  below  has

passed the decree and thereby committed illegality.



2)   Admittedly, the parties are legally wedded spouses and

their  marriage was solemnized at Korba, according to Hindu

rites  and  customs  on 3-7-2003 and  after  marriage  they

resided   together   for   some   time   peacefully.    The

respondent/husband filed an application under Section 13 of

the  Act, 1955 against his wife for a decree of dissolution

of  marriage  on  the  ground of  adultery,  desertion  and

cruelty.   As  per pleadings of the respondent/husband,  it

was  alleged  that  after some time of  the  marriage,  the

appellant/wife  used to receive telephone  calls  from  her

paramours namely Anirudh Sarkar and Kishore Upadhyay  which   

were  also  heard  by  the  respondent/husband  through   a

parallel   telephone  connection.   The  respondent/husband

objected  the relationship of the appellant/wife  on  which

she  assured  him that she would not continue the  relation

with  them  but after some time she again started  to  talk

with  them by telephone.  The appellant/wife used to  visit

her parental house frequently and was   not   ready to live

with    the    respondent/husband.   On    26-9-2005    the

appellant/wife  left  for  her  parental  house  which   is

situated  at Ambikapur and was not willing to come  to  her

matrimonial  house at Korba.    In the month  of  February,

2006 the respondent/husband was informed telephonically  by

sister-in-law of the appellant/wife that appellant/wife was

enjoying  with her paramours at Ambikapur.   On  this,  the

respondent/husband brought the appellant/wife to Korba on 8-

2-2006  after  persuasion but the appellant/wife  continued

her  relations with her paramours and on objection  of  the

respondent/husband, she threatened to implicate him and the

entire  family  in  a false case of demand  of  dowry.  She

further threatened to kill him and his family members  with

the  help  of her friends and brother namely Indrajit,  who

has already undergone in a murder case.



3)    It is further alleged that on 27-8-2006 at about 5.30

a.m.,   she left the matrimonial house on the pretext  that

she was going to the house of her neighbour Shailendra Lala

to  perform  some Pooja  on the occasion of  "Teeja  Vrat".

She  did not return till 8.30 a.m. and then he searched the

house  of Shailendra Lala for her whereabouts but  she  was

not  found  there.  Thereafter, in search of the bed  room,

one letter written by the appellant/wife was found in which

she    made    some   vague   allegations    against    the

respondent/husband  and in-laws. In that  letter  she  also

mentioned  that  she  was  not willing  to  live  with  the

respondent/husband and therefore, she left the  matrimonial

house  voluntarily. It was also found that  she  had  taken

away  one suit case, one ladies purse, costly sarees, 16-17

Tolas  of  gold jeweleries and cash amount with her.  After

recovery  of the letter, the incident was informed  to  the

father  of the appellant/wife and her relatives.   She  was

searched in four corners by the respondent/husband and  his

father  along  with Doctor Pramod Thawait and P.S.  Kokhar.

Thereafter, a report regarding missing person was lodged in

Police Station, Korba and several efforts were made to find

out  the  whereabouts of appellant/wife  by  way  of  paper

publication  and telecasting news in radio and televisions.

On  17-12-2006 the respondent/husband was informed  by  one  

woman  namely  Nisha from Jagdalpur that she had  seen  the 

appellant/wife with one boy who had come to her STD/PCO. On  

the  same date, the respondent/husband received a telephone

call   from  the  appellant/wife  who  threatened  him   to

implicate his entire family in a false case of torture  for

demand  of  dowry  as  he  had caused  her  disturbance  by

publishing the news in newspapers about her missing, though

she had left her matrimonial house voluntarily.



4)      It   is   also  alleged  that  on  19-12-2006   the

appellant/wife   lodged   a  false   report   against   the

respondent/husband and his family members in Police Station 

at  Ambikapur  under Section 498-A of  the  IPC  and  after

leaving the matrimonial house, the appellant/wife lived  at

Bhilai  from November, 2006 to July, 2007 in the  house  of

Abhishek @ Neeraj Jaiswal showing herself to be Ku.  Shilpi

Gupta  where she also continued her relationship  with  her

paramours  and  other persons to which  Abhishek  @  Neeraj 

Jaiswal  objected and therefore, she was vacated  from  his

premises.   Thus,  the conduct of the appellant/wife  comes

within  the purview of adultery and cruelty which made  the

life  of the respondent/husband miserable to live with her.

Therefore,  the  respondent/husband sought  for  decree  of

divorce by way of dissolution of marriage.



5)    On  the  other  hand, the appellant/wife  denied  the

allegations made in the petition and pleaded that she never

tortured  the respondent/husband or committed cruelty  upon

him.   The application under Section 13 of the Act has been

filed  on  false  and baseless grounds.  She  knew  Anirudh

Sarkar  as  he  was  senior  to her  in  Govt.  Polytechnic

College,  Ambikapur, but she did not know Kishore Upadhyay. 

She was  being tortured and harassed by the husband and in-

laws  for want of more dowry right  from the beginning   of

her  marital life and the application for divorce was filed

as  their demand was not fulfilled by her. On 27-8-2006 she

was     badly  beaten  and    thrown    out  for   bringing

Rs.2,00,000/-  from her parents, therefore,  she  left  her

matrimonial house. She did not leave the matrimonial  house

voluntarily.  She was also manhandled in  a  hotel  by  her

husband  during their visit to "Maihar"   and once she  was

left alone near Koni (Bilaspur) in the night by her husband

while coming from Korba to Bilaspur.   She did not take any

money, clothes and jewelleries with her on 27-8-2006.   Her

husband  is  a  very  cruel person and being  harassed  and

tortured  by the husband and in-laws she wrote the  alleged

letter,  the facts of which were produced in wrong  way  by

suppressing its reality.  The respondent/husband is a  very

greedy and smart person who seeks divorce with a view to re-

marry  for  want of dowry.  The appellant/wife specifically

pleaded  in  para 36 of her written statement that  she  is

ready to give divorce to the respondent/husband if he would

return all her ornaments, 18 tolas of gold jewelleries  and

R.3,00,000/- cash given at the time of marriage, Rs.51,000/-

given  on  "Teeka"  and  Rs.20,00,000/-  cash  in  hand  as

permanent alimony. 



6)    On the basis of averments made by the parties, issues

were  framed and after affording an opportunity of  hearing

to  the parties, learned Judge, Family Court has granted  a

decree of judicial separation instead of granting decree of

divorce.



7)      The  respondent examined himself (PW/1), his father

Sitaram  Jaiswal  (PW/2)  and his neighbour  Doctor  Pramod

Thawai   (PW/3).  In  support  of  his  case,  he  produced

documents  Ex.P/1  to  Ex.P/7.    On the  other  hand,  the

appellant/wife examined herself (DW/1), her  father  Laxman

Prasad  Gupta (DW/2) and Jayaprakash Jaiswal  (DW/3).   She  

produced Ex. D/1 and Ex.D/2 in support of her case.



8)   We have heard Shri D.N. Prajapati, learned counsel for

the  appellant and Shri Sunil Otwani, learned  counsel  for

the respondent, perused the judgment &amp; decree and record of

the Family Court.



9)   Learned counsel appearing for the appellant vehemently

argues that the respondent has not adduced any evidence  to

prove  the cruelty committed by the appellant.  The  Family

Court has overlooked the evidence of the appellant that she

was   subjected  to  ill-treatment  and  cruelty   by   the

respondent/husband for want of dowry, therefore, decree  of

judicial  separation  ought not to  have  been  granted  in

favour  of  the  respondent/husband.  It is further  argued

that  the Family Court has not appreciated the evidence  on

record in its proper perspective and in absence of proof of

cruelty,   the  decree  of  judicial  separation   is   not

sustainable under the law, therefore, the impugned judgment

and  decree  be  set  aside.     Learned  counsel  for  the

appellant  placed  his  reliance in  the  matter  of  Gopal

Chandra Mallick Vs. Manjari Mallik1, R. Balasubramanian vs.

Smt.  Vijayalakshmi  Balasubramanian2 and  Ravi  Kumar  vs. 

Julmi Devi3.



10)   On the other hand, learned counsel appearing for  the

respondent vehemently opposed the appeal and submitted that 

the respondent has proved the factum of cruelty by adducing

oral and documentary evidence and after considering all the

aspects,  the court below has rightly granted a  decree  of

judicial  separation  in  favour  of  the  respondent.   In

support  of  his  arguments,  learned  counsel  placed  his

reliance  in  the  matter  of  Smt.  Mayadevi  vs.  Jagdish

Prasad4. 



11)   In  order  to  appreciate the arguments  advanced  on

behalf  of  the  parties,  we have  examined  the  evidence

adduced  by the parties.  It may be true that there  is  no

definition of cruelty under the Act, 1955.  Actually such a

definition  is  not possible.  In matrimonial relationship,

cruelty would obviously mean absence of mutual respect  and

understanding  between  the  spouses  which  embitters  the

relationship  and  often  leads  to  various  outbursts  of

behaviour  which  can  be termed  as  cruelty.   Some  time

cruelty in a matrimonial relationship may take the form  of

violence,  some  time  it may take a  different  form.   At

times,  it may be just an attitude or an approach.  Silence

in  some  situations  may  amount to  cruelty.   Therefore,

cruelty in matrimonial behaviour defies any definition  and

its category can never be closed.  Whether husband is cruel

to  his wife or the wife is cruel to her husband has to  be

ascertained  and judged by baking into account  the  entire

facts  and circumstances of the given case and not  by  any

pre-determined rigid formula.  Cruelty in matrimonial cases

can  be  of  infinite variety - it may be  subtle  or  even

brutal and may be by gestures and words. 



12)   If we examine the evidence adduced by the parties  in

the  light  of  above principles of law, we find  that  the

respondent/husband  sought  a  decree  of  divorce  on  the

grounds   of  desertion  and  cruelty  alleging  that   the

appellant/wife was having relationship with  her  paramours

after  her marriage and despite his persuasion she did  not

change  her conduct.  From perusal of the finding given  by

the  Family  Court in para 46 of its judgment,  it  appears

that  the allegation of adultery against the appellant/wife

has  not  been  proved by the respondent in  the  light  of

evidence.      It   was   the   bounden   duty    of    the

respondent/husband to prove the allegation of  adultery  by

cogent/direct  evidence,   not by  mere  statement  in  the

application  or  in  the court.  There is  no  evidence  on

record   to  show  that  the  appellant/wife  was   leading

adulterous   life,   except   the   deposition    of    the

respondent/husband.    It  is  also   apparent   that   the

respondent/husband  has not  examined   Abhishek  @  Neeraj  

Jaiswal, resident of  Bhilai who might have been one of the

witnesses  of   adulterous life  led by the  appellant   as

alleged in para 26  of the application under Section 13  of

the  Act  that  the appellant lived in his house   on  rent

from  November, 2006 to July, 2007 by concealing  her  real

identification.



13)   So  far  as  the ground of cruelty is concerned,  the

respondent/husband has clearly proved the  same  by  cogent

evidence as discussed by learned Family Court in detail  in

its  judgment  from  para 18 to  45.   On  perusal  of  the

evidence  led by the respondent/husband, it is  clear  that

the     appellant/wife    deliberately     deserted     the

respondent/husband on 27-8-2006 without any rhyme or reason  

leaving   a   letter   Ex.P/2  in  her   bed   room.    The

respondent/husband with tooth and nail made all efforts  to

find out the whereabouts of the appellant/wife and to bring

her back but all efforts went in vain.  The efforts made by

the   respondent/husband  are  well  corroborated  by   the

documents Ex. P/1, P/3, P/4 &amp; P/5.  Ex.P/1 is the report of

missing  person lodged by the respondent in Police Station,

Kotwali,  Korba,  P/3 is the acknowledgement  of  `Gumsudha 

Talash Kendra', Delhi and P/4 &amp; P/5 are newspaper clippings

about  missing  of  the  appellant/wife.   These  documents

remained   unrebutted   and   the   deposition    of    the

respondent/husband to this effect has been corroborated  by

his  father Sitaram Jaiswal (PW/2) and Doctor Pramod Tawait

(PW/3).   The appellant/wife failed to rebut the  aforesaid

evidence  or produce any evidence in contrary.  Apart  from

this, the appellant/wife admitted the letter Ex.P/2 in para

5  of  her examination-in-chief.  She also admitted in para

19  of  her cross examination that she resided in the house

of  Abhishek @ Neeraj Jaiswal at Bhilai on rent from  26-9-

2006 to 5-7-2007.



14)  So far as the defence taken by the appellant/wife that

she  left  her  matrimonial house  being  tortured  by  her

husband  and in-laws for want of dowry, is concerned,    it

is  clear  from  the  evidence that she lodged  the  report

(Ex.D/1)  on 19-12-2006 against the respondent/husband  and

in  laws  which was only after about 4 months from  leaving

her  matrimonial house on 27-8-2006.  Prior  to  that,  she

never  made  any  complaint before any authority  regarding

cruelty  as alleged by her in the said report dated  19-12-

2006.   It is also apparent that she has made no allegation

in  her  letter  Ex.  P/2, though admitted,  regarding  any

cruelty  committed by the respondent/husband or by in-laws.

On the contrary, Ex.P/2 only shows her deliberate desertion

of the respondent/husband.  It is also pertinent to mention

here  that she was well aware about the news of her missing

published  by  her  husband/respondent  in  newspapers  but

neither she nor her parents informed the respondent/husband

about  the whereabouts of the appellant/wife. This  act  of

the   appellant/wife  also  shows  her  arbitrariness   and

deliberate desertion of the respondent/husband without  any

reasonable  cause which amounts to cruelty.    On  a  close

scrutiny of the evidence, it appears that the appellant and

her  parents  were  more  interested  in  lodging  the  FIR

(Ex.D/1)  against the respondent/husband  and  his  parents

rather than reconciliation of the matter.



  15) It is further pointed out by learned Family Court  in

para 45 of its judgment that several attempts were made  at

various stages of the proceedings for reconciliation of the

dispute  between the parties under Section 23  (2)  of  the

Act, 1955 but the appellant/wife was stuck to her statement

that  she  did  not want to give divorce to the  respondent

till the allegations made against her were proved.  On  the

contrary, in her written statement in para  36 as  well  as

in para 11 of her examination-in-chief, she  stated to give

divorce to the respondent/husband on the condition that  if

he  would  return  all  her ornaments,  18  tolas  of  gold

jewelleries  and R.3,00,000/- cash given  at  the  time  of

marriage, Rs.51,000/- given on "Teeka"  and  Rs.20,00,000/-

cash  in  hand as permanent alimony.  This conduct  of  the

appellant/wife  further  goes to  show  that  she  was  not

willing    to   lead   happy   married   life   with    the

respondent/husband. 



16)   Thus,  on re-appraisal of the evidence and  on  going

through the pleadings of the parties, it is clear that  the

respondent/husband has successfully proved  the  factum  of

cruelty  committed  on  him by the appellant/wife  and  the

appellant/wife has failed to prove any cruelty committed by

the  respondent/husband on her. In view of the  above,  the

case laws relied upon by the counsel for the appellant  are

not  applicable  to  the  facts and  circumstances  of  the

present  case.    Apart from this,  the  family  court  has

passed a decree of  judicial separation  instead of passing

a   decree  of  dissolution  of  marriage,  following   the

provision  under  Section 13-A of the Act  which  reads  as

under:

          "[13-A.   Alternate  relief   in
          divorce   proceedings.-In    any
          proceeding under this Act, on  a
          petition   for  dissolution   of
          marriage by a decree of divorce,
          except in so far as the petition
          is   founded   on  the   grounds
          mentioned in clauses (ii),  (vi)
          and (vii) of sub-section (1)  of
          Section 13, the court may, if it
          considers  it  just  so  to   do
          having     regard     to     the
          circumstances of the case,  pass
          instead  a  decree for  judicial
          separation."


   17)     Moreover, if the appellant/wife is aggrieved  by

the  impugned judgment and decree of learned Family  Court,

the  remedy is open to her under Section 10 (2) of the  Act

which reads as under:


          "Where    a    decree   for   judicial
          separation has been passed,  it  shall
          no   longer  be  obligatory  for   the
          petitioner   to   cohabit   with   the
          respondent, but the court may, on  the
          application  by  petition  of   either
          party  and on being satisfied  of  the
          truth  of the statements made in  such
          petition,  rescind the  decree  if  it
          considers it just and reasonable to do
          so".



18)  For the foregoing reasons, we are of the opinion  that

the  learned  Judge,  Family Court has  not  committed  any

illegality  or  irregularity  in  granting  the  decree  of

judicial  separation  in favour of the  respondent/husband.

Consequently, the appeal being devoid of merits   is liable

to  be  dismissed  and is accordingly  dismissed.   Parties

shall bear their own costs.



                                               JUDGE
