First Appeal M No 2 of 2006 Smt S Sangeeta Vs. K R Hari

HIGH COURT OF CHATTISGARH AT BILASPUR          

 First Appeal M No 2 of 2006

 Smt S Sangeeta  

                                                ...Petitioners

                          Versus
 K R Hari
                                                ...Respondents

! Smt Indira Tripathi counsel for the appellant

^ Shri Prafull Bharat counsel for the respondent

 CORAM: Honble Shri Dhirendra Mishra &amp; Honble Shri R N Chandrakar J   

 Dated: 18/03/2010

: Judgement 
                         JUDGMENT

          Passed on this  18th  day of March 2010

  First Appeal under Section 19 1 of the Family Court Act 1984


Per Rangnath Chandrakar, J. 

      By  this  appeal,  the appellant has  challenged  the

legality and propriety of the judgment and decree dated 2-8-

2006 passed by the learned  Principal Judge,  Family Court,

Durg  (CG)  in  Civil  Suit  No.  512-A/2005,  whereby  the

application  filed by the respondent herein  under  Section

13   (1)   of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 (for short,  the

Act,  1955)  for   dissolution  of  marriage  between   the

respondent and the appellant was allowed.   The  decree  is

impugned  on the ground that without any proof of  adultery

the  court  below  has  passed the decree  of  divorce  and

thereby committed illegality.



2)    The  facts of the case, in brief, as projected before

the   Family  Court  are  that  the  marriage  between  the

appellant   and  respondent  was  solemnized  on  21-5-1989

according  to Hindu rites and rituals in Kerala.  Both  the

appellant   and   respondent   are   government   servants.

After  marriage they resided together at Durg  and  out  of

their  wed-lock two children (son and daughter)  were  born

namely   Shreyash  and  Shruti.   The  appellant/wife   and

respondent/husband  were successfully leading  the  married

life  but  in the year 2002 the respondent/husband received

excessive  telephone bill and on verification it was  found

that  the  most of calls were made from Korba and Bilaspur.

On this, the respondent/husband enquired from the appellant

who  told  him  that she used to telephone her  old  friend

namely Chandrahash Dewangan.  This act of the appellant was  

objected  by the respondent but the appellant did not  heed

his words which caused the respondent grievous mental agony 

and taking benefit of the status of mind of the respondent,

the appellant/wife took him to  one Psychiatrist namely Dr.

Pramod  Gupta  for  medical  treatment.   Thereafter,   the

appellant/wife in collusion with Dr. Pramod Gupta tried  to

declare him mental patient by providing improper treatment.

On  this,  the respondent   consulted the Psychiatrists  at

AIMS,  New Delhi as also in Sector 9 Hospital, Bhilai,  who

opined  that  the  respondent was not  suffering  from  any

mental  disorder. The respondent further pleaded  that  the

appellant/wife was a woman of easy virtue and accustomed to

make relations with other persons and to fulfill her desire

she  used to torture the respondent/husband with a view  to

live  separately.  In the year 2004 the appellant developed

intimacy  with  one Vinay Dewangan who was  called  by  the

appellant   in  absence  of  respondent  and  despite   the

objection  of  respondent she continued her relations  with

him.    All the efforts made by the respondent/husband  for

making  good  relation  with the appellant  went  in  vain.

Ultimately, the appellant by giving threats of divorce  and

implication  in a false case of cruelty for dowry,  started

living   separately   from   the   respondent   and    son.

Thereafter,  the appellant/wife got issued notices  to  the

respondent and filed a divorce petition (Petition No.  424-

A/2004)  against  the respondent/husband in  Family  Court,

Durg,  which  was  subsequently dismissed on  20-6-2005  as

withdrawn. The respondent further pleaded that despite  the

dismissal  of  divorce  petition, the appellant/wife  never

made  any attempt to reconcile the dispute and to discharge

her  marital obligations.  Thus, the appellant was  leading

adulterous  life avoiding cohabitation with the  respondent

which  led  him  to  file the petition for  dissolution  of

marriage under Section 13 (1) of the Act, 1955.



3)    The appellant/wife denied the allegations made by the

respondent/husband  in  her written statement  and  alleged

that  the respondent grabbed her income and jewelleries  as

also  the  whole amount received by selling out  the  house

which was built from the income of the appellant/wife.  She

specifically denied the allegation of adultery  and  stated

that  she was not having any illicit relation with any  one

and   was  discharging  her  marital  obligations.      The

appellant/wife     specifically    alleged     that     the

respondent/husband  was  suffering  from  mental   disorder

"paranoid  schizophrenia" for which she took him to  Doctor

Pramod  Gupta at Durg for medical treatment.   She  further

pleaded  that  the  respondent/husband  used  to  call  her

friends to enjoy wine and share obscene movies and he  also

used to force the appellant/wife to apply the techniques of

obscene  movies   in  their  private  life,  to  which  she

objected. It was further alleged that once in the year 2004

the  respondent/husband  tried to  kill  the  appellant  by

throttling   due  to  which  she  left  the  house  of  the

respondent/husband and made complaint against him to Mahila  

Thana,  Durg   and   started living  separately  from  him.

Thereafter,   being   harassed   and   tortured   by    the

respondent/husband,  appellant/wife filed  a  petition  for

dissolution of marriage in the Family Court, Durg which was

subsequently withdrawn by the appellant/wife at the request

of  the respondent/husband after reconciliation for welfare

of  their  children.   She specifically  pleaded  that  the

respondent/husband  published  the  advertisement   through

internet for his second marriage and he also took away  the

daughter Shruti with him from appellant/wife.



4)    On the basis of averments made by the parties, issues

were  framed and after affording an opportunity of  hearing

to  the  parties,  the marriage between the  appellant  and

respondent  was  dissolved by a decree of  divorce  on  the

ground of adultery by the court below.



5)    We  have heard Smt. Indira Tripathi, learned  counsel

for  the appellant and Shri Prafull Bharat, learned counsel

for  the  respondent,  perused the judgment  &amp;  decree  and

record of the Family Court.



6)    Learned  counsel appearing for the appellant  submits

that  the  impugned judgment and decree  passed  by  family

court  is contrary to law and material available on record.

The  family  court failed to appreciate that the respondent

failed  to  establish the ingredients of cruelty.   Learned

counsel further submits that the burden to prove the factum

of adultery was solely on the respondent but the respondent

has  not discharged the burden although he was required  to

prove  the same by preponderance of probabilities.  Learned

counsel  further  submits that the Family  Court  committed

grave  error  in  passing the impugned  decree  of  divorce

merely  on  the  basis  of the evidence  adduced  by  child

witness Ku. Shruti (PW/5) who was the student of Class  5th

and her statement ought to have been scrutinized cautiously

while placing reliance upon her evidence.    Therefore, the

ground of adultery has not been proved on the basis of  the

evidence available on record. She further submits that  the

evidence  of Ku. Shruti has not been corroborated by  other

witnesses.   In view of the above submission it  cannot  be

held  that  the appellant/wife treated the respondent  with

cruelty  but  it  was the respondent/husband  who  was  not

willing  to  live  with the appellant/wife  and  therefore,

the  respondent  is  not entitled to  obtain  a  decree  of

divorce.   The next submission of learned counsel  for  the

appellant  is  that  the family court reached  to  a  wrong

conclusion   by  mis-appreciating  the  material   evidence

available  on record.  The findings recorded by the  family

court  are  perverse  and bad in the  eyes  of  law.     In

absence  of any proof of adultery the decree of divorce  is

not  sustainable under the law.   Therefore,  the  impugned

judgment  and  decree dated 2-8-2006 passed by  the  Family

Court be set aside.



7)    On the other hand, learned counsel appearing for  the

respondent vehemently opposed the appeal and submitted that 

the  respondent has established his case. His  evidence  is

duly  corroborated  by his daughter  Ku.  Shruti.   Learned

counsel  further  submits  that  the  Family  Court   after

considering all the facts and circumstances of the case and

the  evidence available on record has rightly  allowed  the

divorce  petition  in  favour  of  the  respondent/husband.

Learned   counsel   further  submits   that   the   counter

allegations made in the written statement by the  appellant

and  questions  to that effect put by her  counsel  at  her

instructions in the cross examination also amount to mental

cruelty.



8)    In  order  to  appreciate the arguments  advanced  on

behalf  of  the  parties,  we have  examined  the  evidence

available  on  record.  On the basis of  pleadings  of  the

parties issues were framed and the Family Court allowed the

petition  of  the  respondent on  the  ground  of  adultery

amounting to mental cruelty.  The Family Court further held

that  the  respondent  was not suffering  from  any  mental

disorder.   The burden to prove the issue of  adultery  was

solely on the respondent.  The respondent examined himself,

his  daughter, Ku. Shruti, Shriniwas D. Deshmukh,  Rajendra

Kumar   Chaube   and   Sandeep  Ban   Sutre   whereas   the

appellant/wife examined herself, Suresh Pillai  and  Doctor

Pramod Gupta and produced the document Ex.D/1 to Ex.D/19 in   

her support.



9)    The respondent/husband  deposed that in the year 2002

one   Deputy Collector Dewangan used to visit his house and

thereafter he was transferred to Korba from where  he  used

to  telephone  to his house. Whenever he received the call,

Dewangan  used  to disconnect the same. On verification  of

STD  calls, he found that several calls were made to Deputy

Collector, Dewangan from his house and for that  there  was

some altercation between him and his wife.   Thereafter, he

went  to  Kerala with his wife where counseling took  place

between  them.  After returning from there to Borsi (Durg),

he  was taken to Doctor Pramod Gupta (DW/3) by his wife for

treatment as he was not getting proper sleep for two  days.

Doctor  Pramod  Gupta  (DW/3) gave him  treatment  for  two

years.   He  further deposed that in the month of  January,

2004  one  Vinay Dewangan came to his house  and  his  wife 

developed intimacy with him for which he objected  but  his

wife  did not heed his words.  Thereafter, in the month  of

September, 2004, she started residing with daughter  Shruti

separately  from respondent/husband and son.  Once  he  met 

his  daughter at the temple, who told him that she did  not

want  to  live with her mother.  Thus, it is clear that  he

has  not  stated  a single word about the adultery  of  the

appellant/wife  or any illicit relation with  anybody.   On

the contrary, he admitted in his cross examination that the

relation between him and the appellant/wife was good for 14

-15  years and they were blessed with two children  out  of

their  wedlock.   He also admitted in para 4 of  his  cross

examination  that the appellant/wife had  filed  a  divorce

petition  which  was  subsequently withdrawn.   He  further

admitted that when he went to Kerala he had visited  Doctor

Ravi, a Psychiatrist, thereafter, he was taken by his  wife

to   Doctor Pramod Gupta at Durg   where he  continued  his

treatment  for 1 + years.  He stated that he  was  forcibly

administered   injections  and  given  medicines   by   the

appellant/wife in collusion with Doctor Pramod Gupta but he

admitted in para 7 that he never made any complaint against

Doctor  Pramod  Gupta  before any  authority.  He  admitted

Ex.D/1  which  is  the prescription slip of  Doctor  Pramod

Gupta.    In para 9 he admitted the documents Ex.D/2,  D/3,

D/4   which  are  proposals  for  marriage  through  e-mail

received  by  him in response to his advertisement  through

internet  (Ex.D/5). Apart from this he has neither produced

the  telephone bill which gave rise to the dispute nor  has

examined Deputy Collector Dewagan and Vinay Dewangan in his   

support.

10)   Ku.  Shruti  (PW/5) deposed that at  present  she  is

residing  with her father and when she was living with  her

mother  (appellant), one Vinay Dewangan used to  visit  the

house  of the appellant/wife, to which she objected.    One

day  her  mother and Vinay Dewangan were in a  room  bolted 

from inside. When she went to Cinema with her mother, Vinay 

Dewangan also used to accompany them.  Seeing her mother in   

the company of Vinay Dewangan she felt bad.  Once there was  

altercation  between  her mother and Vinay  Dewangan  also.

On  going through the evidence of this witness, it does not

appear  that  she  stated anything about  adultery  of  her

mother    or    she    ever    found    her    mother    in

objectionable/compromising position with anybody  by  which

it   can  be  held  that  the  appellant/wife  was  leading

adulterous  life  in  any  manner.  On  the  contrary,  she

admitted  in para 5 of her cross examination that  she  was

willing  to  live with her mother and father both  and  she

used  to  talk  with her mother on telephone /mobile  while

residing with her father.  She also admitted the fact  that

she has told her father and Rajendra Kumar Chaube about the 

visit of Vinay Dewangan to the house of her mother as  also

about  the  altercation took place between her  mother  and

Vinay Dewangan but this fact is neither corroborated by her

father (the respondent) nor by Rajendra Kumar Choube.

11)   The  other  witnesses Shrivas D. Deshmukh,   Rajendra

Kumar   Choube  and  Sandeep  Ban  Sutre  have   also   not

corroborated    the    version   of    Ku.    Shruti    and

respondent/husband and they have not stated a  single  word

about  adulterous  life  of the appellant/wife.   From  the

evidence  of  Rajendra Kumar Choube, the only fact  reveals

that  the  relation  between  the  appellant/wife  and  the

respondent/husband was not good.   Thus, on re-appraisal of

the  evidence  adduced  by  the  respondent/husband  it  is

evident  that  he  failed to prove the factum  of  adultery

either by direct or by circumstantial evidence.

12)  So far as the argument advanced by learned counsel for

the respondent/husband  regarding  counter allegations made

in   the  written  statement  by  the  appellant/wife   and

questions  to  that  effect put  by  her  counsel   at  her

instructions  in  the  cross examination   also  amount  to

mental  cruelty,  is  concerned,  admittedly   the  counter

allegations  against the respondent/husband were  made  and

questions  to that effect were also put by her counsel  but

it  is  clear  from  the evidence of  Doctor  Pramod  Gupta

(DW/3),  Suresh  Pillai (DW/2) and the appellant/wife  that

the counter allegations are not vague.  Doctor Pramod Gupta

has    clearly   deposed   in   his   evidence   that   the

respondent/husband was suffering from `divisional disorder'

in  which  the patient thinks beyond reality.   He  further

deposed  that  the  person  suffering  from  the  aforesaid

disease  also  suspects  about the character  of  his  life

partner.   He categorically denied the suggestion  that  he

had  thrust  the  disease  upon the  respondent/husband  in

collusion with the appellant/wife.

13)   The  appellant/wife  has  categorically   denied  the

allegations made by the respondent/husband and deposed that  

her husband was suffering from paranoid schizophrenia since

2002  for  which she took him to Doctor Ravi  Prasardi   in

Kerala and thereafter to  Doctor Pramod  Gupta at Durg  but

he  was not regular to his treatment and as soon as he gave

up  the medicine, he started committing marpit with her and

once  he  tried  to pour hot oil over her.  Therefore,  she

left the house of the respondent/husband and made complaint

against  her  husband  in Mahila Thana,  which  is  Ex.D/6.

Thereafter,  she  sent  notices  Ex.D/7  &amp;   D/8   to   the

respondent/husband through her counsel  and  filed  divorce

petition  against  the  respondent which  was  subsequently

withdrawn  vide  Ex.D/9, looking to the  welfare  of  their

children.  Thereafter she along with her daughter  went  to

live with the respondent/husband, but he was not willing to

live  with her wife and threw her out of his house  in  the

night.    The  other allegation regarding watching  obscene

movies and enjoying wine by the respondent/husband with his

friends  is concerned, it is corroborated by Suresh  Pillai

(DW/2) and their evidence remained unrebutted.  Thus, it is

clear   that   the   counter  allegations   made   by   the

appellant/wife are not vague but well founded and the  same

do not amount to cruelty.



14)  For the aforesaid analysis, we are of the opinion that

the   learned  Family  Court  erred  in  reaching  to   the

conclusion    that   the   appellant/wife    treated    the

respondent/husband with cruelty by leading adulterous  life

and  granted a decree of dissolution of marriage in  favour

of  the  respondent/husband.  Accordingly,  the  appeal  is

allowed  and  the  judgment and decree for  dissolution  of

marriage between the appellant and respondent is hereby set

aside.    .

15)  Decree be drawn up accordingly.

16)   No order as to costs.

                                              JUDGE
