Criminal Revision No. 345 of 2002 Deo   Chandra  Dubey Vs. 1.  Gangotri    Tiwari

HIGH COURT OF CHATTISGARH AT BILASPUR       






             Criminal Revision No. 345 of 2002




                    Deo   Chandra  Dubey
                                       ...Petitioners



                          Versus


                1.  Gangotri    Tiwari

                 2.  Malti  Devi

                 3.  Rakesh  Kumar

                 4.  The    State   of   Chhattisgarh
                                           ...Respondents

  (Criminal Revision under Section 397/401of The Code of
                    Criminal Procedure)

!     Mr. Atanu Ghosh, Advocate for the petitioner


^     Mr. N.K. Chatterjee, Advocate for respondents 1 to 3.
      Mr.   Sudhir  Bajpai,  Dy.  Govt.  Advocate,  for  the State/respondent No.4.



Honble Shri Rajeev Gupta,Honble Shri Sunil Kumar Sinha, J 



       Dated:06/01/2010


:       Judgment

                         JUDGMENT
                       (06.01.2010)

         Following     judgment     of     the   Court
was   delivered    by Sunil Kumar Sinha, J.

(1)   Being aggrieved with the judgment of acquittal  dated

24.4.2002   passed  by  the  Additional   Sessions   Judge,

Baikunthpur,  District Korea (C.G.) in Sessions  Trial  No.

6/2002,  the  petitioner/father of the deceased  has  filed

this criminal revision.

(2)  The facts, briefly stated, are as under:-

          Deceased  Rupa Tiwari was the wife of  respondent
     No.3.  Respondent  No. 1 is the sister-in-law  (Nanad)
     and  respondent  No.2  is  the  mother-in-law  of  the
     deceased.  The  deceased was married  with  respondent
     No.3  on  19.5.1996. She was residing in  her  in-laws
     place along with respondents 1 to 3.

          The  case  of the prosecution is that on 3.9.2001
     respondent  No.2,  Malti Devi, asked Prabhakar  Daurey
     (PW-3,  a neighbour) that her daughter-in-law deceased
     Rupa  was  not  well, therefore, he should  call  some
     Doctor.  Prabhakar Daurey (PW-3) while  going  on  his
     scooter  to call the Doctor saw that respondent  No.3,
     Rakesh  Kumar,  was  sitting near the  video-hall.  He
     informed  him  about  the  illness  of  the  deceased.
     Respondent  No.3  and Prabhakar firstly  went  to  the
     house of Dr. A.K. Singh and thereafter Prabhakar  send
     respondent No.3 to his house and he went to Dr.  Gopal
     Krishna Vishwas (PW-5). Dr. Vishwas came to the  house
     of  the  deceased  and saw injuries on  her  body.  He
     advised  to take the deceased to Government  Hospital.
     The  deceased was taken to the Government Hospital  in
     the  vehicle of Sapan Kumar Dhanoria (PW-9).  She  was
     examined by Dr. A.K. Sharma (PW-10), who declared that
     she  was  dead. Dr. A.K. Sharma wrote a memo (Ex.-P/8)
     to  the concerned police station giving information of
     the  dead  body brought to the hospital. By that  time
     the  body  was taken to the house. The police recorded
     merg intimation (Ex.-P/17). After giving notice to the
     Pachas,  inquest  on  the body  of  the  deceased  was
     prepared under Ex.-P/5. The dead body was sent for its
     post-mortem to Government Hospital, Patana, where  the
     post-mortem examination was conduct by a team  of  two
     Doctors,  who gave their report Ex.-P/7.  The  Autopsy
     Surgeons found many external injuries on the  body  of
     the  deceased and opined that the cause of  death  was
     asphyxia  due to strangulation which may be caused  by
     firm  string  encircling  the  neck.  The  death   was
     homicidal in nature.

          The  prosecution filed the charge-sheet u/ss 302,
     201 read with Section 34  IPC.
          The  learned  Sessions Judge framed charges  u/ss
     498-A, 304-B alternatively 302 &amp; 201 of the IPC.

          The   prosecution  examined  21  witnesses.   The
     learned Sessions Judge held that the prosecution could
     not  establish  that either the deceased  was  treated
     with cruelty by respondents 1 to 3 or it was a case of
     dowry death or murder. Therefore, respondents 1  to  3
     were acquitted of the charges framed against them.

(3)   Mr. Atanu Ghosh, learned counsel appearing on  behalf

of  the petitioner, argued that the learned Sessions  Judge

failed  to consider material evidence on record, therefore,

the  judgment is bad-in-law. He also argued that since  the

deceased  was found in injured/dead condition in the  house

of  respondents 1 to 3, therefore, they should have offered

explanation   for  the  same,  failing   which,   a   grave

circumstance was established against them. 



(4)   On  the  other  hand,  Mr. N.K.  Chatterjee,  learned

counsel  appearing on behalf of respondents 1 to 3, opposed

these  arguments and supported the judgment passed  by  the 

Sessions Court. 



(5)    Mr.   Suhdir  Bajpai,  learned  Dy.  Govt.  Advocate

appearing on behalf of the State/respondent No.4, supported

the contentions raised by the counsel for the petitioner.



(6)   We have heard the learned counsel for the parties  at

length  and  have also perused the records of the  sessions

case.



(7)   The  learned Sessions Judge has recorded  a  positive

finding  vide  Para-17 of the impugned  judgment  that  the

death  of  the  deceased was homicidal in  nature.  He  has

further  held  vide Para-19 that on the evidence  of  Kanta

Yadav  (PW-1) it was established that the deceased died  in

between  12  in  the Noon &amp; 5.00 p.m. The learned  Sessions

Judge  also recorded a finding vide Para-43 of the impugned

judgment  that  the  prosecution could not  establish  that

respondents  1 to 3/accused persons were present  in  their

house along with the deceased from 12 Noon to 5.00 p.m.  on

3.9.2001.  Therefore, the liability of  injuries  or  death

cannot be fastened on the respondents.



(8)   After going through the entire evidence available  on

record,  we do not find that it was proved that respondents

1 to 3 were present in the house along with the deceased in

between 12 Noon to 5.00 p.m. on 3.9.2001. In Para-7 of  the

examination-in-chief of I.O., R.P. Singh (PW-21),  specific

Court  question was asked about the investigation  made  to

find   out  regarding  presence  of  the  accused  persons.

Investigating Officer has replied that there is no evidence

on  record  to  establish  that the  accused  persons  were

present  in  their  house  at the  time  of  the  incident.

Specific  questions have been asked in the examinations  of

the  accused persons regarding their presence in the  house

vide  questions No. 70 &amp; 74 and they have replied that they

had  gone to different places and they were present in  the

house only upto 10.30 - 11.00 a.m. and not thereafter.



(9)   In  Trimukh Maroti Kirkan -Vs- State of  Maharashtra,

2006 AIR SCW 5300, the Apex Court held that:  

     ".  If an offence takes place inside the privacy of  a
     house  and  in such circumstances where the assailants
     have  all  the  opportunity to  plan  and  commit  the
     offence  at  the  time and in circumstances  of  their
     choice,  it  will  be  extremely  difficult  for   the
     prosecution to lead evidence to establish the guilt of
     the  accused if the strict principle of circumstantial
     evidence,  as noticed above, is insisted upon  by  the
     Court. A Judge does not preside over a criminal  trial
     merely  to  see  that no innocent man is  punished.  A
     Judge also presides to see that a guilty man does  not
     escape.  Where an offence like murder is committed  in
     secrecy   inside  a  house,  the  initial  burden   to
     establish  the  case  would undoubtedly  be  upon  the
     prosecution, but the nature and amount of evidence  to
     be  led by it to establish the charge cannot be of the
     same   degree  as  is  required  in  other  cases   of
     circumstantial  evidence. The burden  would  be  of  a
     comparatively lighter character. In view of S. 106  of
     the  Evidence Act there will be a corresponding burden
     on   the  inmates  of  the  house  to  give  a  cogent
     explanation  as  to how the crime was  committed.  The
     inmates of the house cannot get away by simply keeping
     quiet  and  offering no explanation  on  the  supposed
     premise  that  the burden to establish its  case  lies
     entirely upon the prosecution and there is no duty  at
     all on an accused to offer any explanation. In case of
     no  explanation or false explanation it would  because
     an additional link in chain of circumstances. "


(10) Further in State of Rajasthan -Vs- Kashi Ram, 2006 AIR

SCW 5768, the Apex Court held that: 



     "Whether an inference ought to be drawn under  Section
     106  is  a  question  which  must  be  determined   by
     reference to facts proved. It is ultimately  a  matter
     of  appreciation of evidence and, therefore, each case
     must  rest  on its own facts. The respondent,  accused
     having  been seen last with the deceased,  the  burden
     was  upon him to prove what happened thereafter, since
     those  facts were within his special knowledge. Since,
     the  respondent failed to do so, it must be held  that
     he  failed to discharge the burden cast upon him by S.
     106 of the Evidence Act. This circumstance, therefore,
     provides   the   missing  link   in   the   chain   of
     circumstances which prove his guilt beyond  reasonable
     doubt."
The Court further held that:

     ".The  principle  is well settled. The  provisions  of
     Section 106 of the Evidence Act itself are unambiguous
     and  categoric in laying down that when  any  fact  is
     especially  within  the knowledge  of  a  person,  the
     burden  of proving that fact is upon him. Thus,  if  a
     person  is last seen with the deceased, he must  offer
     an  explanation as to how and when he parted  company.
     He  must furnish an explanation which appears  to  the
     Court  to be probable and satisfactory. If he does  so
     he  must be held to have discharged his burden. If  he
     fails  to  offer an explanation on the basis of  facts
     within  his  special knowledge, he fails to  discharge
     the  burden  cast  upon  him by  Section  106  of  the
     Evidence  Act.  In  a case resting  on  circumstantial
     evidence  if  the accused fails to offer a  reasonable
     explanation in discharge of the burden placed on  him,
     that  itself provides an additional link in the  chain
     of  circumstances proved against him. Section 106 does
     not  shift  the  burden of proof in a criminal  trial,
     which is always upon the prosecution. It lays down the
     rule  that  when the accused does not throw any  light
     upon  facts  which are specially within his  knowledge
     and  which  could not support any theory or hypothesis
     compatible with his innocence, the Court can  consider
     his   failure  to  adduce  any  explanation,   as   an
     additional   link  which  completes  the  chain.   The
     principle  has been succinctly stated in Naina  Mohd's
     case reported in AIR 1960 Madras 218."

(11)  In the present case, though it comes that respondents

1  to  3 were ordinarily residing with the deceased in  the

same house, but it does not come that they were lastly seen

with the deceased. Had there been a case that respondents 1

to  3  or any one of them was lastly seen with the deceased

and thereafter the deceased was found dead, then of course,

burden  was  upon  them to prove what happened  thereafter,

since those facts were within the special knowledge of  the

accused person(s) who was lastly seen with the deceased and 

in  such  a  situation, if the accused person(s) failed  to

explain  about it, then it would have been held  that  they

failed  to  discharge the burden cast upon them by  Section

106  of  the  Evidence Act. There is  a  finding  that  the

incident took place in the day time in between 12  Noon  to

5.00  p.m.  Had  that been the incident of the  night,  the

situation  would  have been different as there  would  have

been a presumption that all the inmates would be present in

the house. But in the day time, no such presumption can  be

drawn  especially  when  the  inmates  have  offered  their

explanation in specific words that they were not present in

the  house  and were present at a particular place  and  no

investigation  was  conducted  to  find  out   the   truth.

Therefore, the arguments advanced in this regard cannot  be

accepted. 



(12) Devendra Chandra Dubey (PW-14, father of the deceased) 

and  Trinetra  Kumar Dubey (PW-4, brother of the  deceased)

had  tried to make out a case regarding demand of dowry and

treating the deceased with cruelty on account of demand  of

dowry. Their evidence has been discussed in Para-35 of  the

impugned judgment. The learned Sessions Judge has held that  

they  have  given different versions than what  were  given

before the police u/s 161 Cr.P.C. (Ex.-D/1 &amp; D/2) and there

were  material  omissions on these points.  Therefore,  the

facts relating to demand of dowry and treating the deceased

with  cruelty  on account of demand of dowry  were  rightly

held  to be not established. Lalit Kumar Mishra (PW-16)  is

the  maternal  uncle of the deceased. He has  categorically

deposed  vide  Para-3  of  the  examination-in-chief   that

respondents/accused persons had never demanded dowry  after  

the  marriage of the deceased with respondent No.3 and they

have  never treated the deceased with cruelty. This further

strengthen  the  fact  that  the  prosecution   could   not

establish  that  either there was demand of  dowry  or  the

deceased  was  being treated with cruelty  by  the  accused

persons on account of demand of dowry. 



(13) Admittedly, there are no eye witnesses and the case is

based  on circumstantial evidence. In Dhananjoy Chhatterjee

-Vs-  State  of W.B., (1994) 2 SCC 22, the Apex Court  held

that  "In  a  case  based on circumstantial  evidence,  the

circumstances from which the conclusion of guilt is  to  be

drawn  have not only to be fully established but also  that

all  the  circumstances  so  established  should  be  of  a

conclusive  nature and consistent only with the  hypothesis

of the guilt of the accused. Those circumstances should not

be  capable  of  being  explained by any  other  hypothesis

except  the  guilt  of the accused and  the  chain  of  the

evidence must be so complete as not to leave any reasonable

ground for the belief consistent with the innocence of  the

accused.   It  needs  no reminder that legally  established

circumstances and not merely indignation of the  court  can

form  the  basis  of conviction and the  more  serious  the

crime,  the  greater should be the care taken to scrutinize

the evidence lest suspicion takes the place of proof."



(14)  After scrutiny the entire evidence, we find  that  no

incriminating  circumstances have been established  against

respondents  1  to  3 in this matter so  as  to  hold  them

conclusive and not capable of being explained by any  other

hypothesis  except guilt of the accused persons/respondents

1 to 3.


(15)  The revisional power of the High Court under  Section

397  read with Section 401 does not create any right in the

litigant, but only conserves the power to see that  justice

is   done   and  the  subordinate  Courts  do  not   exceed

jurisdiction  or  abuse their powers. The  order  of  lower

Court  ought  not  to be lightly set aside  unless  it  has

entailed  miscarriage of justice or  where  two  views  are

possible  merely  because the revisional  Court  takes  the

other  view.  It  is  only in glaring cases  of  injustice,

resulting from some violation of fundamental principles  of

law by the trial Court, that the High Court is empowered to

set  aside the order of acquittal and direct a re-trial  of

the  acquitted  accused.  The  mere  circumstances  that  a

finding  of  fact recorded by the trial Court may,  in  the

opinion  of  the  High Court, be wrong,  will  not  justify

setting  aside  the acquittal and directing  re-trial.  The

revisional  court is entitled to reverse the  finding  only

when it reaches to the conclusion that finding of the trial

Court  is  perverse and the jurisdiction cannot be  invoked

lightly. Even in the cases where it is possible to take two

views  on  the same matter then in the ordinary course  the

view  taken by the Court below should not be interfered  in

the revisional jurisdiction.



(16)  In the opinion of this Court, the Sessions Court  has

taken  a view and has recorded a finding, which appears  to

be one of the possible views which could have been taken by

a  Court  in  the  facts  and circumstances  of  the  case.

Therefore,  we  do not find any reasons to  interfere  with

such finding recorded by the Sessions Court.



(17)  The Revision has no merit, the same is liable  to  be

dismissed and is hereby dismissed. 



     CHIEF JUSTICE                                JUDGE

