Criminal Appeal No. 415 of 1993 Ganesh Singh Mandvi Vs. Shivratri Devi and others

HIGH COURT OF CHATTISGARH AT BILASPUR      



                    Criminal Appeal No. 415 of 1993


                 Ganesh Singh Mandvi
                                ...Petitioners


                   VERSUS

                        Shivratri Devi and others
                                                 ...Respondents




!          Shri Arun Kochar counsel for appellants


^          Shri  Pravin  Das  Dy. GA  for  respondent
           No.2/State
          Since   despite  the  notice   issued   to
          respondent  No.1 which returned un-served  with
          an   endorsement  that  she  had  left  village
          Machatoli  8  years  back, Shri  Prateek  Kumar
          Sinha  advocate  who is in the  panel  of  High
          Court Legal Service Authority, is appointed  as
          counsel to appear and argue on her behalf.


Hon. Mr. Justice Pritinker Diwaker


       Dated:15/02/2010


:       Judgment


  CRIMINAL APPEAL UNDER SECTION 374  OF THE CODE OF            
                 CRIMINAL PROCEDURE.

                    J U D G M E N T
                                 (15.02.2010)

      This  appeal is directed against the  judgment
dated  5.5.1993 passed by Additional Sessions Judge, 
Bilaspur,  in Sessions Trial No. 264/1988 convicting
the  accused/appellants for the offences  punishable
under   Sections  376  (2)  (g)  and  342  IPC   and
sentencing   each   of  them  to  undergo   rigorous
imprisonment  for  ten years u/s  376  (2)  (g)  and
rigorous  imprisonment for six months u/s  342  IPC.
During the pendency of appeal accused/appellant No.2 
(Angadsingh) has expired and therefore  this  appeal
relates  to appellants Ganesh Singh Mandvi and  R.L.
Sharma, only. 


2.    As  per the case of the complainant/respondent
No.1  she had lodged a complaint on 13.1.1987 before
the   Court  of  Judicial  Magistrate  First  Class,
Katghora alleging that on 22.4.1986 she was forcibly
taken  by  the  accused/appellant No.1 Ganesh  Singh
Mandvi  to his house on the pretext that her husband
was  waiting for her. From there, she was  taken  to
the  nearby  forest  where  all  the  three  accused
persons  had  ravished  her. Accused/appellant  No.1
Ganesh  Singh Mandvi had also snatched her two  year 
child  and threatened to kill him if she raised  any
alarm.  It is alleged that she was confined  to  the
house  of accused/appellant No.1 Ganesh Singh Mandvi  
for  three  days  and  was repeatedly  subjected  to
forcible  sexual  intercourse by  all  of  them.  On
10.6.1986 she sat on hunger strike in front  of  the
office  of  Superintending  Engineer,  Hasdeo  Bango
Project and thereafter on 12.6.1986 Police of police
station  Katghora  registered the case  against  the
accused/appellants.  However,   final   report   was
submitted by the police as a result of which she was
left  with no other option but to file the complaint
case against the accused/appellants.


3.    So  as to hold the accused/appellants  guilty,
complainant has examined 05 witnesses in support  of
her  case. Statements of the accused/appellants were
also  recorded  under section 313  of  the  Code  of
Criminal Procedure in which they denied the  charges
levelled  against them and pleaded  their  innocence
and false implication in the case.


4.    After hearing the parties the trial Court  has
convicted and sentenced the accused / appellants for
the offences as mentioned above.



5.    Heard counsel for the parties and perused  the
material  available on record including the judgment
impugned. 

6.    Counsel  for the appellants submits  that  the
complaint  has been filed with an inordinate  delay.
He  submits  that as per version of the  prosecutrix
herself   she  was  subjected  to  forcible   sexual
intercourse  by the accused/appellants on  22.4.1986
whereas  no prompt report of the same was lodged  by
her  and  even  the  complaint  case  was  filed  on
13.1.1987. He submits that the prosecutrix  has  not
even  been  medically examined.  According  to  him,
there     was    some    civil    dispute    between
accused/appellant No.2 Angadsingh  (since  deceased) 
and  the  father-in-law  of the  prosecutrix  namely
Onkar  Prasad  (PW-5). He submits that statement  of
the  prosecutrix  being full of  contradictions  and
omissions  cannot  be  held to  be  trustworthy  and
conviction based thereon would be illegal.

7.    On  the  other hand counsel for the respondent
No.1 supports the impugned judgment and submits that  
the  same  being  strictly in  accordance  with  the
evidence  available on record is not  prone  to  any
disturbance in appeal. He submits that present is  a
case  where a poor lady has been sexually  exploited
by  the  three accused persons and despite her  best
efforts,  the  police had refused  to  register  and
investigate the matter compelling the prosecutrix to
file     the    complaint    case    against     the
accused/appellants. He also submits that the defence
has  not  been able to bring forth any  material  to
show the false implication of the accused/appellants
in this case.

8.     State  counsel  also  rendered  his  valuable
assistance to this Court.

9.    Prosecutrix (PW-1) has stated in her  evidence
that  on  22.4.1986 when she was returning from  her
parents'  house along with her two year child  in  a
bus in which accused/appellant No.1
Ganesh Singh Mandvi who was working as Forest  Guard   
was  also traveling. She has further stated that  he
forced her to alight the bus, took her to his  house
and  confined her therein. According to her, accused
Ganesh Singh Mandvi called other two accused persons  
namely  Angadsingh (since deceased) and R.L.  Sharma   
and  in  the  night all of them consumed liquor  and
then  after  taking their meals, accused  Angadsingh
(since  deceased) and R.L. Sharma  left  the  place.
Thereafter, accused Ganesh Singh Mandvi took her  to
the  forest  depot where two other  accused  persons
namely  Angadsingh (since deceased) and R.L.  Sharma   
were  already present. All the three accused persons
threatened her to kill her child in case she  raised
an  alarm.  Thereafter, accused Ganesh Singh  Mandvi
tied  her hands and eyes, gagged her mouth and  then
first  of  all  accused Angadsingh (since  deceased)
committed  sexual  intercourse with  her  which  was
followed   by   other  two  accused  persons   also.
According  to her even thereafter she was  subjected
to  sexual  intercourse  by all  the  three  accused
persons  during  her stay for three  days.  She  has
further stated that on the fourth day she was  asked
by  accused Angadsingh (since deceased)  to lodge  a 
report  against her husband for demand of dowry  and
on  her  refusal he himself prepared the report  and
forcefully  obtained  her  signature  on  that   and
submitted the same in police station Machatoli.  She
has  stated that thereafter she went to her parents'
house and four days' thereafter the minor child  was
handed  over  to  her by the accused/appellants  and
then  she narrated the entire incident to her father
who  took her to the house of her husband where  she
narrated the incident to him also and then  both  of
them  went to police station Machatoli to lodge  the
report  but  the  Station House Officer  refused  to
register  the same. According to her, after  refusal
from  the Station House Officer to register the FIR,
she went to the office of Collector, Bilaspur, along
with  her  husband  where she  was  assured  by  the
Collector  regarding an action to be  taken  on  her
report.  In  her cross examination this witness  has
admitted  that though the place where  the  incident
had  taken place is a densely populated locality but
she did not disclose the incident to anyone. She has
stated  that when she was made to get down from  the
bus  by  accused Ganesh Singh Mandvi, she had raised  
an  alarm but no one could hear her voice. Statement
of  the  prosecutrix prima facie appears to  be  un-
natural  and fabricated one and thus not  worthy  of
credence. 

10.  Arun Kumar Trivedi (PW-2) who is the husband of
the  prosecutrix has stated in his evidence that  at
the  relevant  time he was working as timekeeper  in
the  irrigation department. According  to  him,  his
father  in  law had brought the prosecutrix  to  his
house and only then he came to know about her having 
been subjected to forcible sexual intercourse by all
the three accused persons. This witness has admitted
that he was informed by his wife that she had lodged
a  report against him for demand of dowry. According
to  him, even after an assurance from the Collector,
Bilaspur  report  was  not  registered  against  the
accused/appellants.  He  has  stated  that   accused
Ganesh   Singh Mandvi had asked him to part with Rs. 
5000  to each of the accused persons for not  making
the incident of rape on his wife public. However, on
being   confronted   with  his  previous   statement
recorded  under Section 200 of the Code of  Criminal
Procedure,  this witness has stated that  he  cannot
say  as to how the said statement has been recorded.
It  is relevant to note that in Ex. D-2 this witness
has  stated that his wife had informed him that  she
was  taken  by the accused persons but in the  Court
statement  he  has  stated that  she  was  taken  by
accused/appellant Ganesh Singh Mandvi only  and  was  
subjected  to rape. This witness has stated  in  his
cross  examination  that in his  statement  recorded
under  Section 200 of the Code of Criminal Procedure
he  had  not made any statement regarding demand  of 
Rs.  5000 by each of the accused/appellants for  not
making the matter public. According to this witness,
the   prosecutrix   was  kept  in   the   house   of
accused/appellant Ganesh Ram Mandvi for 8  days  and  
was  subjected to forcible sexual intercourse by all
the  accused persons whereas the prosecutrix herself
has  stated that she was kept in his house for three
days only.

11.   Thus the evidence of the prosecution witnesses
particularly that of the prosecutrix (PW-1) and  her
husband Arun Kumar Trivedi (PW-2) appear to be  full
of  contradictions and omissions and therefore  does
not  inspire  confidence of  this  Court.  Moreover,
there are various inconsistencies in their statement
recorded  under Section 200 of the Code of  Criminal
Procedure  and that recorded before the  Court.  Not
only  this, the prosecutrix herself has stated  that
she   was   made   to  alight   the   bus   by   the
accused/appellant Ganesh Singh Mandvi near a barrier 
and accompany him to his house but she did not offer
any  resistance  to  his act and permitted  all  the
three  accused  persons  to sexual  intercourse  for
three long days. Thus the entire story put forth  by
the  prosecutrix  appears to be quite  unnatural  to
warrant conviction.

12.   In view of the above factual background,  this
Court  is of the view that the Court below has erred
in  appreciating  the evidence available  on  record
while   recording   the  findings   convicting   and
sentencing  the accused/appellants for the  offences
mentioned above. Accordingly, the appeal is  allowed
and  the  impugned  judgment  dated  5.5.1993  being
contrary to the evidence available on record is  set
aside.  Appellants  are  acquitted  of  the  charges
levelled against them. Appellants are reported to be
on bail. Their bail bonds stand discharged.

                                             Judge

