FAM No 28 OF 2006 Sanjay Bihari Agrawal Vs. Smt Sandhya Agrawal

HIGH COURT OF CHATTISGARH AT BILASPUR          

 FAM No 28 OF 2006   

 Sanjay Bihari Agrawal
                                            ...Petitioners
                          Versus
 Smt Sandhya Agrawal  
                                            ...Respondents

! Shri HB Agrawal Sr Adv with Smt Meera Jaiswal Adv for the appellant

^ Smt Indira Tripathi Advocate for the respondent

 CORAM: Honble Shri NK Agarwal J   

 Dated: 16/02/2010

: Judgement 
                         O R D E R
                          1622010

  1.   Instant appeal is directed against the judgment and
     decree dated 9-11-2005 passed by the Additional District
     Judge, in Civil Suit No. 17-A/2005 whereby and whereunder
     application for divorce preferred by the appellant under
     Section 13(1)((ia) and 13(1)(ib) of the Hindu Marriage Act,
     1955 (briefly, `Act') has been dismissed. It is not in
     dispute that parties to the proceedings were married as per
     Hindu rites on 23-4-2000. They lived together for a period
     of six months. During this period, the respondent conceived
     pregnancy and gave birth to a female child Ku. Anjali on 28-
     2-2001. After October, 2000, the respondent is residing in
     her paternal home.
2.   According to the plaintiff, when respondent was
pregnant, as per the wishes of her mother and father, she
resided in her paternal home at New Shanti Nagar for
delivery, but two months after birth of Ku. Anjali, when he
went to bring his wife/ respondent, her mother and father
refused to send her to his house at Bhatapara and insisted
him to perform his duties at Bhatapara by residing at
Raipur. When the appellant refused to reside at Raipur, the
respondent refused to go to Bhatapara. The appellant made
repeated efforts to bring the respondent back to Bhatapara,
but she did not come and thus since October, 2000, she has 
failed to perform her matrimonial obligations depriving him
to lead  matrimonial life. To put pressure on the appellant
to reside at Raipur, she also made complaint in Mahila
Thana, Raipur on 16-5-2005. On 20-5-2005, the respondent 
lodged a written complaint to police against the appellant,
his mother, father, sister and sister-in-law regarding
offence of demand of dowry and threatening to kill her.
3.   The respondent filed her written statement and denied
the allegation and pleaded that in fact, when the
respondent was pregnant, the respondent and his family
members, on coming to know through Sonography that she has   
conceived a female child, sent her to her paternal home
against her wishes and pressurized her for abortion. She
also made allegations regarding demand of 50 Tola gold as
dowry and she has also lodged a report in Mahila Thana,
Raipur in this regard. On the basis of the report, they
were called for counseling thrice but the appellant did not
take her with him. She is still ready to live with the
appellant, if the appellant and his family members do not
torture her for dowry. She has also alleged that the
appellant is a drunkard and womanizer.
4.   Isues were framed by the trial Court and parties led
evidence thereupon.
5.   Learned Court below on a close scrutiny of the
evidence led, material placed and submissions made, 
recorded a finding that the appellant failed to prove the
ground taken in the petition, and dismissed the suit.
6.   Shri H.B. Agrawal, Sr. Adv. for the appellant would
submit that trial Court had decided issue No. 1 and 3 in
appellant's favour  and the same were not challenged  and
had attained finality. Only on recording a finding that the
appellant himself does not want the respondent to live with
him as husband and wife, dismissed the petition. He would
contend that the finding recorded is not based on evidence
and material brought on record by the parties.  He would
further contend that false complaint regarding harassment
and beating in lieu of demand of dowry has been lodged by
the respondent; false allegations were pleaded in her
written statement showing the appellant as drunkard and
womanizer; all these allegations were negatived by the
trial Court. All these false allegations amount to cruelty
and the appellant is also entitled for a decree on the
ground of cruelty i.e. by Sec. 13(1)(ia) of the Act.
Reliance is placed by Shri Agrawal upon  the judgment of
the Supreme Court in the case of Lachman Uttamchand   
Kirplani -v- Meena @ Mota reported in AIR  1964 SC 40. He
would further contend that the respondent is living
separately since October, 2000, is not ready to come back
and join appellant's company in the matrimonial home at
Bhatapara. All efforts for reconciliation failed, for all
practical purposes marriage is long dead and over and the
appellant is also entitled for decree of divorce on the
ground of irretrievable breakdown of marriage.
7.   Per contra, Smt. Indira Tripathi, learned counsel for
the respondent would contend that it is the appellant and
his family who compelled the respondent to leave
matrimonial  home; the respondent was and is ready to live
with the appellant in the matrimonial home and to lead
happy married life. It is not correct that the respondent
ever pressurized the appellant to live at Raipur. There is
a finding in the proceeding before the criminal court in
 JC No. 291/2005 that the appellant's behaviour with the
respondent is cruel and he ignored her maintenance. On this
finding, the criminal court held that the respondent is
entitled to live separately and granted maintenance. The
aforesaid finding had attained finality and, therefore, it
cannot be said that she left matrimonial home at her own
with intention to bring the matrimonial relations
permanently to an end. She would further submit that the
allegations of drunkard and womanizer are due to emotional
outbursts and the same should not be considered as 
deliberate allegations with intention to harm prestige and
reputation of the respondent so as to constitute "cruelty"
under the Act.  Appeal preferred is deserve to be
dismissed.  Reliance has been placed by Smt. Indira
Tripathi on the following judgments-
             i.   Sushma Subhas Koshe v. Subhash Dattatraya Koshe (2005
               (12) SCC 204).
ii.  Shyam Sunder Kohli v. Sushma Kohli alias Satya Devi
(2004 (7) SCC 747).
iii. Broja Kishore Ghosh v. Smt. Krishna Ghosh (AIR 1989
Calcutta 327).
iv.  Dr. N. G. Dastane v. Mrs. S. Dastane (1975 (2) SCC
326).

  8.    I  have heard learned counsel for the parties  and
     perused the impugned judgment and decree as also the record
     of the court below.
9.   The question fall for consideration of this Court is
whether the appellant has made out a case for dissolution
of marriage under Section 13(1)(ia) and 13(1)(ib) of the
Act ?
10.  In order to appreciate rival contentions of the
parties, I have examined the pleadings of the parties and
evidence oral and documentary available on record.
Therefrom following factual position would emerge :-
  i.   The  respondent  does  not  want  to  live  in  her
       matrimonial home at Bhatapara. The respondent  wanted the
       appellant either to live and perform his job at Raipur  or
       to live at Raipur and continue with his job at Bhatapara.
ii.  The fact that when the appellant after birth of child
Ku. Anjali went Raipur to bring his wife, she refused to
come to Bhatapara, on the contrary, insisted appellant to
live at Raipur. In this regard, allegations contained in
para 3 of the petition were not specifically denied by the
respondent.
iii. No efforts were made by the respondent to join the
company of the appellant and to lead married life with him.
iv.  After a lapse of about 4 to 5 years, all of a sudden,
a complaint was lodged with Mahila Thana, Raipur and Police
Station, Bhatapara charging the appellant with harassment
and beating in lieu of demand of dowry.
v.   Before Mahila Thana, the respondent refused to live
with appellant in the matrimonial home at Bhatapara and
again insisted the appellant to live at Raipur.
vi.  Upon refusal by the appellant to live at Raipur,
application under Section 125 of the Cr.P.C. has been filed
in which the respondent has stated that she does not want
to live with the appellant as her and her daughter's life
is in danger in living with the appellant. Her mother
Rohini also stated in her statement before the Court in MJC
No. 291/2005 i.e. the application for grant of maintenance
under Section 125 of the Cr.P.C. that she does not want her
daughter i.e. the respondent, to live with the appellant.
vii. As per Ex. A-6, report of Police Station, Bhatapara,
the respondent wants appellant to live with him at Raipur
and she does not want to go to Bhatapara to live with her
husband and for this purpose, she has charged the appellant
with harassment and beaten in lieu of demand of dowry.
viii.     In her reply to the divorce petition, she had
said that she is still ready to live with appellant if the
appellant and his family members do not torture her for
dowry, also charged the appellant as drunkard and
womanizer. 
ix.  On a question asked to her in her cross examination
that earlier she refused to live with appellant on the
ground that in living with appellant, her life would be in
danger, then what are the changed circumstances under which 
now she is ready to live with the appellant, she has stated
that since she has lodged report with the police station,
therefore, now danger is over.
x.   The appellant has stated that in the light of serious
allegations of drunkard and womanizer and demand of dowry, 
now he cannot live with respondent and only divorce is the
solution.
xi.  The appellant has deposed in his statement in para 5
that the respondent at the time of marriage was Lecturer at
Daga College, Raipur and used to go there from Bhatapara,
for that, objection has never been made by the appellant or
his family members. This fact has not been controverted by
the respondent by asking any question to rebut the same nor
respondent in her statement had stated anything suggesting
that she is not working as Lecturer in Daga College,
Raipur.
  11.  Section 13(1)(ia) and 13(1)(ib) of the Act read thus:-

            "13.   Divorce.-(1)  Any  marriage  solemnized,
          whether before or after the commencement of  this
          Act,  may, on a petition presented by either  the
          husband or the wife, be dissolved by a decree  of
          divorce on the ground that the other party-
          1[(i) has,   after  the  solemnization   of   the
                marriage,  had voluntary sexual intercourse
                with  any  person  other than  his  or  her
                spouse; or
                (i-a)      has, after the solemnization  of
                the  marriage, treated the petitioner  with
                cruelty; or
                (i-b)     has deserted the petitioner for a
                continuous  period  of not  less  than  two
                years     immediately     preceding     the
                presentation of the petition; or]

  12.   In  Lachman Uttamchand Kirplani -v- Meena  @  Mota
     reported in AIR 1964 SC 40, the supreme Court has observed
     that  in  its essence desertion means the intentional
     permanent forsaking  and abandonment of one  spouse by the
     other without that other's consent and without reasonable
     cause. The essence of desertion is a total repudiation of
     the  obligation of marriage or an abandonment of  the
     deserted spouse with an intention to bring the cohabitation
     permanently to an end. Mere physical separation between the
     spouses or mere intention of one to separate from the other
     without  any overt act would not by itself amount  to
     desertion. Under the matrimonial law, desertion is not only
     a physical act but also involves essentially a mental act.
     To prove the ground of desertion, the appellant has to
     establish 4 essential conditions (i) factum of separation,
     (ii) animus deserendi, (iii) absence of his or her consent
     and (iv) absence of his or her conduct giving reasonable
     cause to the deserting spouse to leave the matrimonial home
     (Lachman Uttamchand Kirplani -v- Meena @ Mota (supra).
13.  By applying the law as settled by the Supreme Court in
the case referred above in the facts and circumstances of
the case, it is crystal clear that the respondent does not
want to live with the appellant in the matrimonial home at
Bhatapara.  The respondent is living separately at Raipur
with her parents without there being reasonable and
probably cause.  Desertion is a matter of inference to be
drawn in the facts and circumstances of each case. In the
present case, it is not in dispute  that both the spouses
are living separately from October, 2000 and since then,
there is no cohabitation between them. The respondent
refused to come back the matrimonial home even after giving
birth to Ku. Anjali.  The appellant was charged with
baseless allegation of harassment of beating in lieu of
demand of dowry and also described him as a person of bad 
character i.e. drunkard and womanizer.  She denied to live
with her husband at the time of her statement recorded in
 JC No. 291/2005. From above, the picture that emerges is 
that the respondent herself does not want to join the
company of the appellant at Bhatapara, and thus charge of
desertion stands proved.  The leanred court below thus
clearly committed an error in holding that appellant
himself does not want respondent to live with him.
14.  The other ground raised is ground of cruelty.
15.  The existence of cruelty depends not on the magnitude
but rather on the consequences of matrimonial offence of
cruelty actual or apprehended. Personalities of the parties
is an important element for the decision as to whether the
status between the two spouses had been cruel. Cruelty as
envisaged under the Act is not restricted to acts of
physical violence and may extend to behaviour which may 
cause pain and injury to the mind as well as to render the
continuance in matrimonial home an ordeal where it becomes 
impossible for them to live together without mental agony,
torture or distress. The expression "cruelty" as envisaged
under Section 13 of the Act clearly admits in its ambit and
scope such acts which may even cause mental agony to   
aggrieved party. Cruelty may result where the complaining
spouse establishes his/her being treated with cruelty
whether physical, mental, social or otherwise but the acts
complained of must be more serious than the ordinary wear
and tear of marriage falling in the category of conscious
acts cruel in nature as that is the underlying requirement
of the provision.
16.  The intention to be cruel is not an essential element
of cruelty as envisaged under Section 13(1)(i-a) of the
Act. If bitter waters are flowing it is not necessary to
enquire from which source they spring. The intention or
motive behind the cruelty has lost significance in the
changed society and the social atmosphere of the present
day. It is sufficient that if the cruelty is of the type
which indicates that the relations between the spouses had
deteriorated to such an extent  due to the conduct of one
or the other that it has become impossible for them to live
together without mental agony. In marital matters, the
feelings and attitudes of minds are material.
17.  Test of cruelty to be inferred by any conduct of
spouse in its ordinary and natural meaning. Cruelty is not
defined specifically. It is Courts responsibility to
interpret analysis and define it. The allegations of ill-
treatment, abusing indulgence in undesired activities,
neglect of matrimonial obligations and driving out the wife
out of her matrimonial home by her husband is mental
cruelty. Mental cruelty causes grievous injury and creates
reasonable apprehension of unsafe.
18.  The Supreme Court in case of Dr. N.G. Dastane (Supra)
observed in para 24 to 26 as under :

          "24.  The  normal  rule which  governs  civil
          proceedings is that a fact can be said to  be
          established   if   it   is   proved   by    a
          preponderance of probabilities. This  is  for
          the  reason  that  under  the  Evidence  Act,
          Section  3, a fact is said to be proved  when
          the  court  either believes it  to  exist  or
          considers  its existence so probable  that  a
          prudent man ought, under the circumstances of
          the   particular  case,  to  act   upon   the
          supposition  that  it  exists.   The   belief
          regarding the existence of a fact may thus be
          founded  on  a  balance of  probabilities.  A
          prudent    man    faced   with    conflicting
          probabilities   concerning  a  fact-situation
          will  act  on the supposition that  the  fact
          exists,    if   on   weighing   the   various
          probabilities he finds that the preponderance
          is   in  favour  of  the  existence  of   the
          particular  fact. As a prudent  man,  so  the
          court applies this test for finding whether a
          fact  in issue can be said to be proved.  The
          first  step  in this process is  to  fix  the
          probabilities,  the  second  to  weigh  them,
          though  the  two  may often intermingle.  The
          impossible is weeded out at the first  stage,
          the improbable at the second. Within the wide
          range of probabilities the court has often  a
          difficult  choice  to make  but  it  is  this
          choice which ultimately determines where  the
          preponderance    of    probabilities    lies.
          Important issues like those which affect  the
          status  of  parties demand a closer  scrutiny
          than  those  like  the loan on  a  promissory
          note:  "the  nature and gravity of  an  issue
          necessarily   determines   the   manner    of
          attaining  reasonable  satisfaction  of   the
          truth  of  the  issue1"; or as said  by  Lord
          Denning,  "the degree of probability  depends
          on  the subject-matter. In proportion as  the
          offence  is grave, so ought the proof  to  be
          clear".  But  whether the  issue  is  one  of
          cruelty  or of a loan on a pronote, the  test
          to  apply  is  whether on a preponderance  of
          probabilities the relevant fact is proved. In
          civil  cases this, normally, is the  standard
          of  proof  to  apply for finding whether  the
          burden of proof is discharged.
          25. Proof beyond reasonable doubt is proof by
          a  higher  standard  which generally  governs
          criminal  trials or trials involving  inquiry
          into  issues  of a quasi-criminal  nature.  A
          criminal  trial involves the liberty  of  the
          subject which may not be taken away on a mere
          preponderance   of  probabilities.   If   the
          probabilities are so nicely balanced  that  a
          reasonable,  not a vascillating, mind  cannot
          find  where the preponderance lies,  a  doubt
          arises regarding the existence of the fact to
          be  proved and the benefit of such reasonable
          doubt  goes  to the accused. It is  wrong  to
          import  such  considerations in trials  of  a
          purely civil nature.
          26.  Neither  Section 10  of  the  Act  which
          enumerates  the grounds on which  a  petition
          for  judicial separation may be presented nor
          Section 23 which governs the jurisdiction  of
          the  court to pass a decree in any proceeding
          under  the  Act requires that the  petitioner
          must  prove  his  case  beyond  a  reasonable
          doubt.  Section 23 confers on the  court  the
          power  to  pass a decree if it is "satisfied"
          on matters mentioned in clauses (a) to (e) of
          the  section.  Considering  that  proceedings
          under  the  Act are essentially  of  a  civil
          nature,   the  word  "satisfied"  must   mean
          "satisfied    on    a    preponderance     of
          probabilities"  and not "satisfied  beyond  a
          reasonable doubt". Section 23 does not  alter
          the standard of proof in civil cases."

  19.  The High Court of Calcutta in case of Broja Kishore
     Ghosh (Supra) observed in para 10 as under :

          "10.   What  acts  would  constitute   mental
          cruelty depend upon the circumstances of each
          case  e.g.  environment, status  in  society,
          education,   cultural   development,    local
          customs,   social  condition,  physical   and
          mental conditions of the parties.  Each  case
          depends   upon   a  variety  of   facts   and
          circumstances.  Reference may be made among a
          host   of  decisions  to  one  of  our  court
          reported in AIR 1978 Cal 87, Bijoli Chowdhury
          v.  Sukomal  Chowdhury.  In  fact,  there  is
          unanimity   of  judicial  opinion   that   to
          constitute cruelty the conduct complained  of
          should  be "grave and weighty" so as to  make
          cohabitation virtually unendurable.  It  must
          be something more serious than "ordinary wear
          and tear of the married life" as Lord Asquith
          observed in Buchler v. Buchler, (1947) 1  All
          ER  319.  Again  the  conduct  complained  of
          "must"  be  such  that no  reasonable  person
          would  tolerate  it  or  consider  that   the
          complainant  shall be called upon  to  endure
          it.   Before conduct can be called cruel,  it
          must touch a certain pitch of severity."

  20.   A  Division Bench of Kerala High Court in case  of
     Gangadharan v. T.K. Thankam, reported in AIR 1988 Kerala
     244, has held in para 19 as under :

          "19.  In the statement of objects and reasons
          of  the Amending Act of 1976, the object  was
          stated   to   be  liberalise  the  provisions
          relating  to divorce (vide Gazette  of  India
          Extraordinary  Part  II Jan-April  1976  page
          780), and therefore, it is difficult to agree
          with the view that the amendment was intended
          to   restore   the  law  as  to  cruelty   as
          interpreted by English Courts. Therefore, the
          intention in brining the amendment could  not
          have  been  to  reintroduce  the  concept  of
          danger  of  life or limb.  According  to  the
          amended   provision,  the  courts   have   to
          interpret  and analyse and define what  would
          constitute   cruelty  depending   upon   many
          factors such asocial status of parties, their
          education,  physical and  mental  conditions,
          customs, and traditions and come to  its  own
          conclusion that acts proved would  amount  to
          cruelty in a given case.  It is difficult  to
          lay  down a precise definition or to give  an
          exhaustive  description of the  circumstances
          which   would   constitute   cruelty.     The
          amendment  was brought on the  basis  of  the
          59th report of Law Commission which was prior
          to  Dastane's case to the effect that  it  is
          sufficient  to prove cruelty as a ground  for
          divorce  and  leave it to the  court  on  the
          facts  of  each  case to decide  whether  the
          conduct amounts to cruelty.   In our view the
          cruelty  should  be of such a  nature  as  to
          satisfy the conscience of the court that  the
          relationship   between   the   parties    had
          deteriorated to such an extent that it  would
          be  impossible  for  them  to  live  together
          without mental agony, torture or distress  to
          entitle   the   party  to   secure   divorce.
          Physical violence is not absolutely assential
          to constitute cruelty and a consistent course
          of  conduce  inflicting  immeasurable  mental
          agony and torture may well constitute cruelty
          within the meaning of the Act. Mental cruelty
          may  consist of verbal abuses and insults  by
          using filthy and abusive language leading  to
          constant disturbance of mental peace  of  the
          other party."

  21.   The  High  Court of Delhi in case of Smt.  Savitri
     Balchandani v. Mulchand Balchandani, reported in AIR 1987
     Delhi 52, has held in para 39 and 42 as under:

          "39.  Both  the  abovesaid reasons  are  good
          reasons   for   permitting   any   party   to
          matrimonial  proceedings  to  rely  upon  the
          averments  contained  in  the  pleadings,  to
          establish  whether  one party  is  guilty  of
          cruelty towards the other of them.  For  this
          reason I am of the view that assertions  made
          in  para 8 of the written statement can  also
          be   looked   into   for  the   purposes   of
          determining  whether the appellant  wife  has
          been  guilty  of  cruelty to  the  respondent
          husband.   The appellant respondent wife,  it
          is  clear  from Ex. P-1, is used  to  hurling
          abuses on the respondent husband, using  foul
          and filthy language and has persistently been
          abusing  the  respondent  husband  of  having
          committed  adultery  with  persons  known  or
          unknown.  The only named person with whom the
          respondent  is  alleged  to  have   committed
          adultery  is  Naina Wazirani  on  29th  Sept.
          1975.  The wife stated in her examination  in
          court :

               "On 29th Oct. 1975 (should be 29th Sept.
          1975) the petitioner came to the house in the
          evening. He was accompanied by a girl,  named
          Naina Wazirani."

          From  the  above deposition, if it is  to  be
          believed, it would follow that the  wife  had
          seen  the  husband bring a girl  named  Naina
          Wazirani  into  the house.  This  necessarily
          means  that  the two of them  had  walked  in
          together,  into the house.  In  view  of  the
          allegations   in  para  8  of   the   written
          statement, it is extremely unlikely that  the
          wife  would  have permitted  the  husband  to
          bring "Naina Wazirani" into the house without
          raising hue and cry, and what is more,  would
          not  have  permitted `her' and the respondent
          to  get into and to lie in bed together.  The
          wife  deposed that "I saw both of them  lying
          on  the  bed,  when I objected  to  that  the
          petitioner   started  beating  me   and   the
          meantime  my  son  and  two  neighbours   Mr.
          Bhagwan  Dass Malik and Mr. Rajinder  Pershad
          (Krishan  Chand  also came there)  also  came
          there and the girl slipped away."
          42.  To  me  it is clear that the allegations
          made  in para 8 of written statement  by  the
          respondent wife are false and they were false
          to her knowledge.  Not only these allegations
          were false, they were per se defamatory.   It
          has been said in AIR 1966 Mad 363 that making
          defamatory  assertions in the  plaint  signed
          and  filed  by the plaintiff, is publication.
          On   a  parity  of  reasoning,  it  will   be
          publication, when written statement is signed
          and  filed.   The Madrass case, cited  above,
          which related to a complaint under S. 500  of
          the  Penal  Code,  the complainant  had  been
          described  as  a concubine which  words  were
          held to be per se defamatory.  In the instant
          case,  in the written statement (para 8),  it
          is  asserted  that the petitioner (respondent
          before  me)  "is  a man of bad  character..".
          Allegations   in  para  8  of   the   written
          statement  are  per  se defamatory,  as  they
          assert  that the husband is an indiscriminate
          Promiscuous  Philanderer,  and  in  view   of
          publication  of  allegations,  they  are   by
          themselves cruelty."

  22.   Thus, there is long line of decisions holding that
     false,  scandalous, malicious, baseless and  unproved
     allegations made by one spouse whether in letters or in
     written statements or in the cross-examination amounts to
     cruelty. False charge can be considered   to establish
     cruelty even though it was not taken in the pleading.
     Whether  the allegations made by wife in her  written
     statement and the questions put by her  counsel to the
     petitioner in cross-examination amount to mental cruelty
     within the meaning of said sub-clause ?...... It is true
     that the said averments must be read in the contest in
     which  they were made. At the same time, it  must  be
     remembered that the wife was merely defending herself and
     it was not necessary for her to go beyond that and allege
     that  the petitioner is a drunkard or womanizer.  The
     respondent could not substantiate her allegation that the
     appellant and his family members are torturing her mentally
     and physically for demand of dowry and the trial Court has
     rightly found such allegations as baseless and decided the
     issue against the respondent.       In the same way the
     allegation that the appellant is living adulterous life, is
     a womanizer and also drunkard are also rightly held to be
     not proved by the trial Court.
23.  Appellant has stated in para 11 of his statement that
no person can tolerate such false allegations upon his
character and after such serious false allegations, it is
not possible to live together as husband and wife.  In the
considered opinion of this Court also, the husband, in
position of the petitioner herein would be justified in
saying that it is not possible for him to live with the
wife in view of the said allegations. Even otherwise
peculiar facts of the case show that the respondent is
deliberately feigning a posture which is wholly unnatural
and beyond the comprehension of a reasonable persons. She  
is fully aware that the marriage is long dead and over. She
is living separately for a period of about 10 years. She is
charging appellant with grave charge of harassment and
beating in lieu of demand of dowry and also charging him as
a person of bad character. According to her, earlier she
has not joined appellant's company on the fear of life and
now despite all that, she says that she wants to live with
the appellant. Obvious conclusion is that she has resolved
to live in agony only to make life a miserable-hell for the
appellant as well. This type of callous attitude in the
context of fact of this case, leaves no manner of doubt in
our mind that the respondent is bent upon treating the
appellant with mental-cruelty. It is abundantly clear that
the marriage between the parties has broken down 
irretrievably and there is no chance of their coming
together, or living together again, all efforts for
reconciliation failed. Having regard to the facts and
circumstances of the case, I am of the opinion that the
marriage between the parties should be dissolved under
Section 13(1)(ia) of the Act.
24.  In view of the foregoing in the opinion of this Court,
learned Tribunal has erred in dismissing the application
filed by the appellant.
25.  In the result, the appeal deserves to be and is hereby
allowed and the marriage between the parties is dissolved.
Decree be drawn accordingly. 
26.  No order as to costs.

                                             Judge
