Criminal Appeal No 1304 of 1996 Madhukar Vs. State of Madhya Pradesh now Chhattisgarh

HIGH COURT OF CHATTISGARH AT BILASPUR          

 Criminal Appeal No 1304 of 1996

 Madhukar 
                                              ...Petitioners
                           Versus

 State of Madhya Pradesh now Chhattisgarh  
                                              ...Respondents

! Shri Vishnu Koshta and Shri N P Koshta counsel for the appellant

^ Shri Ajeet Singh PL for the State

 CORAM: Honble Mr Justice Pritinker Diwaker 

 Dated: 05/01/2010

: Judgement 

                            J U D G M E N T
                                 05012010

          CRIMINAL APPEAL UNDER SECTION 374 OF THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE               


      This  appeal  is directed against the  judgment  dated
6.8.1996  passed by the Additional Sessions Judge,  Dhamtari
in  Sessions Trial No. 299/1994 convicting the appellant for
the offence punishable under Section 306 of the Indian Penal
Code and sentencing him to undergo rigorous imprisonment for
four years and pay fine of Rs. 1000 in default of payment of
fine  to  further  undergo  rigorous  imprisonment  for  six
months. 


2.    Case  of the prosecution in brief is that marriage  of
deceased  Nita with the present appellant was  performed  in
the  year  1990  and out of their wedlock two children  were
born. Further case of the prosecution is that from the  very
beginning of marriage the deceased was subjected to  cruelty
by  the  appellant and his mother namely Phulbasan  Bai  for
demand  of dowry as a result of which she committed  suicide
on  20.3.1994 by consuming poison. Merg intimation  Ex.  P-9
was  given by an employee of the hospital and thereafter FIR
Ex.  P-13 was registered on 9.4.2004. Dead body of Nita  was
sent  for  post  mortem examination to Government  Hospital,
Dhamtari  where  Dr. Ramesh Kumar Tripathi (PW-9)  conducted  
the  post  mortem and vide his report (Ex. P-6) opined  that
cause of death was cardio respiratory failure as a result of
poisonous   substance.  After  completion  of  investigation
charge sheet was filed against the accused/appellant and his
mother Phulbasan Bai. 


3.   So as to hold the accused/appellant guilty, prosecution
has examined as many as 19 witnesses in support of its case.
Statement  of the accused/appellant was also recorded  under
section  313 of the Code of Criminal Procedure in  which  he
denied  the  charges levelled against him  and  pleaded  his
innocence and false implication in the case.


4.   After hearing the parties the trial Court has convicted
and  sentenced  the accused / appellant for the  offence  as
mentioned   above.  However,  accused  Phulbasan   Bai   was
acquitted of the charge levelled against her.



5.    Heard counsel for the parties and perused the material
available on record including the judgment impugned.

6.   Counsel for the appellant submits that the deceased was
having some mental disorder even before her marriage and was
being  treated for the same. He submits that even after  her
marriage,  the  deceased continued  to  suffer  from  mental
impairment  and as a result of which she committed  suicide.
He  submits that conviction of the appellant is based on the
statement  of Malti Bai (PW-19) who happened to  be  closely
related  to  the  deceased. According to  him,  though  this
witness has made an allegation against the appellant  saying
that  the  deceased used to inform her about being subjected
to  cruelty  by the accused, she has categorically  admitted
that  she has never seen the appellant assaulting or beating
the  deceased. He submits that the marriage of the  deceased
with the appellant was performed through Sukhi Ram (PW-6)  -
father  of  Malti (PW-19) which itself shows that Malti  has
not  stated the facts correctly before the court. He submits
that  the  statement of the brother of the  deceased  namely
Ramanath  Sahu  (PW-3) is wholly unreliable for  the  reason
that  not  only he has exaggerated his version in the  Court
but  has implicated the appellant simply because his  sister
has  died. According to him, even if the entire case of  the
prosecution is taken as it is the offence under Section  306
IPC is not made out as the ingredients of abetment laid down
in section 107 IPC are totally missing in this case.

7.    On  the  other  hand supporting the impugned  judgment
counsel   for   the   respondent/State  submits   that   the
accused/appellant used to harass the deceased for demand  of 
dowry  to such an extent that she was compelled to take  the
extreme  step of suicide and therefore the impugned judgment
being wholly justified does not require any interference  in
appeal.

8.    Heard counsel for the parties and perused the material
available on record including the judgment impugned.

9.    Shiv Prasad (PW-1) - father of the deceased has stated
in  his  evidence  that the marriage of  his  daughter  (the
deceased)  had taken place with the appellant  in  the  year
1990.  He  has  stated that when on the occasion  of  Hareli
festival  his daughter had come to his house, she  had  told
him  to  have been harassed and subjected to cruelty by  the
appellant and his mother saying that the ring, wrist  watch,
fan  and  cycle  which  had been  given  as  dowry  were  of
substandard  quality. This witness has further  stated  that
the  appellant  had written a letter to  him  vide  Ex.  P-1
demanding dowry. According to this witness, as the  deceased 
was  not feeling well, he had asked the appellant to provide
proper  treatment  to  her. In the  cross  examination  this
witness  has admitted that even before marriage the deceased
was having some mental problem and for that she was taken to 
a  place  known as Meeradatar for treatment. He has  further
stated  that  when  mental condition  of  the  deceased  had
improved,  her  marriage was solemnized.  This  witness  has
admitted  that he had informed the appellant before marriage
in  respect  of mental disorder of the deceased. Similar  is
the  statement  of  Ganga  Bai (PW-2),  the  mother  of  the
deceased  where  she  has  stated  that  her  daughter   was
subjected  to  cruelty  by  the appellant  and  his  mother.
However,  in  paragraph 7 of her cross examination  she  has
admitted  that  her daughter was having some mental  problem
even  before marriage. Statement of Ramanath Sahu     (PW-3) 
goes  to show that he has tried to make improvements in  his
court  statement  and the same is full of contradiction  and
omissions  in  comparison  to the statement  recorded  under
Section   161  of  the  Code  of  Criminal  Procedure.   The
prosecution has filed a letter written to the father of  the
deceased  vide  Ex.  P-1 in which it is mentioned  that  the
deceased was not obeying his instructions and used to behave
in  an  abnormal manner. The said letter further mentions  a
request  made by the appellant to the father of the deceased
to  come to him and explore some solution. A bare perusal of
the  letter (Ex.P-1) makes it clear that there was no demand
of  dowry ever made by the appellant and the same appears to
have  been  written when the appellant was in  a  frustrated
state.  Sukhi Ram (PW-6), father of Malti (PW-19) has stated
in  his statement that his daughter Malti had told him  that
the  deceased was subjected to harassment and cruelty by the 
appellant and his mother but he was not aware as to how much 
dowry  was  given  to the appellant by  the  father  of  the
deceased.  Angesh (PW-7) - the brother of the  deceased  has
also  made  an  allegation against the  appellant  regarding
cruelty, but from his statement it is apparent that  he  too
has improved his version by way of exaggeration. Dr. Bhojraj
sahu  (PW-8)  has stated in his statement that he  practices
medicine and once when the deceased had consumed poison  she    
was  brought to him for treatment. Dr. Ramesh Kumar Tripathi
(PW-9) who had conducted the post mortem examination on  the  
dead body of the deceased has stated that no external injury
was  noticed by him on the body of the deceased and that she
had  died  due to consumption of poison. Malti  (PW-19)  has
stated  that she was the neighbour of the deceased  who  was
her  so called sister also. She has stated that the deceased
used to inform her about the cruelty meted out to her by the
appellant and his mother. This witness has however  admitted
that  she  had  never  seen the accused demanding  dowry  or
subjecting the deceased to cruelty. Though this witness  had
seen  the deceased on the date of incident with some  injury
on  her  hand  which was bleeding also, this aspect  of  her
statement  does  not get support from the statement  of  Dr.
Ramesh  Kumar  Tripathi (Pw-9) who had  conducted  the  post 
mortem examination on the body of the deceased. Moreover, as 
the  marriage of the deceased with the appellant  had  taken
place through the father of this witness, her statement also
appears to be doubtful.

10.   Thus  in  the  light of the aforesaid discussion,  the
crucial question to be answered by this Court is whether the
allegations made against the appellant can make out  a  case
under  Section  306 IPC. Answer is of course  `no'  for  the
reason  that  the  ingredients  of  abetment  defined  under
Section 107 IPC do not have even a fleeting glimpse thereto.
To  have a ready reference, the said provision is reproduced
as under:
     Section 107. A person abets the doing of a  thing,
     who -
     First.  - Instigates any person to do that  thing;
     or
     Secondly  - Engages with one or more other  person
     or persons in any conspiracy for the doing of that
     thing,  if an act or illegal omission takes places
     in  pursuance of that conspiracy, and in order  to
     the doing of that thing; or
     Thirdly.-  Intentionally  aids,  by  any  act   or
     illegal omission, the doing of that thing.
       Explanation  1.  -  A  person  who,  by  willful
     misrepresentation, or by willful concealment of  a
     material  fact  which  he is  bound  to  disclose,
     voluntarily  causes or procures,  or  attempts  to
     cause  or procure, a thing to be done, is said  to
     instigate the doing of that thing.
     Explanation 2.- Whoever, either prior to or at the
     time of the commission of an act, does anything in
     order  to  facilitate the commission of that  act,
     and thereby facilitates the commission thereof, is
     said to aid the doing of that act."

11.   To convict a person for an offence under Section  306
IPC  it  has to be seen that instigation to do a particular
thing   must   be  there.  `Instigation'  literally   means
provocation,  incitement, urge  or  persuasion  to  do  any
thing.  In this case none of the witnesses has made even  a
whisper  that the deceased was abetted by the appellant  to
commit suicide. Most of the witnesses including the parents
of  the  deceased  have stated that the  deceased  was  not
having  mental  equilibrium even before  marriage  and  was
receiving  treatment for the same. Thus it can be  presumed
that the deceased might have taken this extreme step at the
cost  of  her life under the influence of mental imbalance.
Even  according to the statement of Shiv Prasad (PW-1) once
the  accused/appellant had written a letter (Ex.P-1) to him
requesting  to  visit  him and solve  the  problem  as  the
deceased  was  not  obeying  his instructions.  The  entire
evidence  brought on record goes to show that the  deceased
was  not  actuated  by any abetment  to  end  her  life  by
committing suicide rather it is the mental imbalance  which
drove her to do so.

12.   The aforesaid discussion if weighed with the evidence
on  record, does not give any clue to maintain the impugned
judgment  convicting and sentencing the appellant as  shown
above.  Impugned  judgment is not in  consonance  with  the
material collected by the prosecution and therefore, it has
to be dislodged.

13.   Appeal,  as  a  result, is allowed and  the  judgment
impugned is set aside. Appellant is acquitted of the charge
levelled  against him. He be let loose if not  required  in
any other case.

                                             Judge
