Criminal Appeal 1155 of 2002 AND  Criminal Revision 606 of 2002 1  Sanjay  Kumar  Kesharwani Vs. 1  The  State of Chhattisgarh

HIGH COURT OF CHATTISGARH AT BILASPUR      

        Criminal Appeal 1155 of 2002 AND  Criminal Revision 606 of 2002

           1  Sanjay  Kumar  Kesharwani

            2  Smt Tulsi  Bai

            3  Nirmal   Kumar  Gupta
                        ...Petitioners

                      Versus



            1  The  State of Chhattisgarh

             2  Dau  Ram

             3  Suryakant

             4  Smt  Rakumani Bai

             5  Smt  Butani  Bai
                         ...Respondents


!                 Mr Prafull Bharat,Mr Ghanshyam Patel

^                 Mr  V V S  Murthy, Mr V C Ottalwar


 CORAM:    HONBLE MR T P SHARMA AND HONBLE MR  N K  AGARWAL JJ                

  Dated: 21/01/2010

:  JUDGEMENT   

    Criminal appeal under Section 374 2  of the Code of
                  Criminal Procedure 1973


 Criminal revision under Sections 397  401 of the Code of
                  Criminal Procedure 1973


  The  following  judgment of the Court was  passed  by  T.P.

Sharma, J: -

1.    Since  the  aforesaid criminal appeal and the  criminal

  revision are arising out of the same judgment dated 30-9-2002

  passed  by  the 3rd Additional Sessions Judge  (Fast  Track

  Court),  Janjgir, in Sessions Trial No.113/2002,  they  are

  being disposed of by this common judgment. 


2.   Criminal Appeal No.1155/2002 has been filed on behalf of

  appellant  Sanjay Kumar Kesharwani against the judgment  of

  conviction &amp; order of sentence dated 30-9-2002 passed by the

  3rd Additional Sessions Judge (Fast Track Court), Janjgir, in

  Sessions  Trial  No.113/2002, whereby &amp; whereunder  learned

  Additional Sessions Judge after holding the appellant guilty

  for  commission of offence under Sections 302 &amp; 201 of  the

  I.P.C., sentenced him to undergo imprisonment for life &amp; pay

  fine of Rs.5,000/-, in default of payment of fine to further

  undergo R.I. for two years and to undergo R.I. for two years,

  respectively.


3.    Criminal Revision No.606/2002 has been filed on  behalf

  of petitioners Smt. Tulsi Bai &amp; Nirmal Kumar Gupta, mother &amp;

  brother of the deceased, respectively, against the judgment

  of  acquittal dated 30-9-2002 passed by the 3rd  Additional

  Sessions Judge (Fast Track Court), Janjgir, in Sessions Trial

  No.113/2002, whereby learned Additional Sessions Judge  has 

  acquitted the accused/respondents No.2 to 5 of the  charges

  alleged against them.


4.     Judgment   is  impugned  by  appellant  Sanjay   Kumar

  Kesharwani  on  the ground that without  any  credible  and

  clinching  evidence especially relating  to  circumstantial

  evidence against the appellant the Court below has convicted

  &amp; sentenced him as aforementioned. 


5.    The revision petitioners have impugned the judgment  on

  the  ground  that  the Court below has not  considered  the

  evidence  available on record sufficient for conviction  of

  respondents No.2 to 5 and thereby committed illegality.


6.    Case  of  the prosecution, in brief, is that  appellant

  Sanjay  Kumar is husband of deceased Kanti Bai.  Respondent 

  No.2 Dau Ram &amp; respondent No.4 Rukmani Bai are father-in-law 

  &amp;  mother-in-law and respondent No.3 Suryakant &amp; respondent 

  No.5  Butani  Bai are elder brother-in-law &amp;  sister-in-law

  (jeth jethani) of deceased Kanti Bai.  On the fateful day of

  26-12-2001 at about 8 a.m. Kanti Bai, who was married  with

  appellant  Sanjay  Kumar two years prior  to  the  date  of

  incident, died as a result of burn injuries in the house of

  the appellant.  Appellant Sanjay Kumar reported the matter to

  Police Station Shivrinarayan vide merg Ex.P-18 in which  it

  has been mentioned that while he was sitting in the shop his

  father Dau Ram informed him over telephone at about 8.15 a.m.

  that toilet is closed from inside and smoke was coming  out

  from  the toilet, on which he went to house and broken  the

  door of the toilet.  Kanti Bai was found dead as a result of

  burn  injuries.   On  the basis of merg, the  Investigating

  Officer left for the scene of occurrence and after summoning

  the witnesses vide Ex.P-1, inquest over the dead body of the

  deceased was prepared vide Ex.P-2.  Dead body was sent  for

  autopsy to the Assistant Surgeon, Shivrinarayan vide Ex.P-17

  and  autopsy was conducted by the team of doctors Dr.  M.L.

  Sahu (PW-10) &amp; Dr. N. Prasad vide Ex.P-4, who found following

  injuries on the person of the deceased: -

  O    96% superficial burns;
O    dead body was at the stage of pugilistic boxer attitude,
singling of hairs;
O    redline not present between burnt and un-burnt parts;
O    smell of kerosene was present on burnt piece of
underwear found over the body;
O    faecal  matter came out from anus;
O    tongue protruded, but not turned into black colour;
O    mouth was closed; and 
O    eyelids were half open.

  On  internal  examination, neck &amp; trachea  were  congested,

  but  carbon particle was not found inside the neck, trachea

  &amp;   larynx.   Death  was  due  to  asphyxia.   Viscera  was

  preserved  for  further  test to  know  about  presence  of

  carboxyhaemoglobin in blood.


7.    Two liters of kerosene found inside the jerry can,  one

  matchbox, two burnt match sticks, one small crowbar, one old

  plastic  mug,  burnt  piece  of  terricot  sari,  piece  of

  petticoat, un-burnt bed sheet, burnt piece of necklace  and

  bucket were seized from the spot vide Ex.P-3.  Query was made

  to the doctors on which they opined that death as a result of

  asphyxia was due to strangulation or suffocation and  death

  was  homicidal in nature, vide Ex.P-7.  Photographs of  the

  spot and dead body were taken vide Exs.P-10 to P-14 by  Raj

  Kumar  Studio, same were recovered vide Ex.P-8A along  with

  negatives Ex.P-16.  On the basis of merg intimation, F.I.R.

  was registered vide Ex.P-21.  Sealed articles received after

  autopsy were seized vide Ex.P-22.  Seized articles were sent

  for chemical examination vide Ex.P-28.  Patwari prepared spot

  map vide Ex.P-8.  Statements of the witnesses were recorded

  under  Section  161 of the Cr.P.C. and after completion  of

  investigation, charge sheet was filed before  the  Judicial

  Magistrate First Class, Janjgir, who in turn, committed the

  case to the Court of Sessions, Bilaspur, from where learned

  Additional Sessions Judge received the case on transfer for

  trial.


8.    In  order  to  prove  the  guilt  of  the  appellant  &amp;

  respondents No.2 to 5, the prosecution has examined as many 

  as  fifteen  witnesses.  The accused  were  examined  under

  Section  313  of  the  Cr.P.C. in  which  they  denied  the

  circumstances appearing against them, pleaded innocence and 

  false implication.  Defence has examined Rajesh Kumar Gupta 

  (DW-1),  brother-in-law of accused/respondent No.3  Raju  @

  Suryakant,  who has deposed that on 25-12-2001 Suryakant  &amp; 

  Butani Bai came to his house at Baradwar, they stayed till 26-

  12-2001  and  on 26-12-2001 at about 10.30 - 11  a.m.  they

  proceeded for their house by motorcycle.


9.    After  affording opportunity of hearing to the  parties

  learned Additional Sessions Judge has convicted &amp; sentenced

  appellant  Sanjay  Kumar  as aforementioned  and  acquitted

  respondents No.2 to 5.


10.   We  have heard Mr. Prafull Bharat, learned counsel  for

  appellant Sanjay Kumar; Mr. Ghanshyam Patel, learned counsel 

  for revision petitioners Smt. Tulsi Bai &amp; Nirmal Kumar Gupta;

  Mr.  V.V.S. Murthy, learned Deputy Advocate General for the

  State; and Mr. V.C. Ottalwar, learned counsel for respondents

  No.2 to 5.  We have perused the judgment impugned and record 

  of the Court below.


11.   Mr. Prafull Bharat, learned counsel appearing on behalf

  of appellant Sanjay Kumar, vehemently argued that the case is

  based on circumstantial evidence.  In case of circumstantial

  evidence, the prosecution is required to prove the complete

  chain  of  circumstances that there is no escape  from  the

  conclusion that in all human probabilities, the  crime  was

  committed  by  the accused and none else.  Learned  counsel

  further argued that the appellant has lodged merg intimation

  in which he has mentioned that he was present in his shop, he

  was informed by his father on telephone about the incident,

  then he went to his house where the burnt dead body of  the

  deceased was found inside the toilet, the toilet was closed

  from inside, they have broken the door of the toilet and took

  out the dead body from the toilet.  According to the finding

  of  the  Court below, three circumstances were against  the

  appellant viz., (1) in his examination under Section 313 of

  the Cr.P.C. he has not supported the fact of merg intimation

  that he has received telephone call from his father, but has

  deposed  that the telephone call which he received was  not

  clear and it appears that it was from his father which shows

  that he is concealing the truth; (2) presence of two liters

  of kerosene in the jerry can which was unnatural; and (3) the

  dead body was not found inside the toilet, but was found in

  the courtyard and the accused has removed the dead body from 

  the   toilet.   Learned  counsel  also  argued  that  these

  circumstances are virtually not the circumstances against the

  appellant sufficient for drawing inference that the appellant

  is  the person who has committed the offence and except the

  appellant nobody has committed the offence.


12.   Mr. Prafull Bharat, learned counsel appearing on behalf

  of  appellant Sanjay Kumar, contended that in  the  present

  case,  autopsy was conducted by Dr. M.L. Sahu (PW-10) along  

  with another doctor, Dr. N. Prasad, vide Ex.P-4.  They have

  not  found  any  injury other than the burn injuries.   The

  evidence of Dr. M.L. Sahu (PW-10) shows that with a view to

  confirm cause of death whether the burns were ante-mortem or

  not,  viscera was preserved.  But the prosecution  has  not

  obtained  the  chemical  analysis report  to  show  whether

  carboxyhaemoglobin was present in blood or not which was the

  conclusive  proof  relating to ante-mortem  or  post-mortem

  burns.  In case of sudden death as a result of shock at the

  time  burn,  carbon particles may not be found  inside  the

  trachea  and  other  internal  parts  of  the  body.    The

  prosecution was under obligation to prove its case beyond all

  reasonable doubts and to prove that the burn was post-mortem

  and  the  death was ante-mortem as a result of injury  over

  neck, but no injury over neck was found.  The prosecution has

  not proved that the burns were post-mortem.  In the present

  case,   the  prosecution  has  utterly  failed   to   prove

  circumstantial evidence against the appellant.


13.   Mr. Prafull Bharat, learned counsel appearing on behalf

  of appellant Sanjay Kumar, placed reliance in the matter of

  Sharad Birdhichand Sarda v. State of Maharashtra1 in  which

  while dealing with the question of circumstantial evidence,

  the  Apex  Court has laid down some conditions relating  to

  proving of circumstantial evidence.  Learned counsel further

  placed reliance in the matter of Nesar Ahmed and another v.

  State of Bihar2 in which it has been held by the Apex Court

  that in case of circumstantial evidence in murder case  the

  prosecution  is required to lead unimpeachable evidence  to

  show  that  the accused was present in the house where  the

  deceased died as a result of burn injuries.  Learned counsel

  also  relied  upon  the  Modi's Medical  Jurisprudence  and

  Toxicology relating to presence of pugilistic boxer attitude

  of the dead body which is suggestive of the fact that burns

  were ante-mortem.


14.   On  the  other hand, Mr. V.V.S. Murthy, learned  Deputy

  Advocate General appearing on behalf of the State, vehemently

  argued that the circumstantial evidence adduced on behalf of

  the prosecution is sufficient for drawing inference that the

  appellant  is the person who has committed the offence  and

  except the appellant, nobody has committed the offence.  The

  doctor has categorically and specifically opined that  burn

  injury  was  post-mortem  and death  was  as  a  result  of

  strangulation.


15.  Mr. Ghanshyam Patel, learned counsel appearing on behalf

of  the  revision  petitioners, argued that evidence  of  the

  doctor &amp; other witnesses are sufficient for drawing inference

  that  the  appellant along with respondents No.2 to  5  had

  committed  the offence of murder of deceased Kanti  Bai  in

  furtherance of the common object of unlawful assembly formed

  by  them  and all the accused are liable for commission  of

  offence,  but  the  Court  below  has  illegally  acquitted

  respondents No.2 to 5 and thereby committed illegality.


16.   Mr.  V.C. Ottalwar, learned counsel appearing on behalf

  of  respondents No.2 to 5, vehemently opposed the  revision

  petition and argued that the prosecution is under obligation

  to prove its case beyond all reasonable doubts.  In case of

  conviction   based   on   circumstantial   evidence,    the

  circumstantial evidence in order to sustain conviction must

  be  complete  and  incapable of explanation  of  any  other

  hypothesis than that of the guilt of the accused  and  such

  evidence should not only be consistent with the guilt of the

  accused but should be inconsistent with his innocence.


17.   In order to appreciate the arguments advanced on behalf

  of  the parties, we have examined the evidence available on

  record.


18.   In the present case, the prosecution has tried to prove

  the  fact  that  deceased Kanti Bai died  as  a  result  of

  suffocation/strangulation and not as a result of ante-mortem

  burn injuries, but according to the appellant &amp; respondents

  No.2  to  5,  deceased Kanti Bai died as a result  of  burn

  injuries  and  burn was ante-mortem.  Even  otherwise,  the

  prosecution was under obligation to prove that burn  injury

  was not ante-mortem in nature and deceased Kanti Bai died as

  a result of suffocation or strangulation.


19.   In  the  present case, conviction of the  appellant  is

  based  on circumstantial evidence.  Deceased Kanti Bai  was

  married to appellant Sanjay Kumar two years prior to the date

  of  incident and she died on 26-12-2001 in the house of the

  appellant &amp; respondents No.2 to 5.  Appellant Sanjay Kumar is

  husband  of  the deceased and respondents  No.2  to  5  are

  relatives of husband of the deceased.  Autopsy was conducted

  by Dr. M.L. Sahu (PW-10) vide Ex.P-4.  Inquest was prepared

  by Vindhyachal Singh (PW-14), Assistant Sub Inspector, vide

  Ex.P-2.


20.   Dr. M.L. Sahu (PW-10) has deposed that on 26-12-2001 at

  about 4.35 p.m. he along with Dr. N. Prasad conducted autopsy

  on  the dead body of Kanti Bai, 96% superficial burns  were

  found  over  her  body;  chest,  neck,  face  &amp;  head  were

  charcoaled; the dead body was in pugilistic stage which was

  normally  found in case of ante-mortem burns;  singling  of

  hairs was also found; there was no redline between burnt &amp; un-

  burnt parts of the body; burnt piece of underwear found over

  the body was removed and presence of kerosene smell was found  

  in  the burnt piece of underwear; faecal  passed from anus;

  tongue  was  protruded but was not stained; another  injury

  except burn injury was not found over the body and no injury

  was found over neck.


21.   According to the opinion of doctor and Ex.P-4, cause of

  death  was  post-mortem burn injury which  is  not  correct

  because  any injury after the death of a person  would  not

  cause the death of person.  It appears that according to the

  opinion of doctor, burn injury was post-mortem and not  the

  cause of death.  Mode of death was asphyxia.


22.   Dr. M.L. Sahu (PW-10) has deposed in his evidence  that

  viscera was preserved and presence of carboxyhaemoglobin in

  blood may be confirmed by examination of viscera.  In case of

  ante-mortem burn injury presence of carboxyhaemoglobin would 

  be the condition precedent.  The doctor has admitted in para

  16  of  his cross-examination that if a person would be  in

  contact of high flame continuously, there may be symptom of

  post-mortem  burn over the dead body.  He has explained  in

  para  19  that presence of redline between the  injury  and

  pugilistic attitude is also helpful in deciding whether the

  injury  is  ante-mortem or post-mortem.  In case of  sudden

  death  due  to  shock  before spreading  of  flame,  carbon

  particles may not be found inside the respiratory track.  He

  has further admitted in para 24 of his cross-examination that

  they have not found any symptom of strangulation, but he has

  denied the suggestion that under pressure of the prosecution

  &amp;  police officers they have prepared false report and gave

  false opinion.


23.   According to autopsy report Ex.P-4 and evidence of  Dr.

  M.L. Sahu (PW-10), 96% superficial burn injuries were found

  over  the  body of the deceased; attitude of the  body  was

  pugilistic boxer; redlines were not present between burnt &amp;

  un-burnt  parts  of the body; faecal  came out  from  anus;

  tongue was protruded but there was no blackening over tongue;

  mouth was closed; eyes were semi-closed; trachea, larynx  &amp;

  lungs  were congested; no carbon particle was found  inside

  trachea &amp; larynx; coronary veins were prominent; and liver,

  kidney &amp; spleen were also congested.  In case of ante-mortem

  burn, line of redness between burnt &amp; un-burnt parts termed

  as `vital reaction' is a prominent feature.  If the body was

  not burn in open place, then in case of ante-mortem burn, the

  person will inhale soot carbon particles and the same would

  be  found  inside  the larynx, trachea, main  bronchia  and

  smaller bronchia.  Even in case of post-mortem burn, if mouth

  was  open,  soot carbon particles may be found in  mouth  &amp;

  throat but not in esophagus.  The pugilistic attitude of the

  body  is  also a sign of ante-mortem burn, in case of  burn

  injury.   A body that is badly burnt assumes the appearance

  known  as  `pugilistic attitude' and this is  due  to  heat

  stiffening and contraction of the muscles, causing the arms

  to become flexed at the elbows and hands clenched, the head

  slightly extended and knees bent.  The appearance resembles

  the position adopted by a person engaged in a fight and has

  led on occasions to suspicion that death occurred during some

  violent crime.  In fact, the body assumes this position when

  fire starts.


24.  The prosecution has failed to produce the viscera report

  to show the presence of carboxyhaemoglobin in blood.  In the

  present  case,  tongue was protruded, but no blackening  of

  tongue was found and faecal passed from anus.  According to

  the  case  of defence, ante-mortem burn injury  was  caused

  inside the bathroom of which length &amp; breadth was 1.90 mts. x

  1  mt.  and height was 2.50 mts. as per the map Ex.P-8  and

  evidence of Patwari Ramesh Prasad Sahu (PW-11) which has not  

  been disputed by any of the parties.  In other words, length

  &amp; breadth of the toilet was about 6 ft. x 3 , ft. and height

  was  8 + ft.  Size of the toilet was very small and if some

  person  inside the toilet receives ante-mortem burn injury,

  definitely he or she will inhale the soot carbon  particles

  and  same  must be found inside larynx, trachea &amp; bronchia.

  According to autopsy report Ex.P-4, burn was superficial and

  temperature  was  not  so high therefore,  immediate  death

  without inhaling or breathing was not possible.  In case of

  burn injury, especially by kerosene oil inside a small room

  not  in  any open place, there was every chance of inhaling

  carbon  particles.  Mouth of the deceased was  closed,  but

  tongue  was protruded which is not the sign of death  as  a

  result   of   burn,   but  is  sign   of   death   due   to

  strangulation/suffocation.   Pugilistic   state   (fighting

  position) is a symptom of burn injury and also the symptom of

  resistance.  In case of suffocation, there may be  mark  of

  struggle i.e. abrasion over mouth, nose &amp; cheeks, but if soft

  cloth or pillow is used to block the mouth or nostrils, then

  there  may  not  be any external sign of  injury  and  even

  abrasion may disappear if the body is burnt after the death.


25.   In  the  present case, chest, neck, face  &amp;  head  were

  charcoaled.  Tongue protruded but was not blackened.  Faecal

  matter  passed from anus.  Absence of soot carbon particles

  inside larynx, trachea &amp; bronchia; absence of redline (vital

  reaction);  and  presence  of  pugilistic  boxer  attitude,

  especially  in  case of ante-mortem burn  injury  inside  a

  congested closed room, are suggestive of the fact that burn

  injury is post-mortem and not ante-mortem.  It appears that

  this  is a case of death by suffocation by using some  soft

  article like pillow or cushion.


26.   The  aforesaid circumstances are sufficient for drawing

  inference that the alleged burn injuries are post-mortem and

  not  ante-mortem, and cause of death was  asphyxia  due  to

  suffocation.  In these circumstances, death of the deceased

  was homicidal in nature.


27.   As  regards  complicity of the appellant &amp;  respondents

  No.2 to 5 in the crime in question, in this case conviction

  is  based  on  the circumstantial evidence.   Ex.P-18  merg

  intimation has been lodged by appellant Sanjay Kumar in which

  it has been mentioned that on the fateful day his father has

  telephoned  at  about 8.15 a.m. saying that Kanti  Bai  was

  inside the toilet and smoke was coming out from the toilet,

  at that time, he was present in his shop, then he went to the

  house and broken the door of the toilet by crowbar and burnt

  dead body of Kanti Bai was found inside the toilet.  It has

  also been mentioned in the merg intimation that he went  to

  the shop at about 6 a.m.


28.   Other accused/respondents No.3 &amp; 5 Suryakant @  Raju  &amp;  

  Smt.   Butani  Bai,  respectively,  have  stated  in  their

  examination  under Section 313 of the Cr.P.C. that  on  the

  fateful day they were not present in the house, they had gone

  to  Baradwar  and  they came after the incident.   Accused/

  respondents   No.2  &amp;  4  Dau  Ram  &amp;  Smt.  Rukmani   Bai,

  respectively,  have also stated in their examination  under

  Section 313 of the Cr.P.C. that on the fateful day they were

  also  not present in the house and when they came from  the

  pond after taking their bath, they saw the dead body of their

  daughter-in-law i.e. deceased Kanti Bai.  All  the  accused

  persons  i.e. the appellant &amp; respondents No.2  to  5  have

  specifically stated in their examination under Section 313 of

  the  Cr.P.C.  that they were not present  at  the  time  of

  incident.  Appellant Sanjay Kumar has stated that he received

  telephone call while he was present in shop, voice was  not

  clear  and  he thought that his father has telephoned  him.

  Merg  intimation Ex.P-18 reveals that after  receiving  the

  telephone call he went to his house, at that time, toilet was

  closed  from inside, he gave sound but did not receive  any

  reply from inside the toilet, smoke was coming out from the

  toilet, then he broke the door of the toilet by crowbar and

  burnt dead body of his wife was found inside the toilet.  His

  father, niece (bhanji) Simmi &amp; niece (bhatiji) Priyanka were

  present  in  the house.  The facts mentioned  in  the  merg

  intimation  are information given by the appellant  to  the

  police, but same is not confessional statement inadmissible

  in  accordance  with Sections 25, 26 &amp;  27  of  the  Indian

  Evidence Act.  In the merg intimation, the appellant has not

  admitted the commission of offence.


29.   Appellant Sanjay Kumar, husband of the deceased,  along

  with respondents No.2 to 5 (in criminal revision), relatives

  of husband of the deceased, has been acquitted of the charge

  under Sections 304B read with Section 34 &amp; 201 of the I.P.C.

  Respondents No.2 to 5 have also been acquitted of the charge

  under Section 302 read with Section 34 of the I.P.C.


30.  Deceased Kanti Bai was married to Sanjay Kumar two years  

  prior to the date of incident.  The prosecution has examined

  the  witnesses of the place of incident.  Bhauprasad Sharma

  (PW-1) has deposed in his evidence that he came to the spot

  at the time of inquest.  His evidence reveals that he is not

  witness  to the incident.  Raghunandan (PW-5) is  also  not

  witness to the incident.  He came after the incident, at the

  time of investigation.  Bhuvan (PW-8) &amp; Champalal (PW-9) have

  deposed that they were present at the time of inquest.  The

  prosecution has not examined other witnesses relating to the

  incident.


31.   In  this  case,  conviction is based on  circumstantial

  evidence.  Manishankar Gupta (PW-2), brother of the deceased,

  has  deposed that four months prior to the incident satwasa

  function was solemnized at Bilaspur where the deceased &amp; the

  appellant were also present, on that day the deceased  told

  him  that  the appellant and his relatives used  to  commit

  cruelty &amp; torture upon her and they used to beat her.  He has

  further  deposed  that  husband of the  deceased  i.e.  the

  appellant used to demand Rs.50,000/- for extension of shop,

  though  they  had given sufficient dowry  at  the  time  of

  marriage.  Nirmal Kumar Gupta (PW-3), elder brother of  the

  deceased, has supported the evidence of Manishankar Gupta (PW-  

  2)  i.e.  his  brother.   Tulsibai (PW-4),  mother  of  the

  deceased,  has corroborated the evidence of her  sons  i.e.

  Manishankar  Gupta (PW-2) &amp; Nirmal Kumar Gupta  (PW-3)  and   

  stated that her daughter has told her that the appellant and

  his relatives used to demand Rs.50,000/- for shop.  Kamaldev

  Rao Dighraskar (PW-6) &amp; Sanjay Gupta (PW-7) have deposed that  

  the appellant &amp; his other relatives used to commit cruelty &amp;

  torturer upon the deceased and demand Rs.50,000/-.


32.  In the present case, Manishankar Gupta (PW-2) - brother,

  Nirmal  Kumar  Gupta (PW-3) - brother,  Tulsibai  (PW-4)  -

  mother, Kamaldev Rao Dighraskar (PW-6) - relative &amp;  Sanjay

  Gupta (PW-7) - relative of the deceased, have deposed  that

  the  appellant  &amp;  his relatives used to commit  torture  &amp;

  cruelty  upon  the  deceased  and  demand  Rs.50,000/-  for

  extension of shop, but these witnesses have not lodged  any

  report  and  they  have not made any complaint  before  the

  incident.  Manishankar Gupta (PW-2) has specifically deposed

  that the appellant &amp; his relatives had refused to send  the

  deceased  with him, to her paternal house.  The prosecution

  has not adduced any direct evidence relating to commission of

  murder of the deceased.  But the evidence of these witnesses

  reveals that the appellant, who is husband of the deceased,

  used to beat the deceased, commit cruelty &amp; torture upon her

  and also demand money of Rs.50,000/- for extension of shop.

  The evidence of Manishankar Gupta (PW-2) further reveals that

  the  appellant along with his relatives also  directed  the

  deceased to bring money from her brothers and just before 15

  days of the incident, the appellant &amp; his relatives refused

  to send the deceased to her paternal house.


33.   In  the present case, the Court below has rejected  the

  evidence relating to dowry death on the ground that demand of

  Rs.50,000/- for extension of shop is not demand of dowry in

  terms  of  Sections  3  &amp; 4 of the Dowry  Prohibition  Act.

  Manishankar  Gupta  (PW-2), Nirmal  Kumar  Gupta  (PW-3)  - 

  brothers  &amp; Tulsibai (PW-4) - mother of the deceased,  have

  deposed  that  the appellant &amp; his relatives have  demanded

  Rs.50,000/-.  These witnesses have also deposed  that  they

  used  to torture the deceased in connection with demand  of

  dowry.   They  have not deposed that the  appellant  &amp;  his

  relatives  had only demanded Rs.50,000/-, but they  deposed

  that the appellant &amp; his relatives have demanded dowry  and

  committed  cruelty upon the deceased.  However,  the  Court

  below  has acquitted the accused persons only on the ground

  that  demand of Rs.50,000/- for extension of shop does  not

  fall under the category of demand of dowry, but it has  not

  considered the other evidence relating to demand of dowry.


34.   The  evidence of Manishankar Gupta (PW-2), Nirmal Kumar 

  Gupta  (PW-3)  &amp;  Tulsibai (PW-4)  including  Kamaldev  Rao

  Dighraskar (PW-6) is sufficient for drawing inference  that

  the  deceased  was subjected to cruelty in connection  with

  demand  of  dowry and even 15 days prior  to  the  date  of

  incident, the appellant &amp; his relatives had refused to send

  the deceased to her paternal house.  Question of soon before

  her death is a question of fact and there must be some nexus

  between  demand  of dowry and death of the deceased,  there

  cannot be any straight jacket formula or hard &amp; fast rule to

  decide  as to which would amount to soon before her  death.

  The evidence of Manishankar Gupta (PW-2), Nirmal Kumar Gupta  

  (PW-3) &amp; Tulsibai (PW-4) clearly reveals that the appellant,

  who is husband of the deceased, &amp; main accused, used to beat 

  the  deceased  in connection with demand of dowry  and  has

  committed  torture &amp; cruelty upon the deceased.  The  Court

  below after appreciating the evidence available on record has

  acquitted  the  other accused respondents  No.2  to  5  (in

  criminal  revision).   Evidence of the aforesaid  witnesses

  reveals  that  the  appellant is the main  person  who  has

  demanded  dowry  and committed cruelty upon  the  deceased. 

  According  to the finding of the Court below, the  evidence

  against other accused persons was not sufficient for  their

  conviction.


35.    Close  scrutiny  of  the  evidence  of  the  aforesaid

  witnesses reveals that appellant Sanjay Kumar &amp; his relatives

  have  committed  cruelty &amp; torture  upon  the  deceased  in

  connection with demand of dowry and the appellant has refused

  to  send the deceased to her paternal house even before  15

  days of the incident.  Evidence relating to respondents No.2

  to  5  is  inconsistent and not well corroborated by  other

  material evidence or the evidence of each others, but there

  is  consistency in the evidence of the aforesaid  witnesses

  relating  to the appellant that the appellant has committed

  cruelty &amp; torture upon the deceased in connection with demand

  of  dowry  and  even  15 days prior to  the  incident,  the

  appellant has refused to send the deceased to her  paternal

  house.   The  incident took place inside the house  of  the

  appellant where presence of independent witnesses  was  not

  natural.  In case of family disputes or difference  between

  relatives residing under the same roof, evidence from outside

  would normally be not available.


36.  In case of domestic violence or harassment, normally the

  effected  persons i.e. daughter-in-law does not  report  or

  inform anyone about the harassment or tortuous attitude  of

  her husband or in-law's to other persons but as and when she

  gets  the opportunity, she informs about it to her parents.

  The  parents of the bride normally do not react immediately

  but  wait  for an opportune time, in the hope  of  amicable

  settlement  between  the  parties  and  to  avoid   further

  complications which may arise in future.  But when the matter

  becomes intolerable then the daughter-in-law or the effected

  lady discloses the tortuous attitude of her husband and in-

  law's, to the police, neighbour and other persons related to

  her to get the dispute resolved with their intervention.


37.  This is a case of death of bride in the house of her in-

  laws  within  seven  years  of  her  marriage  in  abnormal

  condition.  In case of cruelty or torture to bride, normally,

  the paternal relatives of bride do not take immediate step,

  lodge report or convene caste meeting to resolve the problem,

  but they used to wait and see with a view to assure &amp; secure

  the  safe  life  of the bride.  Matrimonial relation  is  a

  delicate  tie  between  husband &amp; wife  and  two  families.

  Relatives of the bride are always interested in settlement of

  their relations in an amicable way.  Therefore, relatives of

  the  bride including the bride used to tolerate the adverse

  situation unless it becomes intolerable for them.


38.    In   the   present  case  conviction   is   based   on

  circumstantial  evidence.  The Court below  has  considered

  three circumstantial evidence viz., (1) presence of 2 ltrs.

  of kerosene oil in the jerry can which was not natural; (2)

  false explanation relating to telephone; and (3) factum  of

  removal of dead body from the toilet.  After considering the

  above circumstantial evidence, the Court below has convicted

  the appellant under Section 302 of the I.P.C.


39.   In case of conviction based on circumstantial evidence,

  the Apex Court in the matter of Sharad (supra), has laid down

  some essential ingredients required to be proved.  Para 152

  of the said judgment reads thus,

          "152.      A  close analysis of this decision
          would show that the following conditions must
          be fulfilled before a case against an accused
          can be said to be fully established:
            (1)  the circumstances from which the conclusion of guilt is
               to be drawn should be fully established.
            It  may  be  noted  here  that  this  Court
            indicated  that the circumstances concerned
            `must   or   should'  and  not   `may   be'
            established.    There   is   not   only   a
            grammatical   but   a   legal   distinction
            between  `may be proved' and  `must  be  or
            should  be  proved' as  was  held  by  this
            Court  in Shivaji Sahebrao Bobade v.  State
            of  Maharashtra, (1973) 2 SCC  793  :  (AIR
            1973   SC   2622)   where   the   following
            observations were made:
               "certainly,  it  is a primary  principle
               that  the accused must be and not merely
               may be guilty before a Court can convict
               and the mental distance between `may be'
               and  `must be' is long and divides vague
               conjectures from sure conclusions."
            (2)  the facts so established should be consistent only with
               the hypothesis of the guilt of the accused, that is to say,
               they should not be explainable on any other hypothesis except
               that the accused is guilty,
(3)  the circumstances should be of a conclusive nature and
tendency, 
(4)  they should exclude every possible hypothesis except the
one to be proved, and
(5)  there must be a chain of evidence so complete as not to
leave any reasonable ground for the conclusion consistent
with the innocence of the accused and must show that in all
human probability the act must have been done by the accused. 

40.   In the matter of Nesar (supra), the Apex Court has held

  that  in  case  of  commission of  murder,  there  must  be

  unimpeachable  evidence to show that  the  appellants  were

  present in the house where the deceased died as a result of

  burn  injuries  at the crucial time.  Para 6  of  the  said

  judgment reads thus,

          "6.   Before  we allow to link up  the  above
          circumstances, it is absolutely essential  to
          first  consider  whether the prosecution  has
          led  any unimpeachable evidence to show  that
          the  appellants  were present  in  the  house
          where  the deceased died as a result of  burn
          injuries  at  the  crucial  time.    In   our
          opinion, if it is found that the presence  of
          the  appellants at the crucial time  has  not
          been  established  in the  house,  all  other
          circumstances would not complete the chain of
          circumstantial  evidence  to  lead   to   any
          irresistible conclusion consistent only  with
          the hypothesis of guilt of the appellants and
          inconsistent with their innocence."

41.   In  case  of  commission of murder, the prosecution  is

  required  to  prove  that the appellant has  caused  injury

  sufficient  for  causing  death  of  the  deceased  or  the

  prosecution  is  required to prove that the  appellant  was

  member of conspiracy for commission of murder.  The present

  case is not based on the commission of murder as a result of

  conspiracy.  Therefore, the prosecution was under obligation

  to  prove by unimpeachable evidence that the appellant  was

  present  on the spot at the time of incident i.e. when  the

  deceased sustained burn injuries.


42.   Merg intimation Ex.P-18 lodged by the appellant reveals

  that  on the fateful day the appellant was present  in  his

  shop,  he received telephone call whereupon he came to  his

  house  and saw that fumes were coming from the toilet,  the

  toilet was closed from inside and after breaking the door of

  the toilet, he took out the burnt dead body of his wife.  The

  merg intimation further reveals that the appellant went  to

  the  shop at 6 a.m. and the incident took place at about  8

  a.m.   Other  accused persons respondents  No.2  to  5  (in

  criminal  revision)  have  specifically  stated  in   their

  examination under Section 313 of the Cr.P.C. that they were

  not  present in the house at the time of incident and  they

  came afterwards.  The prosecution has not adduced evidence to

  show that all the accused or any of the accused was present

  in the house at the time of incident.  Suspicion, howsoever

  grave it may be, cannot take the place of evidence and  the

  prosecution  is  required  to prove  its  case  beyond  all

  reasonable doubts.  The prosecution cannot take the benefit

  of weakness of the defence.


43.   The  circumstantial evidence and the evidence of  other

  witnesses are not sufficient for drawing inference that the

  appellant  or  any other accused person has  committed  the

  murder of deceased Kanti Bai.  However, the evidence adduced

  on  behalf  of  the prosecution is sufficient  for  drawing

  inference that the appellant, who is husband of the deceased,

  has  committed  cruelty  &amp; torture  upon  the  deceased  in

  connection with demand of dowry, before her death.  Death of

  the  deceased was abnormal and was not as a result of  burn

  injuries.  Death of the deceased was within seven years  of

  her marriage.


44.   Initially,  the  appellant was  also  charged  for  the

  offence punishable under Section 304B of the I.P.C.   Dowry

  death is defined in Section 304B of the I.P.C. which reads as

  under: -

          "304B. Dowry death.-(1) Where the death of  a
          woman is caused by any burns or bodily injury
          or   occurs   otherwise  than  under   normal
          circumstances  within  seven  years  of   her
          marriage and it is shown that soon before her
          death   she  was  subjected  to  cruelty   or
          harassment by her husband or any relative  of
          her  husband for, or in connection with,  any
          demand  for dowry, such death shall be called
          "dowry  death", and such husband or  relative
          shall be deemed to have caused her death.
               Explanation.-For the purpose of this sub-
          section, "dowry" shall have the same  meaning
          as in section 2 of the Dowry Prohibition Act,
          1961 (28 of 1961).
               (2) Whoever commits dowry death shall be
          punished  with imprisonment for a term  which
          shall  not be less than seven years but which
          may extend to imprisonment for life."

45.   In  the  present case, the prosecution has successfully

  established that the appellant is husband of the  deceased,

  the deceased was married to the appellant two years prior to

  the incident, she died in abnormal circumstances within seven

  years  of her marriage in the house of the appellant  as  a

  result  of  bodily injuries sustained by her  and  she  was

  subjected  to  cruelty &amp; harassment  by  the  appellant  in

  connection with demand of dowry.


46.   As  regards the question of demand of dowry soon before

  the  death  of  the deceased, there cannot be any  straight

  jacket  formula for deciding the question that which  would

  amount  to "soon before her death", however, there must  be

  proximate and live-link between effect of cruelty based  on

  dowry demand and concerned death.  


47.   While  dealing  with the expression  "soon  before  her

  death", the Apex Court in the matter of Prem Kanwar v. State

  of  Rajasthan3 has held that "soon before her death"  means

  proximate and live-link must exist between effect of cruelty

  based on dowry demand and concerned death.  Para 12 of  the 

  said judgment reads thus,

          "12.  A conjoint reading of Section 113-B  of
          the Evidence Act and Section 304-B, IPC shows
          that there must be material to show that soon
          before her death the victim was subjected  to
          cruelty  or harassment.  Prosecution  has  to
          rule  out  the  possibility of a  natural  or
          accidental death so as to bring it within the
          purview  of  the  `death occurring  otherwise
          than    in   normal   circumstances'.     The
          expression  `soon  before' is  very  relevant
          where  Section 113-B of the Evidence Act  and
          Section  304-B, IPC are pressed into service.
          Prosecution  is  obliged to  show  that  soon
          before  the  occurrence there was cruelty  or
          harassment  and only in that case presumption
          operates.  Evidence in that regard has to  be
          led  by  prosecution.   `Soon  before'  is  a
          relative  term  and  it  would  depend   upon
          circumstances  of each case  and  no  strait-
          jacket  formula can be laid down as  to  what
          would constitute a period of soon before  the
          occurrence.    It  would  be   hazardous   to
          indicate any fixed period, and that brings in
          the  importance of a proximity test both  for
          the  proof  of an offence of dowry  death  as
          well  as  for  raising  a  presumption  under
          Section  113-B  of  the  Evidence  Act.   The
          expression  `soon before her death'  used  in
          the   substantive  Section  304-B,  IPC   and
          Section  113-B of the Evidence Act is present
          with the idea of proximity test.  No definite
          period  has been indicated and the expression
          `soon before' is not defined.  A reference to
          expression `soon before' used in Section 114,
          Illustration  (a)  of  the  Evidence  Act  is
          relevant.   It  lays down that  a  Court  may
          presume  that a man who is in the  possession
          of  goods  `soon after' the theft, is  either
          the  thief or has received the goods  knowing
          them to be stolen, unless he can account  for
          his  possession.   The determination  of  the
          period  which can come within the term  `soon
          before'  is  left  to be  determined  by  the
          Courts,    depending    upon    facts     and
          circumstances   of   each   case.    Suffice,
          however,  to  indicate  that  the  expression
          `soon  before' would normally imply that  the
          interval  should  not  be  much  between  the
          concerned cruelty or harassment and the death
          in  question.  There must be existence  of  a
          proximate and live-link between the effect of
          cruelty  based on dowry demand the  concerned
          death.   If  alleged incident of  cruelty  is
          remote  in  time and has become stale  enough
          not  to  disturb  mental equilibrium  of  the
          woman   concerned,  it   would   be   of   no
          consequence."

48.   The  evidence  adduced on behalf of the prosecution  is

  sufficient  for  drawing inference that the  appellant  has

  committed dowry death of his wife.


49.    This  is  a  criminal  appeal  against  conviction  of

  appellant Sanjay Kumar.  The appellate Court is empowered to

  alter  the  finding, maintaining the sentence, or  with  or

  without altering the finding, alter the nature or the extent,

  or the nature and extent, of the sentence, but not so as to

  enhance the same under sub-clauses (ii) &amp; (iii) of clause (b)

  of  Section  386  of the Cr.P.C.  While  dealing  with  the

  question of re-appreciation and alteration of the finding of

  the trial Court, the Apex Court in the matter of Sham Sunder

  v.  Puran  and  another4  has held  that  the  High  Court,

  exercising power under Section 386 of the Cr.P.C., in appeal

  from a conviction may reverse the finding and sentence  and

  acquit  the  accused or alter the finding  maintaining  the

  sentence or with or without altering the finding alter  the

  nature.  Para 2 of the said judgment reads thus,

          "2.   The High Court, exercising power  under
          Section  386,  Cr.P.C., in an appeal  from  a
          conviction   may  reverse  the  finding   and
          sentence and acquit the accused or alter  the
          finding  maintaining the sentence or with  or
          without altering the finding alter the nature
          or the extent or the nature and extent of the
          sentence  but not so as to enhance the  same.
          The  powers of the High Court in dealing with
          the evidence are as wide as that of the trial
          court.  As the final court of facts, the High
          Court  has also duty to examine the  evidence
          and  arrive  at  its  own conclusion  on  the
          entire material on record as to the guilt  or
          otherwise of the appellants before it."

50.   While dealing with the same question, the Apex Court in

  the matter of Narinder Singh and another v. State of Punjab5

  has held that fresh appreciation of the entire evidence  is

  permissible under Section 386 of the Code.  The Apex  Court

has further held that the High Court was right in overturning

  the   judgment  of  acquittal  of  the  Court  of  Session.

  Perversity is writ large on the face of the judgment of the

  trial  court.   Its  appreciation  of  evidence  is  wholly

  inappropriate  and it has acted with material irregularity.

  It has taken into consideration inconsequential circumstances

  to record acquittal of the appellants.


51.   This  is a criminal appeal against the finding recorded

  by  the  Additional Sessions Judge and it is  open  to  the

  appellate Court to re-appreciate the finding on the basis of

  the  evidence and to correct the finding of the Court below

  while  exercising the appellate jurisdiction  in  terms  of

  Section  386 of the Cr.P.C.  As has been held by  the  Apex

  Court in the matters of Sham Sunder &amp; Narinder Singh (supra),

  re-appreciation  of  entire evidence is  permissible  under

  Section 386 of the Cr.P.C.


52.   On close scrutiny of the evidence adduced on behalf  of

  the prosecution, the act of appellant Sanjay Kumar squarely

  falls  under Section 304B of the I.P.C.  The appellant  has

  been tried for the offence punishable under Sections 302 read

  with  Section 34 &amp; 304B read with Section 34 of the  I.P.C.

  The  offence under Section 302 of the I.P.C. is a  grievous

  offence  and  the  offence of dowry death punishable  under

  Section 304B of the I.P.C. is a minor offence included in the

  offence  of  murder, in case of charges of  dowry  death  &amp;

  murder.


53.   Virtually,  it  is clear from the definition  of  dowry

  death  as provided in Section 304B of the I.P.C. that dowry

  death is either murder or commission of suicide, but is not a

  natural  or  accidental death.  With a view to  punish  the

  offenders  against whom normally the evidence of murder  or

  abetment of suicide is not possible to be adduced on behalf

  of   the  prosecution  on  account  of  death  in  peculiar

  circumstances,  normally, in the  house  of  offender,  the

  Legislature has enacted a new provision in the  year  1986.

  Maximum punishment provided for murder is death and minimum   

  punishment is imprisonment for life, but maximum punishment

  provided for dowry death is imprisonment for life and minimum

  punishment is imprisonment for seven years.


54.   In  case  of the offence proved including  the  offence

  charged,  the Court is competent to convict the person  for

  minor offence included in major offence in accordance  with

  Section 222 of the Cr.P.C.  Section 222 of the Cr.P.C. reads

  as follows: -

          "222. When offence proved included in offence
          charged.-(1) When a person is charged with an
          offence  consisting of several particulars  a
          combination of some only of which constitutes
          a    complete   minor   offence,   and   such
          combination  is  proved,  but  the  remaining
          particulars  are  not  proved,  he   may   be
          convicted of the minor offence, though he was
          not charged with it.
               (2)  When  a person is charged  with  an
          offence and facts are proved which reduce  it
          to  a  minor offence, he may be convicted  of
          the minor offence, although he is not charged
          with it.
               (3)  When  a person is charged  with  an
          offence, he may be convicted of an attempt to
          commit  such offence although the attempt  is
          not separately charged.
               (4)  Nothing  in this section  shall  be
          deemed to authorize a conviction of any minor
          offence  where  the conditions requisite  for
          the  initiation of proceedings in respect  of
          that minor offence have not been satisfied."

55.   The  appellant was originally charged for  the  offence

  punishable under Section 304B read with Section 34  of  the

  I.P.C. also.  In the present case, offence under Section 304B

  of the I.P.C. is included in offence under Section 302 of the

  I.P.C. and the appellant may be convicted under Section 304B

  of the I.P.C. in accordance with Section 222 of the Cr.P.C.

  Learned Additional Sessions Judge has convicted &amp; sentenced 

  the  appellant under Section 302 of the I.P.C. but has  not

  considered the most material aspect of the case that there is

  no evidence relating to presence of the accused/appellant at

  the time of commission of such offence in the house or near

  the place of incident, but the merg intimation reveals that

  the appellant was not present at the time of incident in his

  house where the offence took place and thereby the Additional

  Sessions Judge has committed illegality.


56.   On close scrutiny of the evidence adduced on behalf  of

  the  prosecution and the defence taken by the  appellant  &amp;

  other accused persons, we are of the considered view that the

  evidence  adduced  on  behalf of  the  prosecution  is  not

  sufficient  for  conviction of appellant Sanjay  Kumar  for

  commission of homicidal death of his wife Kanti Bai amounting

  to murder punishable under Section 302 of the I.P.C., but is

  sufficient  for  drawing inference that the  appellant  has

  committed the offence punishable under Section 304B of  the

  I.P.C.


57.  For the foregoing reasons,

     (a)  Criminal Revision No.606/2002 filed on behalf of Smt.
       Tulsi Bai &amp; Nirmal Kumar Gupta, mother &amp; brother of the
       deceased, respectively, is liable to be dismissed and it is
       hereby dismissed.

     (b)   Criminal  Appeal No.1155/2002 filed on  behalf  of
       appellant Sanjay Kumar is partly allowed.  Instead  of
       convicting the appellant under Section 302 of the I.P.C., he
       is convicted under Section 304B of the I.P.C. included in the
       charge of Section 302 of the I.P.C.  As regards the question
       of sentence, taking into consideration the material and
       evidence adduced on behalf of the parties, the sentence of
       custodial period i.e. detention of the appellant since 30-12-
       2001 for about 8 years 1 month, is sufficient sentence, as
       such, the appellant is sentenced for the custodial period
       already undergone by him i.e. since 30-12-2001 till date.  He
       be released forthwith, if not required in any other case.

                                       JUDGE

