FIRST APPEAL M No 12 of 2006 Smt Kiran Gandharwa Vs. Rajendra Gandharwa

HIGH COURT OF CHATTISGARH AT BILASPUR          

 FIRST APPEAL M No 12 of 2006    

 Smt Kiran Gandharwa  
                                              ...Petitioners
                           Versus
 Rajendra Gandharwa  
                                              ...Respondents

! Shri M K Bhaduri Advocate for appellant

^ Shri P K C Tiwari Sr Adv with Shri Shashi Bhushan Adv for the respondent

 CORAM: Honble Shri NK Agarwal J   

 Dated: 07/01/2010

: Judgement 
                           JUDGMENT
                            712010
        FIRST APPEAL UNDER SECTION 28 OF THE HINDU MARRIAGE ACT 1955            


  1.   This is first appeal arising out of the judgment  and

       decree dated 26-7-2006 passed by IInd Additional District

       Judge,  Rajnandgaon in C.S. No. 37A/2006 whereby  and

       whereunder, learned trial Court has passed decree in favour

       of the respondent husband for restitution of conjugal rights

       under Section 9 of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 (briefly

       `the Act').

2.   Undisputed facts of the case are that the appellant is
legally wedded wife of the respondent. The marriage
solemnized between them on 11-5-2003 at Durg. They lived 
together at village Korinbhata, Rajnandgaon for six months
after marriage.
3.   As per the respondent's application under Section 9 of
the Act, the appellant left matrimonial home after 15
November, 2003 without intimating the respondent and went to
the house of her brother-in-law at Rajnandgaon. There she
lived for 15-20 days and thereafter she went to her paternal
house at Durg, from where she sent notice dated 15-12-2003
to the respondent/ husband which was dully replied by him.
Thereafter respondent's father approached the community
president for resolution of the dispute, if any, but the
community person could not render any decision, however they 
found the appellant at fault. Thereafter the respondent
filed an application for restitution of conjugal rights.
That was resisted by the appellant on the ground that she
was ill-treated for the demand of motorcycle in lieu of
dowry by the respondent who also ousted her from the
matrimonial home, therefore no option was left with the
appellant but to leave the house and go to the house of her
brother-in-law. She has further stated in the reply that the
respondent mixed Lizard in the food so that she may die and
for that she remained in hospital for two days.  Based on
the pleadings of the parties, the trial Court framed issues.
4.   During trial, the appellant remained exparte. The
respondent examined two witnesses i.e. himself and one Koman  
Das. Learned trial Court on appreciation of the evidence led
by the respondent, documents filed and submission made, held 
that the appellant has without reasonable excuse withdrawn
from the society of the respondent; the appellant failed to
prove any demand of dowry; passed the decree of restitution
of conjugal rights. Hence this appeal.
5.   Shri M.K. Bhaduri, learned counsel for the appellant
would submit that the impugned judgment and decree is 
erroneous on two counts, first, on 26-7-2006, when the case
was fixed for evidence, neither the appellant nor her
counsel appeared in the case, nor appellant's counsel
intimated  to the appellant for her appearance before the
Court and, therefore, the exparte proceedings against the
appellant is bad, secondly, learned trial Court has not
discussed the matter in detail before passing the decree for
restitution of conjugal rights. In support of his
submission, reliance has been placed upon the judgment in
case of Tahil Ram Issardas Sadarangani -v- Ramchand  
Issardas Sadarangani reported in  AIR 1993 SC 1182. 
6.   Per contra, Shri Tiwari, learned Sr. Counsel appearing
for the respondent would contend that the appellant was
negligent through out in conducting her case; for the reason
best known to her, she did not challenge the decree by
filing application under Order 9 Rule 13 of C.P.C. for
setting aside exparte decree; the trial Court after
considering every aspect of the matter passed the decree
which deserves to be upheld. In support of his submission,
he placed reliance upon the judgment in the case of Nagar
Palika Nigam, Gwalior  -v- Motilal Munnalal reported in AIR
1977 MP 182, Smt. Maya Devi  and others -v- Mehria Gram Dall 
Mill, Hissar and others reported in AIR 1988 Punjab and
Haryana would contend that the appeal cannot be converted 
into proceeding for setting aside exparte decree.
7.   I have heard learned counsel for the parties, perused
the record of the case and the impugned judgment and decree.
8.   A bare perusal of the order sheet of the trial Court
would reveal that the appellant was negligent through out in
prosecuting her case before the trial Court. On 9-2-2005,
she was proceeded exparte. On 4-5-2005, exparte proceeding 
was set aside and the case was again fixed for framing
issues. Again on 17-11-2005, she remained absent and the 
case was fixed for respondent's evidence on 30-12-2005. On
30-12-2005 again she remained absent. On 13-2-2006, at the 
stage of final argument, she again moved application under
Order 9 Rule 7 of C.P.C. for setting aside exparte order,
which was not found bonafide and the same was dismissed by  
the trial Court. Again vide order dated 1-4-2006, she has
been permitted to participate in the proceeding and to
submit her argument. Again on 21-4-2006, her application
under Section 151 of C.P.C. was allowed by the trial Court
and she has been permitted to cross-examine the applicant's
witnesses and the case was fixed on 26-6-2006. On 26-6-2006, 
the case was adjourned on appellant's request. It is
pertinent to mention her that on 26-6-2006, the appellant
herself was present in the Court and the next date i.e. 26-7-
2006 was well within her personal knowledge. She remained 
absent on 26-7-2006 and thereafter her opportunity to cross-
examine the applicants witnesses was closed and the judgment  
has been passed. 
9.   The Supreme Court in case of Bhanu Kumar Jain -v-
Archana Kumar and another reported in 2005 AIR SCW 270 has    
observed  in para 24 of its judgment that:- An appeal
against an exparte  decree in terms of Section 96(2) of the
Code  could be filed on the following grounds:- (i)    The
materials on record brought on record  in the exparte
proceedings in the suit by the plaintiff  would not entail a
decree in his favour and (ii) The suit could not have been
posted for exparte hearing.
10.  In the facts of the present case, it would be crystal
clear that learned trial Court has rightly proceeded exparte
against the appellant. More over the appellant has not
preferred any application under Order 9 Rule 13 of C.P.C.
for setting aside exparte judgment and decree by showing
sufficient cause for her non-appearance on the date when the
trial Court proceeded exparte against her. Scope of
challenge to the exparte proceedings in an appeal under
Section 96(2) of C.P.C. is limited to the extent that the
suit could not have been posted for exparte hearing which is
not the position here. The judgment cited by the appellant
in the facts and circumstances of the present case is of no
help to him, she could not contend that there is sufficient
cause for her non-appearance on the date when the case was 
proceeded exparte against her. It is also not a case where
the appellant's counsel withdrew from the case or pleaded no
instruction without intimating the appellant, on the
contrary the date i.e. 26-7-2006 as alleged by the appellant
was well within the knowledge of the appellant. The judgment
and decree has been passed by the trial Court after
considering every aspect of the matter and no fault can be
found in it.
11.  In view of the foregoing, I do not find any infirmity/
illegality in the judgment and decree passed by the trial
Court. The same deserves to be and is hereby upheld.
12.  In the result, the appeal is dismissed.
13.  No order as to costs.

                                             Judge
