CrMP No 612 OF 2007 Manoj Kumar Sharma & Ors Vs. State of Chhattisgarh and Ors

HIGH COURT OF CHATTISGARH  BILASPUR         

 CrMP No 612 OF 2007   

 Manoj Kumar Sharma &amp; Ors   
                                             ...Petitioners

                          Versus

 State of Chhattisgarh and Ors
                                             ...Respondents

! Shri BC Sahu with Shri FS Khare counsel for the petitioners

^ Shri Vaibhav A Goverdhan Panel Lawyer for the State respondents No 1 to 3 Shri Vivek Sharma counsel for respondent No 4

 CORAM: HONBLE SHRI MANINDRA MOHAN SHRIVASTAVA J               

 Dated: 17/10/2011

: Judgement 



                             O R D E R
                 (Petition u/S 482 of the Cr.P.C)
                       (Passed on 17.10.2011)







1.    This  petition  under Section  482  of  the  Code  of

  Criminal Procedure, 1973 (hereinafter referred to as "the

  Code") has been filed by the petitioners for quashing FIR

  dated 29.5.2005 registered under Crime No. 194/05 and all

  connected criminal proceedings by police of Police Station-

  Bhilai Nagar, District Durg, alleging commission of offence

  under Section 304-B and Section 498-A read with Section 34

  of the IPC.



2.    The  relevant  and  necessary facts  giving  rise  to

  instant  petition are that petitioner No.1-  Manoj  Kumar

  Sharma was married to Nandani, daughter of R.P. Sharma on 

  27.4.1999. While the deceased Nandni Sharma was  residing 

  with  her husband-petitioner No.1, she died in suspicious

  circumstance  on 20th September, 1999. An information  in

  writing (Annexure P-1) regarding death of Nandani was sent

  to the Station House Officer of Police Station - Mullana,

  Ambala Cantt. on that very date i.e. 20th September, 1999

  by  one P.S. Ghosh, Flying Officer, Security Officer  for

  Commanding Officer of 2207 Squadron Air Force. In the said

  letter,  it was stated that Mrs. Nandani Sharma, wife  of

  petitioner  No.1 died unnatural death on 20th  September,

  1999.  One Sunita Verma, wife of Wing Commander -  N.  N. 

  Verma  was  informed and when she went to  the  house  of

  petitioner No.1, he was  found crying and saying that his

  wife  hanged herself.  Deceased-Nandani was then sent  to

  hospital at Ambala for necessary medical care where she was

  declared dead. Upon receipt of the information, the police

  of  Police Station - Ambala proceeded to hold an  inquiry

  under Section 174 of the Code. The dead body was sent for

  postmortem  and  also  for chemical  examination  in  the

  Forensic  Science Laboratory. The father of the  deceased

  namely  R.  P.  Sharma was informed. The details  of  the

  inquiry made under Section 174 of the Code were entered in

  the General Diary by one Balbeer  Singh, ASI on 22.9.1999.

  It  was  recorded therein that upon receiving information

  regarding unnatural death, the police went to the place of

  occurrence and upon inquiry, no offence was found to have

  been  committed. Report of the inquiry made under Section

  174  of  the  Code  was forwarded to the  Sub  Divisional

  Magistrate, Ambala, by the Station House Officer on  24th

  January 2000 stating that Mrs. Nandani died due to hanging

  and  postmortem  was conducted and chemical  report  from

  F.S.L.  was  also  obtained. The father of  the  deceased

  requested that the remains of the body of the deceased be

  handed over to him for performing last ceremony and it was

  also stated in the said report that father of the deceased

  does not want any further action in the matter of death of

  his  daughter - Nandani. On the basis of the said report,

  the Superintendent of Police, Ambala, recorded on 19.2.2000

  that  the  deceased died on 20th September, 1999  and  no

  cognizable offence was found to have been committed and the

  case  is  therefore closed. This report was accepted  and

  endorsed  by  the Sub Divisional Magistrate, Ambala.  The

  acceptance report has been placed on record as Annexure P- 

  8.  Simultaneously, an inquiry was also conducted by  the

  Indian Air Force Authority and upon completion of inquiry,

  the  inquiry officer submitted final report on  18.2.2000

  (Annexure P-9) stating that civil police has completed the

  investigation under Section 174 of the Code and  no  foul

  play is suspected in the case and therefore the case  has

  been  closed and case file sent to Dy. Suptt.  of  Police

  Narayangarh  for disposal. The aforesaid inquiry  report,

  prepared  by Squadron Leader and forwarded to the  higher

  authorities, was finally accepted and the case was closed

  vide Annexure P-10.



3.    After about 5 years, on the basis of report submitted

  by Shashi Bhushan, brother of the deceased- Nandani Shamra, 

  the police of Police Station - Bhilai Nagar, District Durg

  registered a crime under Crime No.194/05 dated  29.5.2005

  against the petitioners, registering offences under Section

  304-B and 498-A read with Section 34 of the IPC (placed on

  record as Annexure P-18). The FIR, in substance, recorded

  that  the  application was received from brother  of  the

  deceased-Nandni and upon inquiry made, it was found  that

  deceased-Nandani  was  married  to  petitioner  No.1   on

  27.4.1999  and ever since the deceased was  married,  the

  petitioners did not accord proper treatment and  expected

  car  by way of dowry and further that the in-laws of  the

  deceased  used  to provoke Manoj Sharma, husband  of  the

  deceased  and on telephone, the deceased used  to  inform

  regarding incidents of quarrel. On 20th September,  1999,

  deceased-  Nandani  Sharma  informed  her  brother   over

  telephone regarding her quarrel with petitioner No.1 and on

  that very date, she died in suspicious circumstance.  The

  police found that the deceased was subjected to cruelty in

  connection with demand of dowry by her husband, father-in-

  law-Hiralal Sharma, mother-in-law- Hemlata and uncle-in-law

  Mahaveer  Prasad  Sharma,  resulting  in  her  death   in

  suspicious circumstance within 4 months of her marriage in

  the house of her husband. In the FIR, it has been alleged

  that on the basis of some letter received on 7.4.2005, it

  came to light that the deceased had not committed suicide,

  but  she  was murdered by Manoj Sharma and it  was  given

  colour  of  a  case of suicide. The petitioner  No.1  was

  arrested  on 1st June, 2005 and was produced  before  the

  Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate, Durg, where from he

  was remanded to judicial custody. The petitioner- Manoj had

  moved an application for grant of bail which was rejected

  by the Additional Sessions Judge, Durg and thereafter, bail

  application was rejected by the High Court. A writ petition

  registered  as  W.P.  No.2890/05  was  preferred  by  the

  petitioners  for  quashing of FIR under  Crime  No.194/05

  registered by Police Station-Bhilai Nagar, Durg. Vide order

  dated  25.7.2005  (Annexure P-13),  petitioner  No.1  was

  directed to be released on bail and it was further directed

  that till the writ petition is disposed of, investigation

  against the writ petitioners may continue but none of the

  petitioners  will be arrested without the  leave  of  the

  Court. Later on, writ petition was disposed of as withdrawn

  reserving  liberty  to the petitioners  to  question  the

  validity or otherwise of the FIR said to have been  filed

  against the writ petitoenrs before an appropriate forum and

  further that withdrawal of the writ petition would not come

  in the way of writ petitioners raising all such contentions

  which are available to them including the contention raised

  in the writ petition.



4.    In  the  aforesaid background, the  instant  petition

  under  Section  482  of the Code has been  filed  by  the

  petitioners  for quashing FIR and the connected  criminal

  proceedings  under Crime No.194/05 registered  by  Police

  Station-Bhilai Nagar, District-Durg.



5.    Learned  counsel for the petitioners assailed the FIR

  and   criminal   proceedings  by  contending   that   the

  registration of a criminal case under Crime No.194/05 is an

  abuse  of  the process of law as no second FIR  could  be

  entertained and registered by the police of Police Station-

  Bhilai  Nagar  in respect of the same incident  regarding

  which  report  was earlier made to the police  of  Police

  Station-Mullana,   which  conducted   the   inquiry   and

  investigated into the alleged commission of offences  and

  found that no cognizable case was made out and the report

  was  finally  accepted by the Sub Divisional  Magistrate,

  closing  the  case. Learned counsel for  the  petitioners

  vehemently  argued that once a report  of  commission  of

  cognizable  offence  was made to Police  Station-Mullana,

  investigation held and the case closed, it was beyond the

  authority and jurisdiction of the police of Police Station

  -Bhilai Nagar to entertain and investigate into the  same

  allegation  alleging commission of cognizable offence  by

  registering  crime  under  Crime  No.194/05  against  the

  petitioners. It is submitted, in extenso, that the law does

  not permit fresh investigation of the same incident by  a

  different investigating agency, once it has already  been

  investigated  by one police station and case  closed  and

  report of closure accepted. It is contended that even if an

  occasion arises for further investigation, the only course

  of  action  permissible under the law is to hold  further

  investigation by the same investigating agency  with  the

  specific  permission of the concerned  Magistrate  having

  territorial jurisdiction over the concerned area. Further

  contention of learned counsel for the petitioners is that

  as  the incident of death of deceased - Nandani had taken

  place  at  Amabala  in the State of  Haryana  within  the

  territorial area of Police Station- Mullana, it is beyond

  the  territorial  jurisdiction of  Police  Station-Bhilai

  Nagar,  District-Durg to take cognizance of  the  report,

  register  case  and hold investigation into  the  alleged

  commission  of  offence.  The  criminal  case  has   been

  registered  after 5 years of the incident  without  there

  being any reason assigned in the FIR and the prosecution,

  therefore, appears to be not fair and initiated with mala

  fide intention to subject the petitioners to harassments.

  Further submission is that the offence which has now been

  registered by the Police Station -Bhilai Nagar is  highly

  suspicious as no information as required under Section 157

  of the Code was sent to the Magistrate, which is clear from

  the order Annexure P-17 rejecting petitioners' application

  for supply of copy of FIR on the ground that no copy of FIR

  has  been  submitted in the Court of Addl. Chief Judicial

  Magistrate, Durg. It is then contended that from the  FIR

  and   the  statements  recorded  by  the  police   during

  investigation, there is no iota of evidence of demand  of

  dowry or any cruelty soon before death or any overt act by

  the  petitioners so as to prima facie make out a case  of

  commission of offence under Section 498 -A or 304-B of the

  IPC.  On  the basis of above submissions, it is submitted

  that  present is a fit case for quashing FIR  and  entire

  criminal  proceedings initiated against  the  petitioners

  under Crime No.194/05. Learned counsel for the petitioners,

  in  support  of  the contention so advanced  by  him  and

  referred to above, has relied upon number of authorities,

  reference   of  which  has  been  made  in  the   written

  submissions.



6.    On  the  other hand, learned counsel for  the  State,

  representing respondents N. 1 to 3 and learned counsel for

  respondent  No.4 opposed the petition by submitting  that

  there was no FIR lodged in Mullana Police Station nor was

  there any investigation carried out into any allegation of

  commission  of  cognizable offence, but upon  receipt  of

  information  regarding death, the  police  had  conducted

  inquiry  under  Section 174 of the Code and  submitted  a

  report  to the Sub Divisional Magistrate. It is submitted

  that the present is not a case where the police of Police

  Station -Mullana registered any FIR alleging commission of

  offence, carried out investigation and submitted a  final

  report  under  Section 173 of the Code, stating  that  no

  offence  was found committed, which was accepted  by  the

  Court of a competent Magistrate and case finally closed. It

  is  urged  that initially when Nandani died at Ambala  in

  suspicious  circumstances, the police after  having  made

  inquiry submitted  a report under Section 174 of the Code

  before  the Magistrate stating that no case is made  out,

  which was accepted by the Magistrate, which cannot be said

  to  be  an  investigation  and submission  of  report  as

  contemplated under Section 173 of the Code so as  to  say

  that second FIR was lodged in regard to the same incident

  in a different police station. It is further submitted that

  father of the deceased had submitted an application in the

  Police  Station- Mullana in the circumstances which  were

  prevailing at that time and in his letter (Annexure P-12) ,

  all that was stated was that he was informed that it was a

  case  of suicide and on the basis of the information then

  available,  he  does  not  want any  action  against  the

  petitioner-Manoj Sharma. Later on, it came to the  notice

  and knowledge of the members of the family of the deceased,

  particularly  her  brother Shashi Bhushan  that  deceased

  Nandani  did  not commit suicide, but she  was  murdered,

  therefore,  a report was lodged in the police station  at

  -Bhilai  Nagar,  Durg,  specifically  alleging  that  the

  deceased Nandni was murdered. He further submits that when 

  Nandani died and inquiry was made under Section 174 of the

  Code by the police of Police Station - Mullana, there was

  no  material available with the father and brother of the

  deceased,  but later on when they received the postmortem

  report,  inquest  report,  Panchanama  and  when      Sr.

  Scientific  Officer, Scene of Crime Unite,  District-Durg

  vide his report dated 15.4.2005 as also Director of Medico

  Legal Institute in his report dated 25.4.2005 stated that

  the death is very-very suspicious, specially in reference

  of  hanging,  the police registered offence  under  Crime

  No.194/05. It is submitted that the FIR was thus lodged for

  the  first  time in the Police Station- Bhilai Nagar  and

  cannot be said to be second FIR of the same incident. It is

  submitted that two reports of Scene of Crime Unit Durg and

  Director Medico Legal Institute, contents of FIR and case

  diary  statements  clearly make  out  a  case  warranting

  registration of offence against the petitioners for alleged

  commission of offence under Section 304-B, 498 A read with

  Section 34 of the IPC. The circumstances in which the FIR

  came to be lodged in the year 2005 have been elaborated in

  the FIR and, therefore, the FIR alleging commission of  a

  grave offence is not liable to be quashed on the technical

  ground of delay. It is further submitted that even if it is

  found that the police of Police Station-Bhilai Nagar had no

  territorial   jurisdiction  to  interfere  into   alleged

  commission of offence for the reason that the deceased died

  at Ambala, the police may be directed to forward the entire

  material  collected during investigation to the concerned

  police  station  i.e.  Police Station-  Mullana  to  hold

  detailed and proper investigation into the allegations of

  dowry death in the light of the judgment of Supreme Court

  in the case of  Satvinder Kaur Vs. State (Govt. of N.C.T.

  of Delhi) and another1.



7.    I  have  considered  the rival  submissions  made  by

  learned counsel for the parties and pursed the records.



8.    The  foremost contention advanced by learned  counsel

  for the petitioners is that the registration of FIR by the

  police of Police Station-Bhilai Nagar amounts to a second

  FIR before an agency other then investigating agency before

  whom the FIR was first lodged and which investigated  and

  closed  the case. The submission proceeds on the  premise

  that  the  earlier information regarding unnatural  death

  amounted to first information report under Section 154 of

  the Cr.P.C. which was investigated by the police of Police

  Station  - Mullana and after investigation, the case  was

  closed. Therefore, the second FIR of the same incident and

  fresh investigation or re-investigation in the garb of the

  FIR lodged under Crime No.194/05 is not permissible under

  the law. The contention of the petitioners proceeds on an

  assumption that the information which was earlier sent on

  20th  September, 1999 (Annexure P-1) by on one P.S. Ghosh  

  Flying officer, was the First Information Report, on  the

  basis of which the police investigated and found that  no

  cognizable  offence was committed. A careful  reading  of

  information dated 20th September, 1999 (Annexure P-1) shows 

  that  it  was  information regarding unnatural  death  of

Nandani,  wife  of  the  petitioner No.1.  Information  was

  placed before the police of Police Station- Mullana, Ambala

  Cantt. that the incident occurred in Officers' Enclave on

  20th  September, 1999 at 18:20 hrs. The contents  of  the

  letter   further   stated  that   the   petitioner   No.1

  telephonically informed one Mrs. Sunita Verma, wife of Wing

  Commander N.N. Verma that his wife is unconscious and she  

  was requested to come. When Mrs. Sunita Verma went to his  

  house, she saw petitioner No.1 crying and saying that his

  wife  has  hanged herself and he was trying to  give  her

  artificial respiration, but there were no sign of recovery.

  The  information  was also to the effect that  thereafter

  Nandani  was sent to Military Hospital Ambala for necessary

  medical care and there she was declared dead. It was also

  informed that petitioner No.1 is reported to be unconscious

  and  admitted  at  Military Hospital  Ambala  Cantt.  The

  substance of the information, on a close scrutiny cannot be

  categorized under information relating to the commission of

  a  cognizable offence, within the meaning and  import  of

  Section  154  of  the  Code. In  essence  and  substance,

  information was an information that wife of petitioner No.1

  Nandani  died  unnatural  death.  If  that  be  so,   the

  information  is  one  of  the categories  of  information

  specified  under  Section 174 of the Code.  Provision  of

  Section  174 of the Code makes provision with  regard  to

  power of the police to inquire into in a case of accidental

  or suspicious death. Sub-section (3) of Section 174 of the

  Code  was  added by Criminal Law (Second Amendment)  Act,   

  1983,  which  was  enacted to deal  with  the  increasing

  incidents  of dowry death or cases of cruelty to  married

  woman by their in-laws. Provision was made for inquest by

  the  Executive Magistrate and for postmortem in all  case

  where  a  woman  has,  within 7 years  of  her  marriage,

  committed suicide or died in suspicious circumstances. The

  proceedings which have been drawn by the police of Police

  Station-Mullana, stated by the petitioner himself in  the

  petition, are proceedings under Section 174 of the Cr.P.C.,

  which is clear from the contents of the general diary entry

  dated 22.9.1999 (Annexure P-2), which shows that when the

  information  was  given to the police,  the  police  made

  inquiry as contemplated under Section 174 of the Code. The

  body of the deceased was sent for postmortem and parts of

  the body were also sent for chemical examination. The cause

  of death was shown to be asphyxia as is indicated from the

  report of doctor (Annexure P-6). After holding an inquiry

  under Section 174 of the Code, the Station House Officer of

  Police  Station  -  Mullana submitted  its  report  dated

  24.1.2000  before the Sub Divisional Magistrate,  Ambala,

  stating therein the details of the inquiry made. The report

  stated that it was a case of hanging. It is further stated

  that  father of the deceased Nandani namely R.P.  Sharma,

  requested  the  police official to  handover  the  mortal

  remains of the deceased for performing last ceremony,  to

  which police had no objection because R.P. Sharma expressed 

  that he does not want any further action to be taken in the

  matter. The aforesaid report of S.H.O. was considered  by

  the  Superintendent of Police Ambala and it was  recorded

  that Nandani committed suicide and no cognizable offence is

  found to have been committed and therefore the papers  be

  filed. This report was also approved by the Sub Divisional

  Magistrate, who endorsed the conclusion recorded  by  the

  S.P.  Ambala. The documents which have been  referred  to

  above clearly go to show that what was undertaken by  the

  police was an inquiry contemplated under Section 174 of the

  Code and the matter was closed.



9.    In view of the above discussion and close scrutiny of

  information dated 20th September, 1999 (Annexure P-1)  as

  elaborated  above, it further reveals that the intimation

  was merely an information as contemplated under Section 174

  of the Code rather than it being an information regarding

  commission of cognizable offence. Though first information

  report  has not been defined under the Code, but  whether

  information constitutes First Information Report, is to be

  determined  in  the light of the provision  contained  in

  Section 154 of the Code. Section 154 (1) of the Code being

  relevant, is reproduced as below:

          "154.  Information in cognizable  cases-  (1)
          Every  information relating to the commission
          of  a cognizable offence, if given orally  to
          an  officer  in  charge of a police  station,
          shall  be reduced to writing by him or  under
          his  direction,  and  be  read  over  to  the
          informant;   and   every  such   information,
          whether  given  in  writing  or  reduced   to
          writing as aforesaid, shall be signed by  the
          person  giving it, and the substance  thereof
          shall be entered in a book to be kept by such
          officer  in such form as the State Government
          may prescribe in this behalf."

               (2)  x    x    x

               (3)  x    x    x


10.   Reading of the aforesaid provision clearly shows that

  information must be one relating to the commission  of  a

  cognizable  offence.  It further  provides  that  if  the

  information is given orally to an officer in-chare  of  a

  police station, it shall be reduced to writing by him  or

  under his direction and be read over to the informant. The

  aforesaid   provision  also  states   that   every   such

  information,  whether  given in  writing  or  reduced  to

  writing, shall be signed by the person giving it and  the

  substance thereof shall be entered in a book to be kept by

  such officer in such form as the State Govt. may prescribe

  in this behalf. In the case of  Tapinder Singh Vs. State of

  Punjab and another2, the Supreme Court, while dealing with

  the issue as to whether the information constituted first

  information report, observed  (para-4 at page 1569 of the

  report):

             "4.  .But  prima  facie  this  cryptic  and
             anonymous  oral message which  did  not  in
             terms  clearly specify a cognizable offence
             cannot  be  treated  as  first  information
             report. The mere fact that this information
             was the first in point of time does not  by
             itself  clothe  it  with the  character  of
             first   information  report.  The  question
             whether   or  not  a  particular   document
             constitutes a first information report has,
             broadly speaking, to be determined  on  the
             relevant  facts and circumstances  of  each
             case."..

     Therefore,  merely because there is  some  information

first  in  point of time, without looking into contents  of

the  same,  it  cannot  be said to be a  First  Information

Report within the meaning of Section 154 of the Code.

     In  another decision in the case of Sheikh Ishaque and

Ors.  Vs.  State of Bihar3, the Supreme Court  was  dealing

with  a  situation  where some cryptic information  at  the

police station was given which was to the effect that there

was  commotion  in the village as firing and brick  batting

was  going on. That information was recorded in the  police

diary. The Supreme Court observed that such information did

not   amount  to  a  First  Information  Report  disclosing

commission  of  a  cognizable offence, in  following  words

(para-7 at page 2685 of the report):

          7..   According  to  the  statement   of   the
          Investigating Officer, Gulabi Paswan had given
          some cryptic information at the police station
          to  the effect that there was commotion in the
          village as firing and brick batting was  going
          on.  This  information  was  recorded  in  the
          police  diary.  It  did not strictly  speaking
          even  disclose the commission of a  cognizable
          offence,  let alone disclosing as to who  were
          the  assailants  or the victims.  The  cryptic
          statement of Gulabi Paswan therefore cannot be
          treated  to  be an FIR within the  meaning  of
          Section 154 of the Cr.PC.".


     The  requirement of FIR within the meaning of  Section

154  of  the  Code was more elaborately dealt with  by  the

Supreme Court in the its authoritative pronouncement in the

case of State of Haryana Vs. Bhajan Lal4, it was held :

          "32. Be it noted that in Section 154(1) of the
          Code, the legislature in its collective wisdom
          has   carefully   and  cautiously   used   the
          expression  "information"  without  qualifying
          the  same as in Section 41(1)(a) or (g) of the
          Code   wherein  the  expressions,  "reasonable
          complaint"  and  "credible  information"   are
          used. Evidently, the non-qualification of  the
          word "information" in Section 154(1) unlike in
          Section  41(1)(a) and (g) of the Code  may  be
          for  the reason that the police officer should
          not  refuse to record an information  relating
          to  the commission of a cognizable offence and
          to  register a case thereon on the ground that
          he is not satisfied with the reasonableness or
          credibility  of  the  information.  In   other
          words,  `reasonableness' or  `credibility'  of
          the   said  information  is  not  a  condition
          precedent  for  registration  of  a  case.   A
          comparison  of  the present Section  154  with
          those of the earlier Codes will indicate  that
          the  legislature had purposely thought it  fit
          to  employ only the word "information" without
          qualifying the said word. Section 139  of  the
          Code of Criminal Procedure of 1861 (Act 25  of
          1861)  passed  by the Legislative  Council  of
          India   read   that   `every   complaint    or
          information' preferred to an officer in charge
          of  a  police  station should be reduced  into
          writing   which  provision  was   subsequently
          modified  by Section 112 of the Code  of  1872
          (Act  10  of 1872) which thereafter read  that
          `every  complaint' preferred to an officer  in
          charge of a police station shall be reduced in
          writing.  The word `complaint' which  occurred
          in  previous  two Codes of 1861 and  1872  was
          deleted   and   in   that   place   the   word
          `information'  was used in the Codes  of  1882
          and  1898  which word is now used in  Sections
          154,  155, 157 and 190(c) of the present  Code
          of 1973 (Act 2 of 1974). An overall reading of
          all   the  Codes  makes  it  clear  that   the
          condition  which is sine qua non for recording
          a  first information report is that there must
          be  an  information and that information  must
          disclose a cognizable offence."



11.   Therefore, from the aforesaid decision of the Supreme

  Court, it is clear that the condition which is sine-qua-non

  for  in recording First Information Report is that  there

  must be an information and that information must disclose a

  cognizable  offence. If the contents of  the  information

  dated  20th September, 1999 (Annexure P-1) and  what  was 

  recorded by the police in its case diary upon receipt  of

  such  information and inquest &amp; postmortem  reports,  are

  scrutinized,  it  leaves  no manner  of  doubt  that  the

  intimation  was an information of the nature contemplated

  under  Section  174  of the Code  and  it  could  not  be

  categorized as information disclosing a cognizable offence.

  This  is  also fortified from the established  facts  and

  circumstances narrated by the petitioners and the documents

  filed  by the petitioner himself that all that the police

  did  was to hold an inquiry under Section 174 of the Code

  and  submitted a report to the Sub Divisional Magistrate,

  who  accepted the same closing the case. The  petitioners

  have  neither placed on record any FIR registered by  the

  police  of  Police Station- Mullana indicating any  crime

  number, though non-mentioning of crime number may not be a 

  conclusive proof of the fact of lodging of FIR. There is no

  material  to show that the police conducted investigation

  after recording FIR relating to commission of a cognizable

  offence. There is no material placed before the Court  by

  the   petitioners   to  show  that   the   police   after

  investigation, submitted a report under Section 173 of the

  Code before the Competent Magistrate, who accepted the said 

  report and closed the case. General diary notings made by

  ASI-Balbeer Singh of Police Station -Mullana also show that

  the  police had made an inquiry under Section 174 of  the

  Code  but having found that no cognizable case was  prima

  facie made out, closed the case without registering any FIR

  or conducting any investigation, much less submitting any

  report under Section 173 of the Code before the Competent

  Magistrate.



12.   The  inevitable conclusion, therefore, is that  there

  was  no  FIR in the eye of law before the Mullana  Police

  Station, nor any investigation, nor submission of  report

  under  Section 173 of the Code. Therefore,  challenge  to

  impugned FIR under Crime No. 194/05 registered by police of

  Police Station -Bhilai Nagar could not be assailed on the

  ground  that  it  was second FIR in the  garb  of  which,

  investigation or fresh investigation on the same incident

  was   initiated.  Therefore,  reliance  placed   by   the

  petitioners on the decision of Supreme Court in the case of

  T.T. Antony Vs. State of Kerala and Ors. (AIR 2001 SC 2637)

  and  other  decisions  on  the same  line  is  completely

  misplaced.  The  submission of learned  counsel  for  the

  petitioners on this ground, therefore, fails.



13.    Learned   counsel  for  the  petitioner   vehemently

  contended that the police of Police Station-Bhilai  Nagar

  had no territorial jurisdiction to investigate the matter

  alleging commission of offence under Section 304- B and 498-

  A  of  the  IPC, because none of the part of offence  was

  committed  within the territorial jurisdiction of  Bhilai

  Nagar Police Station in district- Durg. According to him,

  the  allegation contained in the FIR and the  case  diary

  statements which so far have been recorded by the police in

  the  matter,  goes to show that the alleged  offence  was

  committed within the territorial jurisdiction of  Mullana

  Police  Station and therefore, the FIR and all  connected

  criminal proceedings are liable to be quashed. In support

  of his contention learned counsel for the petitioners has

  placed reliance mainly on the decision of Supreme Court in

  the  case  of Y. Abraham Ajith and Ors. Vs. Inspector  of

  Police,  Chennai (AIR 2004 SC 4286), Ramesh and Ors.  Vs. 

  State of Tamil Nadu (AIR 2005 SC 1989) and Manish Ratan &amp;  

  Ors. Vs. State of M.P. &amp; Anr. [(2006) 35 OCR (SC) 891].



14.   In the considered opinion of this Court, the FIR  and

  connected criminal proceedings are not liable to be quashed

  at  this stage when the investigation is not complete and

  even charge sheet has not been filed, nor cognizance taken

  by the Magistrate. On the other hand, in the present fact

  situation where investigation is not complete, FIR cannot

  be  quashed  only on the ground that the  Police  Station

  -Bhilai  Nagar  did not have territorial jurisdiction  to

  investigate  the  offence. A similar fact  situation  was

  considered by the Supreme Court in the case of  Satvinder

  Kaur  (supra). In that case, appreciating the  submission

  that  the offence was alleged to have been committed   at

  Patiala, the High Court arrived at the conclusion that the

  police of Police Station - Paschim Vihar, New Delhi was not

  having   territorial  jurisdiction   to   entertain   and

  investigate  the FIR lodged therein. The  Supreme  Court,

  holding  that  the findings were illegal  and  erroneous,

  observed as under:

          "8..In  our view, the findings given  by  the
          High  Court  are, on the face of it,  illegal
          and erroneous because:
               (1)  The  SHO  has  statutory  authority
          under  Section 156 of the Criminal  Procedure
          Code  to investigate any cognizable case  for
          which an FIR is lodged.
               (2) At the stage of investigation, there
          is  no question of interference under Section
          482  of  the Criminal Procedure Code  on  the
          ground that the investigating officer has  no
          territorial jurisdiction.
               (3)  After investigation is over, if the
          investigating   officer   arrives   at    the
          conclusion  that  the  cause  of  action  for
          lodging  the  FIR has not arisen  within  his
          territorial jurisdiction, then he is required
          to  submit a report accordingly under Section
          170  of  the Criminal Procedure Code  and  to
          forward  the case to the Magistrate empowered
          to take cognizance of the offence."

     The Supreme Court also analyzed the statuary scheme of

investigation under Chapter-XIII of the Code and held:

          "9.  This  would be clear from the  following
     discussion. Section 156 of the Criminal  Procedure
     Code  empowers  the police officer to  investigate
     any cognizable offence. It reads as under:
          "156.  Police officer's power to  investigate
          cognizable case.-(1) Any officer in charge of
          a  police station may, without the order of a
          Magistrate,  investigate any cognizable  case
          which  a  court having jurisdiction over  the
          local  area within the limits of such station
          would have power to enquire into or try under
          the provisions of Chapter XIII.
               (2) No proceeding of a police officer in
          any such case shall at any stage be called in
          question on the ground that the case was  one
          which  such  officer was not empowered  under
          this section to investigate.
                 (3)  Any  Magistrate  empowered  under
          Section  190  may order such an investigation
          as above-mentioned."

          10.  It is true that territorial jurisdiction
          also  is prescribed under sub-section (1)  to
          the  extent  that the officer can investigate
          any  cognizable  case which  a  court  having
          jurisdiction over the local area  within  the
          limits  of  such  police station  would  have
          power  to  enquire  into  or  try  under  the
          provisions  of  Chapter XIII.  However,  sub-
          section  (2)  makes  the  position  clear  by
          providing  that  no proceeding  of  a  police
          officer  in any such case shall at any  stage
          be  called in question on the ground that the
          case  was  one  which such  officer  was  not
          empowered to investigate. After investigation
          is    completed,   the   result    of    such
          investigation is required to be submitted  as
          provided  under Sections 168,  169  and  170.
          Section  170 specifically provides  that  if,
          upon  an  investigation, it  appears  to  the
          officer in charge of the police station  that
          there  is  sufficient evidence or  reasonable
          ground of suspicion to justify the forwarding
          of  the accused to a Magistrate, such officer
          shall forward the accused under custody to  a
          Magistrate  empowered to take  cognizance  of
          the  offence upon a police report and to  try
          the accused or commit for trial. Further,  if
          the  investigating  officer  arrives  at  the
          conclusion  that the crime was not  committed
          within  the territorial jurisdiction  of  the
          police station, then FIR can be forwarded  to
          the  police station having jurisdiction  over
          the area in which the crime is committed. But
          this  would  not mean that in  a  case  which
          requires  investigation, the  police  officer
          can   refuse   to  record  the   FIR   and/or
          investigate it.

          11.   Chapter  XIII  of  the  Code  provides  for
          "jurisdiction of the criminal courts in enquiries
          and  trials". It is to be stated that  under  the
          said  chapter there are various provisions  which
          empower  the  court for enquiry  or  trial  of  a
          criminal  case  and  that there  is  no  absolute
          prohibition that the offence committed beyond the
          local   territorial   jurisdiction   cannot    be
          investigated,  enquired or tried. This  would  be
          clear  by  referring to Sections 177 to 188.  For
          our  purpose, it would suffice to refer  only  to
          Sections 177 and 178 which are as under:
               "177.   Ordinary   place  of   enquiry   and
          trial.-Every offence shall ordinarily be enquired
          into  and  tried  by a court within  whose  local
          jurisdiction it was committed.
               178. Place of enquiry or trial.-(a) When  it
          is  uncertain in which of several local areas  an
          offence was committed, or
               (b) where an offence is committed partly  in
               one local area and partly in another, or
               (c)  where an offence is continuing one, and
               continues  to  be committed  in  more  local
               areas than one, or
               (d)  where it consists of several acts  done
               in different local areas,
               it  may be enquired into or tried by a court
               having  jurisdiction over any of such  local
               areas."

          12.  A  reading  of the aforesaid sections  would
          make  it  clear  that Section  177  provides  for
          "ordinary"  place  of enquiry or  trial.  Section
          178, inter alia, provides for place of enquiry or
          trial  when  it is uncertain in which of  several
          local areas an offence was committed or where the
          offence  was committed partly in one  local  area
          and  partly in another and where it consisted  of
          several  acts done in different local  areas,  it
          could be enquired into or tried by a court having
          jurisdiction over any of such local areas. Hence,
          at  the stage of investigation, it cannot be held
          that S.H.O does not have territorial jurisdiction
          to investigate the crime."

15.    Therefore,   in   the  present  case   also,   where

  investigation is still going on and not completed, if upon

  investigation, the police officer arrives at the conclusion

  that  the  crime was not committed within the territorial

  jurisdiction  of  the police station,  then  FIR  can  be

  forwarded to the police station having jurisdiction  over

  area, in which crime is committed. The authorities, which

  have  been relied upon by the petitioners, relate to  the

  cases where after completion of investigation, charge sheet

  was filed in the Court and the Magistrate took cognizance

  or on a complaint filed, cognizance was taken. The decision

  in the case of Ramesh (Supra), Y. Abraham Ajith (supra) and

  Manish Ratan(supra) are therefore distinguishable on facts

  and  not applicable in the present facts situation  where

  investigation  is  not  complete. In  the  present  facts

  situation, the course of action is required to be adopted,

  as laid down by the Supreme Court in the case of  Satvinder

  Kaur  (supra).  Therefore, for this reason  the  FIR  and

  connected criminal proceedings cannot be quashed. 



16.   The  prayer  for quashing FIR and connected  criminal

  proceedings has been made by further contending that  the

  allegation  contained  in the  FIR  and  the  case  diary

  statements do not make out any case and there is no iota of

  evidence  to  even  prima face show that  there  was  any

  harassment  or cruelty meted-out to deceased -Nandani  or

  that  she  was  subjected to harassment  and  cruelty  in

  connection with demand of dowry, soon before her death on

  20th September, 1999. This Court has perused the contents

  of FIR (Annexure P-18) as also the case diary statements,

  collectively placed on record as Annexure P-15 .  In  the

  first  information report (Annexure P-18),  it  has  been

  alleged  that  after  marriage,  the  husband  and  other

  relatives  were  not  giving proper  treatment  and  they

  expected car by way of dowry and that the in-laws used to

  provoke  the  husband against the deceased  and  she  was

  subjected  to  mental  cruelty. On 20th  September,  1999

  deceased had informed her brother that there was  quarrel

  between the deceased and her husband Manoj Sharma and  on   

  that  very  date, she died in suspicious conditions.  The

  contents of FIR and the case diary statements, particularly

  that of the brother of the deceased, contains allegation of

  cruelty  meted-out to the deceased and it has  also  been

  alleged  that  on the date of incident, the deceased  had

  talked to her brother Shashi Bhushan twice, in which  she

  stated  that  on  19.9.1999, phone call of mother-in-law,

  father-in-law  and  uncle-in-law was received,  in  which

  objectionable things were said and on that,  the  husband

  quarreled with the deceased. It is relevant to mention here

  that the father of the deceased had given a letter in the

  police station for handing over the mortal remains of the

  deceased  and  in  one  of  his letters  dated  23.9.2000

  (Annexure P-12), he said that on the basis of information

  available till that time he does no want any action. Later

  on, upon receiving some anonymous letter that the husband

  of  the deceased was having illicit relation and deceased

  Nandani was murdered, the matter was reported in the police

  station  along with panchnama, postmortem report,  F.S.L.

  report and statements etc. True it is that at the time when

  the brother and father of the deceased had gone to Ambala

  after  receiving information regarding death of  Nandani,

  they did not say anything with regard to cruelty meted-out

  and all these allegation are contained in the FIR which has

  been lodged in the police station in the year 2005, it only

  raises certain suspicion, but, only on that ground,  this

  Court  is  not  inclined to quash the  FIR  and  criminal

  proceedings,  particularly taking into consideration  the

  attending circumstances in which the mortal remains  were

  taken from the police station of Mullana.



17.   It would not be proper for this Court to examine  the

  reliability or otherwise of the material which  has  been

  placed before the police and collected by the investigating

  agency so far, particularly when the investigation is not

  complete  and  the police has not come  to  any  definite

  conclusion by way of report under Section 173 of the Code

  one  way  or the other. However, this Court is unable  to

  uphold the contention of learned counsel for the petitioner

  that  the  allegations  are so inherently  improbable  or

  absurd, on the basis of which no prudent person can  ever

  reach a just conclusion that there is sufficient ground for

  proceedings against the accused. It has to be noted  that

  earlier,  father of the deceased himself  stated  in  his

  letter dated 23.9.2000 (Annexure P-12) given to the S.H.O.

  of  Police Station - Mullana stating that on the basis of

  information available till that time, he does not want any

  action  to be taken against the petitioner. It  was  only

  subsequently when Medico-Legal expert's opinion that  the

  death is under very-very suspicious circumstances that the

  police was approached and FIR was registered. Therefore, at

  this stage, it is difficult to accept the contention that

  the  criminal  proceedings  are  opened  with  mala  fide

  intention to wreck-vengeance, particularly in a case where

  a  newly married lady died in suspicious circumstances in

  her  matrimonial house. Interest of justice requires that

  the  investigation should be allowed to continue. Learned

  counsel for the petitioners relied upon the decision in the

  case of        All Cargo Movers (I) Pvt. Ltd. Vs. Dhanesh

  Badarmal Jain and another5,  Vijay Shekhar and another Vs.

  Union  of  India  and ors.6 and M/s. Zandu Pharmaceutical

  Works  Ltd. and others Vs. Md. Sharaful Haque and  Ors.7.

  Those decisions are clearly distinguishable. The peculiar

  facts  and circumstances of the present case relating  to

  death of wife of petitioner No.1 in the matrimonial house

  in very-very suspicious circumstances, require proper and

  thorough investigation by the police so that truth may come

  out. Reliance placed by learned counsel for the petitioner

  in  the case of Pankaj Kumar Vs. State of Maharashtra and

  Ors.8  is also misplaced. The Supreme Court in that  case

  has  taken  into  consideration number  of  circumstances

  including the fact that in relation to an incident of 1982,

  FIR was lodged in the year 1998, investigation was dragged

  for over 3 years. The Supreme Court had also taken note of

  the  fact that there was no explanation to offer for  the

  delay in investigation and the reason why the trial did not

  commence for eight long years.



18.   In view of the aforesaid discussions and applying the

  principles laid down by the Supreme Court in the case  of

  Bhajan Lal (supra), particularly, the principles laid down

  in paragraph-102 of the said decision, this Court is of the

  considered opinion that present is not one of those rarest

  of  rare cases where allowing the proceedings to continue

  would be an abuse of the process of the Court or that the

  ends  of  justice require that the proceedings should  be

  quashed.



19.   It appears that though there was no interim order  by

this  Court  in  the present proceedings,  because  of  the

  pendency of the present petition, the investigation has not

  so far been completed nor final report has been submitted

  by the police. The Station House Officer of Police Station

  -Bhilai Nagar, District-Durg is directed to hold fair and

  proper investigation to ensure logical conclusion of  the

  investigation without unnecessary delay.



20.   With  the  aforesaid observations,  the  petition  is

  dismissed.


                                                  J U D G E
