First Appeal No199 of 2005 Smt Annapurna Vs. VP Ranga Moorty

HIGH COURT OF CHATTISGARH AT BILASPUR          

 First Appeal No199 of 2005

 Smt Annapurna  
                                         ...Petitioners

                        Versus

 VP Ranga Moorty  
                                         ...Respondents

! Shri Sanjay Patel counsel for the appellant

^ Shri Avinash Mishra counsel for the respondent

 CORAM: Honble Shri Justice IM Quddusi and Honble Shri Justice Prashant Kumar Mishra   

 Dated: 04/04/2011

: Judgement 

                    ORAL  JUDGMENT
            (Delivered on 4th April, 2011)

First Appeal under Section 19 of the Family Courts Act


Per I.M. Quddusi, J.:

     Heard.
2.    This  appeal under Section 19(1)  of  the  Family

Courts Act, 1984 (henceforth `the Act, 1984') has  been

preferred   by   the  appellant/wife  challenging   the

judgment and decree dated 29-9-2005 passed by  the  1st 

Additional Principal Judge, Family Court, Durg allowing

the  respondent/husband's application under Section  13

of  the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 (henceforth `the  Act,

1955') and granting a decree of divorce.


3.    Facts  of the case, briefly stated, are that  the

respondent/husband/applicant  before  the  Court  below

instituted an application under Section 13 of the  Act,

1955  on the pleadings inter alia that the parties were

married  at  Durg  on 24-4-1992.  The  applicant  is  a

fourth    class   railway   employee,    whereas    the

appellant/non-applicant's brother was posted as  Deputy

Chief  Controller in the same railway at  the  relevant

time.   At the instance of the non-applicant's brother,

he  agreed to marry the non-applicant and they  started

residing   together.   However,  after  sometime,   the

applicant   realised  that  the  non-applicant   is   a

quarrelsome  and  irritating  lady  and  used  to  make

quarrel with him for no good reasons.  She was  in  the

habit of not taking care of the husband and not cooking

food,  therefore,  at times, she had to  attend  office

without  having  meals  and if  the  husband  tried  to

convince  her, she used to shout, create  a  scene  and

collect  the neighbours.  In spite of efforts  made  by

the  brother to prevail upon the wife, she did not mend

her ways.


4.    It was further stated in the application that she

was  having illicit relation with one R.M.Yewalkar  and

the  wife of said R.M.Yewalkar used to address the non-

applicant  as  her Saut (another wife of her  husband).

The  non-applicant always insisted to  buy  Colour  TV,

Fridge,  Scooter, Cooler, Water Cooler etc., which  the

applicant  could not afford from his meager salary  and

because of this the non-applicant used to embarrass him

in  front of friends and relatives.  She had no respect

for  his friends and relatives and never used to  treat

them  properly  by  offering tea or breakfast  whenever

they  used  to  visit his house.  Though they  had  two

issues  from the marriage, but more oftenly she refused

to   have  physical  relation  and  was  making   false

allegations that he has a keep at Village Puraina.  She

also  used to quarrel with the applicant by asking  him

not  to  have relation with his parents.  The situation

went  to  this  extent  that  he  had  to  proceed   on

pilgrimage for two months from 9-3-2003 and during this

time  the  non-applicant lodged  a  report  of  missing

person  in the police station.  When he came  back  and

attended  the  police station, he was  beaten  by  non-

applicant's  sister-in-law (Bhabhi) K.  Padma  and  one

policeman.   At that time, the non-applicant  was  also

present  and  was deriving pleasure when the  applicant

was  thrashed by the police and the said K. Padma.  The

applicant was dragged to the house of Dattu Fitter  and

from there he was taken to one STD-PCO and was asked to   

call  his parents.  The applicant lodged a report  with

the  police  on  the  next day.  He also  reported  the

matter   against  K.  Padma  to  the  higher  officers.

Knowing  this, the non-applicant locked the  house  and

went  to Raipur and lodged a false report of demand  of

dowry  against the applicant and his parents.   Because

of  compelling circumstances, the applicant  agreed  to

take  his wife to his house.  However, after few  days,

she  came back to her original form and again lodged  a

report on 17-6-2003.


5.    The appellant/wife/non-applicant before the Court

below,  in her reply, denied the allegations and stated

that the applicant is habitual drinker.  She denied  to

have any relation with R.M.Yewalkar.  It was stated  by

her  that she was treated with cruelty and for this she

had  to lodge a report.  However, on assurance of  good

behaviour, she went to her marital house, but  she  was

treated with cruelty once again.


6.   In course of trial, the applicant examined himself

as  AW-1 and his father V.S.N. Moorty as AW-2.  He also 

examined  one S.S. Ishtiyak as AW-3, Panchram Gupta  as   

AW-4,   Bramhadin  Pandey  as  AW-5  and  Matru   Lasal  

Chakravarty  as  AW-6.   On the other  hand,  the  non-

applicant/wife examined herself as NAW-1,  her  brother

K. Ramanna Rao as NAW-2 and M. Ramchandra as NAW-3.        


7.    On the basis of evidence available on record, the

family  Court concluded that the husband has been  able

to establish ground under Section 13(1)(ib) of the Act,

1955  and  has  granted the decree of  divorce  on  the

ground of cruelty.


8.    Learned counsel for the appellant has argued that

from  the  evidence  on  record  ground  under  Section

13(1)(ib) of the Act, 1955 is not established  and  the

impugned  decree  has wrongly been passed  on  perverse 

findings.


9.    Learned counsel for the respondent has  supported

the  impugned decree and has prayed that the appeal  be

dismissed. 


10.   This  Court  has heard learned  counsel  for  the

parties  at length and perused the record.   AW-3  S.S.

Ishtiyak,  aged  about  58  years,  a  retired  railway

employee, has stated that he had witnessed the incident

when  the applicant was beaten by one policeman  and  a

woman.   Similarly, AW-4 Panchram Gupta, aged about  61  

years, a co-employee of the applicant in railways,  has

also  stated  that he had seen K. Padma and  one  Abhay 

Ganodkar  were  beating  the applicant  in  the  police

station.   He  has  also stated that the  non-applicant

used   to  treat  the  applicant  with  cruelty.   AW-5

Bramhadin  Pandey  is  the  head  constable  in  G.R.P.

Outpost Charoda, who appeared in the witness-box  along 

with  the  record  of  the  complaint  lodged  by   the

applicant Ranga Moorty.  This witness has deposed  that

during  investigation wife Annapurna admitted that  she

caught hold of her husband's hand whereon he fell  down

and  sustained injuries.  AW-6 Matru Lasal  Chakravarty

has  stated  that  one day the applicant  came  to  the

police  station and stated that his wife  has  snatched

all the money from him and he has no funds for going to

Durg  and  he  had given Rs.20/- to him on humanitarian

grounds.


11.   NAW-2  K. Ramanna Rao, the brother  of  the  non-

applicant,   has  admitted  that  there  were   serious

disputes  between the husband and the wife.   NAW-3  M. 

Ramchandra,  who is neighbour of the non-applicant  and

her brother, has deposed that the applicant always used

to  complain  about the behaviour of the  non-applicant

and the husband and wife used to quarrel frequently.


12.   After appreciating the evidence elaborately,  the

family  Court  has recorded the findings in  paragraphs

15,  16 and 17 of the impugned judgment that the  facts

of  beating  the  applicant in the police  station  and

serious  disputes/quarrel between them have been  fully

established.   On the basis of facts and  evidence  and

applying    the    principle   of   preponderance    of

probabilities, the family Court has concluded that  the

applicant  was  treated  with  cruelty  by   the   non-

applicant/wife and it is not possible for both of  them

to live together.


13.   After  going  through the entire  evidence,  this

Court  is  of the opinion that the finding recorded  by

the family Court regarding commission of cruelty by the

non-applicant/wife is born out from  the  evidence  and

the  said  finding  is  not  perverse,  therefore,  the

instant appeal has no substance and it deserves  to  be

dismissed. 


14.   Learned  counsel for the appellant has  submitted

that     the    appellant/wife    deserves    permanent

alimony/maintenance under Section 25 of the Act,  1955.

However, there is no material about the income  of  the

respondent/husband  and  the fact  as  to  whether  the

appellant/wife is able to maintain herself or not.   No

prayer  in this regard appears to have been made before

the family Court also, therefore, it is not possible at

this  stage to pass any order under Section 25  of  the

Act,  1955.   However, the appellant/wife shall  be  at

liberty  to  move a duly constituted application  under

Section 25 of the Act, 1955 before the Court below  and

in  such eventuality, the same shall be disposed of  on

its  own merits.  The first appeal is, thus, dismissed.

There shall be no order as to costs.


15.  A decree be drawn-up accordingly.


                                           JUDGE
