Criminal Appeal No 798 of 2007 Ganesh Kumar Vs. State of Chhattisgarh

HIGH COURT OF CHATTISGARH AT BILASPUR          

 Criminal Appeal No 798 of 2007

 Ganesh Kumar  
                                              ...Petitioners
                           Versus
 State of Chhattisgarh
                                              ...Respondents

! Shri Janak Ram Verma counsel for the appellant

^ Shri Ashish Gupta PL for the State

 CORAM: Honble Mr Justice Pritinker Diwaker 

 Dated: 19/01/2011

: Judgement 
                             J U D G M E N T
                                 19012011

        CRIMINAL APPEAL UNDER SECTION 374 2 OF THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE                


      This appeal is directed against the judgment and order
dated  27.07.2007 passed by the Additional  Sessions  Judge,
Baloda   Bazar,  Raipur  in  Sessions  Trial   No.   11/2007
convicting  the appellant under Sections 307 and  498-A  IPC
and  sentencing him to undergo rigorous imprisonment for ten
years  and  pay  fine  of  Rs.  500  u/s  307  and  rigorous
imprisonment for three years and pay fine of Rs.500 u/s 498-
A IPC, plus default stipulations.

2.    Case of the prosecution in brief is that on 18.10.2006
at  about  7.40  p.m.  FIR Ex. P-1 was  lodged  by  Laxmibai
Dewangan (PW-2) alleging that on that day at about 4.30 a.m.
accused/appellant burnt her sister Durga Bai (PW-1).  It  is
alleged that marriage of her sister Durga Bai was solemnized
with   the   accused/appellant  whereas  her  marriage   was
solemnized  with his brother.  It is also alleged  that  her
sister  was  subjected to cruelty by the  accused/appellant.
According to her on the date of incident i.e. 17.10.2006 the
accused/appellant had brutally beaten her sister and she was
not even given food.
According  to  her in the morning at about  4.30  a.m.  when
after  hearing the cries of her sister she went to her room,
she    saw   that   her   sister   was   burning   and   the
accused/appellant was standing there having match box in his
hand  and the lamp was also lying there.  It is alleged that
she  and  her husband had extinguished the fire  by  pouring
water.   After investigation, the challan was filed  by  the
police  on  10.12.2006 under sections 498-A and  307/34  IPC
against  the  present appellant, his mother and  father  and
they were tried accordingly.

3.    So  as to hold the accused persons guilty, prosecution
has examined as many as 13 witnesses in support of its case.
Statements  of the accused persons were also recorded  under 
section 313 of the Code of Criminal Procedure in which  they
denied  the charges levelled against them and pleaded  their
innocence and false implication in the case. This apart, two
witnesses namely Bhanuram Sahu (DW-1) and Tejram (DW-2) have     
been examined by the defence in support of its case.


4.    After  hearing the parties the trial  Court  acquitted
accused  Kaliram and Shanti Bai of all the charges  levelled
against    them    but   convicted   and    sentenced    the
accused/appellant herein as mentioned above. 


5.    Heard counsel for the parties and perused the material
available on record including the judgment impugned.

6.    Counsel for the accused/appellant submits that present
appears  to  be a case of accident because on  the  date  of
incident  accused/appellant and the victim were sleeping  on
the same cot beside which a kerosene lamp was also there and 
thus  it appears that the victim came into contact with  the
same  and sustained burn injuries.  He submits that just  to
implicate the accused/appellant in a false case, the  victim
has exaggerated her version giving entirely a new story that
the  accused/appellant had burnt her. He submits that as  on
the  same  set  of  evidence the mother and  father  of  the
present  appellant have been acquitted, he is also  entitled
for  acquittal. He submits that the important witness namely
Mahesh  Kumar (PW-4) who is said to have immediately  rushed  
to  the spot, has not supported the case of the prosecution.
This  witness  has  categorically  stated  that  the  victim
herself  had set on fire as a result of which she  sustained
injuries.    He    submits   that   for    convicting    the
accused/appellant under section 307 IPC the prosecution  has
to  prove his intention which it has utterly failed to do so
and  therefore looking to the simple injuries  sustained  by
the victim at the most he can be convicted under Section 324
IPC.

7.    On  the  other  hand counsel for the  respondent/State
supports  the  judgment impugned and  submits  that  present
appears  to  be  a  case of brutal act on the  part  of  the
accused/appellant where he burnt his wife who was  fortunate
enough  to survive the same. He submits that the victim  had
sustained  40-50 per cent burn injuries and  this  fact  has
also  been proved by the prosecution. He submits that  there
was   no   reason   for   the  victim   to   implicate   the
accused/appellant in a false case.

8.    Victim  -  Durga  Dewangan (PW-1) has  stated  in  her
evidence that her sister Laxmi Bai (PW-2) is married to  her
brother-in-law. According to this witness, her marriage  had
taken place with the present appellant about one and a  half
years  back  from the date of recording of her evidence  and
she was harassed by her husband and his relatives for demand 
of dowry and they used to say that her parents had not given
two  kilograms of silver and one tola of gold  as  promised.
This  witness  has stated that the accused/appellant  herein
used  to  beat  and scold her whereas her mother-in-law  and
father-in-law did not subject her to beating.  According  to
this  witness,  the accused persons used  to  say  that  her
mother  had two husbands and when she objected to that,  her
husband  had  beaten  her brutally and whenever  her  father
visited  their house, they used to pick up quarrel with  him
and  raising  the  demand  of  gold  and  silver  they  were
harassing her and also her sister Laxmi. According  to  her,
on  the  date  of  incident at about 4 a.m.  while  she  was
sleeping,  she found herself being put afire  and  when  she
woke  up she saw that her husband was standing there.    She
has  stated that her husband sprinkled kerosene on her  body
but  neither he spoke anything nor did he try to  save  her.
Thereafter  on hearing her cries, her sister and brother-in-
law came there and extinguished the fire but her husband was
simply  standing there and did not do anything to save  her.
On  her sister asking her husband as to why he had burnt her
sister, he was keeping mum.  When she was being taken by her  
sister  and  brother-in-law, her husband got a  bicycle  and
made  her sit thereon.  She has stated that on the  way  her
husband  felled her down and asked her to make the statement 
as  if she herself got burnt or else he would bury her in  a
pit  and  saying  so he took her to her mother's  house  and
after  dumping  her  there he disappeared  from  the  scene.
Subsequently  her mother took her to hospital  and  at  that
time she was unconscious.  She regained her consciousness in  
a  hospital  at  Raipur  after a  month  and  her  body  was
completely  burnt.   She remained in the  hospital  for  two
months.  She has stated that the accused/appellant had  once
said  to  her  that her mother had two husbands  and  on  an
objection being raised by her thereto, he had burnt her.  In
the  cross-examination she has stated that her marriage  and
that  of her sister had taken place on the same day and  her
father  had  given the household items to both  of  them  in
equal  proportion.  She has denied the factum of  demand  of
dowry  being  disclosed to anyone and  categorically  stated
that  she had once disclosed the same to her mother but  she
did  not  remember as to when she had done so.  Though  some  
minor   contradictions  and  omissions  are  there  in   her
evidence, considering the fact that this witness is a rustic
villager  they are to be ignored.  This witness  has  stated
that  on the date of incident her in-laws were not at  home.
According  to  her  on  that day she and  her  husband  were
sleeping on the same cot and she did not see anyone  setting
her on fire.

      Laxmi (PW-2) has supported the statement of the victim
who  happens  to be her sister.  According to  her  all  the
accused  persons used to harass her and also the victim  for
demand  of dowry.  She has stated that the accused/appellant
herein  used to beat the victim for demand of two  kilograms
of  silver, T.V. and almirah.  They used to say that she and
her  sister  (the victim) were not the off-spring  of  their
father   which   led  her  sister  being   beaten   by   the
accused/appellant herein.  On the next day after hearing the
cries  of her sister when she went to her room she  saw  her
sister  burning  where  the  accused/appellant  herein   was
present.    According   to  this  witness   the   fire   was
extinguished  by her and her husband.  She has  stated  that
the  match box was lying on the quilt.  She has stated  that
two  lamps were lying there, one was empty and the other was
filled with kerosene.  This witness has stated that when her
brother-in-law  was  to  call the doctor,  accused/appellant
said  to let the victim die. When the victim was being taken
to Bilaigarh, near village Khajri, accused/appellant came on
a  bicycle.   She made her sister sit on it from  where  the
accused/appellant took her to her mother's house and  dumped 
her  there.  In cross-examination this witness remained firm
to her statement made in the examination-in-chief.
      Jaishree (PW-3) - the mother of the victim has  stated
that  from the beginning of the marriage itself her daughter
was   subjected   to   cruelty  by  the   accused/appellant.
According  to  her as the victim was suffering from  chronic
headache,  the  accused/appellant used to drop  her  to  her
house  and asked to provide treatment to her.  This  witness
has  stated  that  the accused persons used  to  harass  her
daughter  for not giving the gold and silver as promised  by
her  husband.   According  to this witness  the  victim  was
brought  to  her  house by the accused/appellant  with  burn
injuries  and after dumping her there he disappeared  there-
from.   Thereafter she called her brother and brother-in-law
and  took  the  victim to the hospital.   This  witness  has
stated  that  the  victim  regained  consciousness  in   the
hospital  after  one  and  a half months  and  she  remained
hospitalized for two months.  According to her on an enquiry
being  made  by  the  police officer  to  the  victim  after
regaining   consciousness  she  came  to   know   that   the
accused/appellant had set her daughter on fire.

      Mahesh  (PW-4)  - the brother of the accused  has  not
supported the case of the prosecution and has been  declared
hostile.   He however has stated that the victim  was  being
kept  properly by his brother and on hearing her cries  when
he  went  to her room, he saw the victim sitting  there  and
told him that she herself got burnt.

      Nanki  Bai (PW-5) and Ramesh (PW-6) have not supported 
the  case of the prosecution and have been declared hostile.
Ravi  Shankar  Chouhan (PW-7) is the witness to  seizure  of
articles  made  under  Ex. P-4 has not  supported  the  same
completely but admits his signature on the arrest memo  Exs.
P-7, 8 &amp; 9.  Radheshyam (PW-8) has not supported the case of 
the  prosecution and has been declared hostile.  Rohit Kumar
(PW-9) has stated that the victim had informed him that  the
accused/appellant used to harass her for demand  of  silver.
He  has  stated that on hearing the news about the  incident
when he went to hospital, victim had informed him that there
was  a quarrel between her and her husband and while she was 
sleeping in the night he sprinkled kerosene on her body  and
set  her  on fire.   Dr. H. Verma (PW-10) who first attended
the  victim  has  stated  that the  victim  was  brought  to
hospital with 40-50% burns and looking to her condition  she
was  referred to Mekahara hospital at Raipur.  He has stated
that  statement of the victim was recorded by the Tahasildar
in  his  presence.   Dr.  Nisha Yadu  (PW-11)  -  Consultant
Plastic  Surgeon has stated that the victim was hospitalised
on  18.10.2006 and she remained there till 7.12.2006 and had
sustained  50  per  cent burn injuries on  her  face,  neck,
chest,   back  and  both  arms.  Station  House  Officer   -
Deenbandhu  Uikey (PW-12) is the investigating  officer  who
has supported the case of the prosecution. Dhan Sai Sahu (PW- 
13) is the Patwari who had prepared spot map Ex. P-18.

     Bhanuram Sahu (DW-1) has stated on coming to know about  
the  incident through one Mahesh, when he went to the  house
of  the  accused/appellant, victim was found sitting in  the
room  and  on being asked by him, she told that  as  burning
lamp  had fallen on her, she sustained the injuries.  Tejram
(DW-2)  -  father of the victim has stated that his daughter
was  kept  properly  by  the accused persons  and  that  his
daughter had not made any complaint to him against them. 

9.    Minute examination of the evidence available on record
particularly that of victim Durga Bai (PW-1), Laxmi Bai (PW-
2)  and  Jaishree (PW-3) makes it clear that from  the  very
beginning  of marriage, the victim was subjected to  cruelty
by the accused/appellant for demand of dowry. Medical report
of  the victim also goes to show that she had suffered 40-50
per   cent   burn   injuries.  Record   reveals   that   the
accused/appellant had made all efforts to  kill  the  victim
but she was   fortunate enough to survive. Record also shows
that  the  victim was being taunted by the accused/appellant
saying  that  she  had two fathers and  on  objection  being
raised by the victim to such remakes, accused/appellant used
to  beat  her. This means that apart from physical  torture,
she  was  subjected to mental harassment also. Moreover,  it
creates   a   doubt   that   when   the   victim   and   the
accused/appellant  were  sleeping  on  the  same  cot,   the
appellant should also have received the injuries on his body
but  surprisingly  he  did  not  receive  any  injury  which
suggests that it was the accused/appellant himself  who  was
the mastermind behind the incident. In addition to this, the
evidence  of  Laxmi  (PW-2) makes it  clear  that  when  her
brother-in-law    Dinesh   was   to   call    the    doctor,
accused/appellant said that let the victim die. Evidence  of
the  victim also shows that the accused/appellant had forced
her  to  make the statement as if she herself had got  burnt
and  if she did not state like this, he would dump her in  a
pit. Record also shows that when the victim was burning, the
accused/appellant was simply standing there and did not make 
any   effort   to  save  her.  This  brutal   act   of   the
accused/appellant  does not lay claim for  any  sympathy  by
this  Court.  This  Court does not find  any  force  in  the
argument of the counsel for the appellant that it was a case
of  merely  an accident because paragraphs 1  to  3  of  the
statement  of  the victim clearly go to show the  manner  in
which  she was burnt. This Court also finds no substance  in
the  argument  that  the act of the accused/appellant  would
fall  u/s 324 IPC as the victim had suffered 40-50 per  cent
burn injuries which was confirmed by the doctor.

10.     There   is   thus   ample   evidence   against   the
accused/appellant  to  arrive at  the  conclusion  that  the
findings  recorded  by  the trial Court  are  based  on  due
appreciation  of  the  evidence  available  on  record.   No
illegality  or  infirmity  is  noticeable  in  the  judgment
impugned convicting and sentencing the accused/appellant  as
mentioned above warranting interference there-with.

11.  In the result, the appeal being devoid of substance  is
liable  to  be  dismissed. It is dismissed as such.  As  the
appellant  is  already  in  jail,  no  order  regarding  his
surrender etc. is required to be passed.

                                                         Judge
