Criminal Appeal No 162 of 2003 Smt Kejabai and others Vs. State of Chhattisgarh

HIGH COURT OF CHATTISGARH AT BILASPUR          

 Criminal Appeal No 162 of 2003

 Smt Kejabai and others
                                              ...Petitioners
                           Versus
 State of Chhattisgarh
                                              ...Respondents

! Smt Indira Tripathi counsel for the appellants

^ Shri Pravin Das Dy GA for the respondent State

 CORAM: Honble Mr Justice Pritinker Diwaker 

 Dated: 11/02/2011

: Judgement 

                             J U D G M E N T
                                 11022011

         CRIMINAL APPEAL UNDER SECTION 374 2 OF THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE                


      This appeal is directed against the judgment and order
dated  30.1.2003  passed by the Additional  Sessions  Judge,
Raipur  in  Sessions  Trial  No.  386/2000  convicting   the
accused/appellants under Sections 498-A and  304-B  IPC  and 
sentencing each of them to undergo rigorous imprisonment for
two  years  with  fine of Rs. 1,000 u/s 498-A  and  rigorous
imprisonment for ten years with fine of Rs. 5000  u/s  304-B
IPC, plus default stipulations.

2.    Case of the prosecution in brief is that on 14.10.1999
at  about  9.30  p.m. deceased Nandini  ended  her  life  by
consuming some poisonous substance in her matrimonial house.   
Merg intimation Ex. P-7 was given by Shyam Lal Pathak (PW-7)  
-  the  ward  boy of Mekahara hospital, Raipur on  that  day
itself  on the basis of which FIR Ex. P-8 was registered  on
2.11.1999 under sections 498-A and 306 IPC. After completion
of  investigation  challan  was  filed  on  23.2.2000  under
Sections  498-A and 306 IPC. However, the charge was  framed 
by the trial Court under Sections 498-A, 306 and 304-B IPC.

3.     So   as   to  hold  the  accused/appellants   guilty,
prosecution has examined as many as 13 witnesses in  support  
of  its case. Statements of the accused/appellants were also
recorded under section 313 of the Code of Criminal Procedure
in  which they denied the charges levelled against them  and
pleaded  their innocence and false implication in the  case.
This  apart, one Manrakhan (DW-1) has also been examined  by  
the defence in support of its case.


4.   After hearing the parties the trial Court has acquitted
the  accused/appellants of the charge under section 306  but
convicted and sentenced them as mentioned above.  


5.    Heard counsel for the parties and perused the material
available on record including the judgment impugned.

6.    Counsel for the accused/appellants submits that  there
is  no concrete evidence available on record with respect to
the   correct   date  of  marriage  of  the  deceased   with
accused/appellant  No.3  herein.  She  submits   that   very
inconsistent statements have been made by the witnesses from 
which  it  appears  that  marriage  of  the  deceased   with
appellant No.3 herein was solemnized 7-8 years prior to  the
date  of  incident  and in these circumstances  the  offence
under  Section  304-B  IPC  is  not  made  out  against  the
accused/appellants.  She  submits that  there  are  material
contradictions  in  the statements of Sadaram  (PW-1),  Smt.
Pramila Bai (PW-2), Smt. Chanda Bai (PW-3), Kriparam (PW-4),  
Smt.  Phulmati  Bai (PW-6) and Smt. Dularin  Bai  (PW-7)  if
compared to their statements recorded under Section  161  of
the  Code  of  Criminal Procedure. She submits that  present
appears  to  be  a case where the witnesses appear  to  have
exaggerated their version out of the anger originating  from
unfortunate  death  of the deceased. She  submits  that  the
incident had taken place on 14.10.1999 whereas for the first
time    the    witnesses    have   deposed    against    the
accused/appellants on 2.11.1999. She submits that Itwari (PW-
9) has not supported the case of the prosecution.

7.    On  the  other  hand counsel for the  respondent/State
supports the judgment impugned and submits that the deceased  
was   subjected   to   cruelty   at   the   hands   of   the
accused/appellants to such an extent that she was left  with
no  other  option but to commit suicide. According  to  him,
minor contradictions in the statements of the witnesses have
to  be  ignored when they have made specific allegations  on
material  particulars. He submits that there was  demand  of
Rs.  2,00,000  from the accused/appellants for purchasing  a
jeep  and  that  as  deceased died  within  seven  years  of
marriage, their conviction under Section 304-B IPC is  fully
justified.  According to him, independent  witnesses  namely
Smt.   Phulmati   Bai  and  Dularin  Bai  (PW-6   and   PW-7
respectively)   have  duly  supported  the   case   of   the
prosecution and therefore also the judgment under  challenge
is just and proper.

8.    Appellant  No.1  namely Smt. Kejabai,  appellant  No.2
namely Jagatpal and appellant No.3 namely Chunnilal Sahu are 
the mother-in-law, father-in-law and husband of the deceased
respectively.  Sadaram (PW-1) - the father of  the  deceased
has  stated  in his evidence that marriage of  the  deceased
with  accused/appellant Chunnilal was solemnized in the year
1993  and that she died on 14.10.1999. According to him,  on
the  second day of the incident accused/appellant  Chunnilal
along  with  two  other persons had come to  his  house  and
informed  about the death of the deceased due to consumption
of  poison  and thereafter he went to Mekahara hospital  and
saw  the  dead  body  of  his daughter.  According  to  this
witness, when about a month prior to the date of incident he
had  brought  his daughter to his house on the  occasion  of
Tija  festival,  she had informed him that accused/appellant
No.3  used to beat her whereas accused/appellants  1  and  2
used   to   abuse  her.  According  to  this  witness,   the
accused/appellants  also  used to demand  Rs.  2,00,000  for
purchasing  a  jeep.  This  witness  has  stated  that   the
accused/appellants had asked his daughter to get back to the
matrimonial  house with the money asked for, otherwise  not.
According to him, 8-10 days after the Tija festival  he  had
sent  back  his daughter with his elder brother  making  her
understand about his inability to pay the money so  demanded
and then 10-12 days thereafter he got the news of her death.
In  cross  examination  this witness  has  stated  that  the
accused/appellants  used to harass the deceased  since  very
beginning of the marriage. He however has admitted  that  in
this  connection he had not called any meeting  nor  made  a
complaint in the society or the police because his  daughter
(the  deceased)  had not permitted him for  the  same.  This
witness had not even asked the accused/appellants as to  why
they were demanding dowry. He has stated that at the time of
marriage of the deceased, the accused/appellants were having
25  acres  of  land  and thereafter they had  purchased  the
tractor  also. This witness has admitted that all the  three
sons of the deceased were born in her matrimonial house  and
expenses  thereof were also borne by the accused/appellants.
According to this witness, he had informed the police  about
the  accused/appellants harassing the deceased  but  if  the
same  is not mentioned in the diary statement, he could  not
tell the reason for that. He has stated that the marriage of
the  deceased was solemnized with the accused/appellant No.3 
Chunnilal eight years there-before.

      Smt.  Pramila Bai (PW-2) - mother of the deceased  has
stated that marriage of the deceased was solemnized with the
accused/appellant No.3 Chunnilal seven years prior  thereto.
She  has  stated  that about one month before  the  date  of
incident, her husband had brought the deceased to her  house
along  with  her child leaving other two children  with  the
accused/appellants. During her 7 days stay in her house, the
deceased   had   told   this  witness   weeping   that   the
accused/appellants had asked her to get back  to  them  with
Rs.  2,00,000  for purchasing the jeep otherwise  not.  When
this witness expressed her inability to part with the amount
demanded and told the deceased to stay with her, she did not
agree  to  that  as she had left her two children  with  the
accused/appellants. Then, 8-10 days thereafter, according to
this  witness, her brother-in-law had taken the deceased  to
her  matrimonial house. She has stated that after  about  20
days accused/appellant Chunnilal and his brother came to her
house  and  informed  that  the  deceased  was  admitted  in
Mekahara hospital as she was not keeping well. Subsequently, 
her  husband went to Mekahara hospital and on return  there-
from he told her that the accused/appellants had killed  the
deceased by administering poison. According to this witness,
whenever the deceased visited her, she used to tell that the
accused/appellants were harassing her for demand  of  dowry.
This  witness  however admits that she did  no  disclose  to
anyone  about  the demand of money by the accused/appellants  
nor  did  she ask her husband to make a complaint  regarding
the  same  in  the  society.  There  appear  to  be  certain
contradictions in the evidence of this witness in respect of
disclosing  to  the  police about the two  children  of  the
deceased not being brought with her apart from certain other
facts. This witness has admitted that accused/appellants are
having   20-25  acres  of  land  and  a  tractor  and   that
accused/appellant No.2 was in government job.
      Smt.  Chanda  Bai  (PW-3) - the sister-in-law  of  the
deceased  has  stated  that her marriage  and  that  of  the
deceased had taken place in the year 1993. According to her,
during  summer  season  when the deceased  had  visited  her
house,   she   had  informed  that  accused/appellant   No.3
(husband)  used  to beat her for demand of dowry  and  other
accused/appellants used to quarrel with  her.  According  to
her, there was a scar on the back of the deceased which  was
as  a  result  of  her being cauterized by accused/appellant
No.3  herein  with  hot  tongs. In  cross  examination  this
witness has stated that on the eve of Tija festival when the
deceased had visited her house, she did not meet her as  she
had  gone  to her maternal house. From paragraph  4  of  her
cross  examination minor contradictions appear to be present
there if compared with her case diary statement.

      Kriparam (PW-4) - the uncle of the deceased has stated
that   marriage   of  the  deceased  was   solemnized   with
accused/appellant No.3 herein about 7-8 years prior  thereto
and  that  on  the  date  of incident  he  was  informed  by
accused/appellant No.3 and his brother that  deceased  being
seriously ill was admitted in the hospital and when  he  had
gone  to  the hospital he saw the dead body of the deceased.
According to this witness, on the occasion of Tija  festival
when the deceased had visited his house, she was weeping and  
on  being asked she informed him that the accused/appellants
were  demanding  1+  -2  lakhs of rupees  for  purchasing  a
vehicle  and were harassing her also.  According to him,  in
the  event  of there being any dispute, effort was  made  by
them  to resolve the same in the society but as regards this
matter no complaint was made to the Panchayat. In paragraphs 
7  and  8  of his deposition, there appear to be some  minor
contradictions if compared to the case diary statement.

     Chintaram Soni (PW-5) is the Patwari and witness of Ex.
P-3  which  was  given on the basis of  land  records.  Smt.
Phulmati Bai (PW-6) is the neighbour of Sadaram (PW-1) - the
father of the deceased. She has stated that about 15-20 days
before  the  date  of  incident, deceased  had  visited  her
parents  on  the occasion of Tija festival and stayed  there
for  few  days  and during this period she had informed  her
about   the   cruelty  being  meted  out  to  her   by   the
accused/appellants  for demand of dowry.  Deceased  is  also
said to have shown to this witness the scar on her back as a
result  of cauterization by the accused/appellant No.3  with
hot  tongs. According to this witness, the deceased had also
disclosed  to her the demand of Rs. 2,00,000 being  made  by
the  accused persons for purchasing the vehicle. In  respect
of  date of marriage of the deceased, she has stated that it
was  solemnized 7-8 years back therefrom. In paragraph 6  of
her evidence there appear to be some minor contradictions if
compared to her case diary statement. Smt. Dularin Bai  (PW-
7)  has  made almost similar allegations as made by Phulmati
(PW-6).  She  has  not stated anything  about  the  date  of
marriage  of the deceased with accused/appellant  No.3.  Dr.
Ullhas Gonnade (PW-8) is the witness who had conducted  post  
mortem on the body of the deceased and given his report  Ex.
P-4  according  to  which  the death  was  caused    due  to
asphyxia as a result of poisoning.  Itwari (PW-9) has stated
that   marriage   of  the  deceased  was   solemnized   with
accused/appellant No.3 7-8 years back thereto but he was not
aware  as  to  how  the  deceased died.  According  to  this
witness,  he never heard of any dispute between the deceased
and  the  accused/appellants and that he was  residing  near
their  house.  Later  on,  this witness  has  been  declared
hostile. Sub Inspector namely Nirbhay Singh (PW-10)  is  the
witness who has done part of the investigation. Bhagwan  Das
(PW-11)  - the neighbour of the accused/appellants  has  not
made  any  allegation against any of the accused/appellants.
ASI  - R.S. Sahu (PW-12) is the witness who had participated
in the investigation. Akhilesh Jha (PW-13) - Additional S.P.
is  the investigating officer who has supported the case  of
the prosecution.

9.    Minute  examination of the evidence of  the  witnesses
makes  it  very  clear that there is no cogent  and  legally
admissible evidence on record to establish the exact date of
marriage of the deceased with the accused/appellant  No.  3.
On  the contrary the witnesses have stated that the marriage
of  the  deceased  was solemnized with the accused/appellant
No. 3 about 7 - 8 years back. Thus the basic ingredients for
convicting a person under section 304-B IPC that death of  a
woman  is  caused  by any burns or bodily injury  or  occurs
otherwise than under normal circumstances within seven years
of  marriage and it is shown that soon before her death  she
was subjected to cruelty or harassment by her husband or any
relative  of her husband in connection with demand of  dowry
are  totally  amiss  in  this case.  Considering  all  these
aspects  of the case in respect of the date of marriage,  it
is  difficult  to say that the marriage of the deceased  was
solemnized  with the appellant No. 3 within seven  years  of
her  death. More so, there is no concrete evidence on record
to show that soon before death the deceased was subjected to
cruelty  or harassment by the appellants and, therefore,  it
will   not   be   safe  for  this  Court  to   convict   the
accused/appellants under Section 304-B of the  Indian  Penal
Code  and therefore, they are acquitted of the said  charge.
However,  in  respect of offence under  Section  498-A  IPC,
there  is ample evidence on record to show that the deceased
was  subjected to cruelty as defined under Section 498-A IPC
and, therefore, their conviction under Section 498-A IPC  is
maintained.  However, the conviction under Section 304-B IPC
is  set aside. Accused/appellants are acquitted of the  said
charge.

10.   As regards sentence, looking to the peculiar facts and
circumstances  of the case and that the incident  had  taken
place  in  the  year 1999, this Court is of  the  considered
opinion that it would be in the interest of justice  if  the
sentence imposed on him is reduced to imprisonment  for  six
months  instead  of 2 years as has been done  by  the  Court
below. Order accordingly.

11.  Appeal is thus partly allowed.
                                                  Judge
