Criminal Appeal No 202 of 2007 Yavnesh Kumar Sahu and others Vs. State of Chhattisgarh

HIGH COURT OF CHATTISGARH AT BILASPUR          

 Criminal Appeal No 202 of 2007

 Yavnesh Kumar Sahu and others  
                                              ...Petitioners
                           Versus
 State of Chhattisgarh
                                              ...Respondents

! Shri Malay Bhaduri counsel for the appellants

^ Shri Pravin Das Dy GA for the State

 CORAM: Honble Mr Justice Pritinker Diwaker 

 Dated: 03/01/2011

: Judgement 

                             J U D G M E N T
                                 03012011

          CRIMINAL APPEAL UNDER SECTION 374 OF THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE               


      This  appeal  is directed against the  judgment  dated
27.2.2007 passed by the Additional Sessions Judge (FTC) Durg 
in  Sessions  Trial No. 203/2002 convicting  the  appellants
under Sections 498-A and 304-B of the Indian Penal Code  and
sentencing each of them to undergo rigorous imprisonment for
ten years.

2.    Case  of the prosecution in brief is that marriage  of
the    deceased   namely   Savita   was   solemnized    with
accused/appellant No.1 Yavnesh Kumar Sahu in  the  month  of 
May  2000.  Appellant No.2 Bharosa Ram Sahu, appellant  No.3  
Basan Bai Sahu and appellant No.4 Sabita Bai are the father-
in-law,  mother-in-law  and sister-in-law  of  the  deceased
respectively. On 20.7.2001 deceased Savita died by consuming 
poison.  Merg intimation Ex. P-4 was given by the husband of
the  deceased  and  based  on the  written  report  made  by
Khorbahra  Ram  Sahu  -  the  father  of  the  deceased   on
21.7.2001, FIR Ex. P-1 was registered on that day itself. In
the said written report it has been stated by the father  of
the   deceased   that  his  daughter  was  killed   by   the
accused/appellants for not brining sufficient  dowry.  After
investigation,  challan  was filed  by  the  prosecution  on
25.10.2001.

3.     So   as   to  hold  the  accused/appellants   guilty,
prosecution has examined as many as 10 witnesses in  support  
of  its case. Statements of the accused/appellants were also
recorded under section 313 of the Code of Criminal Procedure
in  which they denied the charges levelled against them  and
pleaded  their innocence and false implication in the  case.
This  apart,  two witnesses namely Bharosha Ram  (DW-1)  and  
Bhav  Singh  Sahu  (DW-2) were examined by  the  defence  in
support of its case.


4.   After hearing the parties the trial Court has convicted
and  sentenced the accused / appellants for the offences  as
mentioned above. 


5.    Heard counsel for the parties and perused the material
available on record including the judgment impugned.

6.    Counsel for the appellants submits that of course  the
death of the victim is an unfortunate one but for that  only
the appellants cannot be convicted either under  Section 498-
A or 304-B IPC. He submits that as Khorbahra Ram Sahu (PW-1)   
and  Parvati  Sahu  (PW-2) - the father and  mother  of  the
deceased  have lost their daughter, they have made  a  false
complaint  against the accused/appellants  alleging  cruelty
for demand of dowry. He submits that merely on the basis  of
bald  allegations the accused/appellants cannot be convicted
under section 498-A or 304-B IPC. He submits that it has not
been  stated  by  any of the witnesses as to  which  of  the
accused/appellants has made any demand from the deceased  or   
who  subjected  her to cruelty on any occasion.  He  submits
that  Fukeshwari  (PW-3)  -  the  so-called  friend  of  the
deceased  appears to be a tutored witness and a  reading  of
her  entire statement makes it clear that she has not stated
the  truth  before  the  Court. He  submits  that  even  the
provisions of Section 157 of the Code of Criminal  Procedure
have  not been complied with by the prosecution as  copy  of
the  FIR  was not forwarded to the concerned magistrate.  He
submits  that  in  the  absence of any  charge  against  the
accused/appellants in respect of Dowry Prohibition  Act,  it
would  not  be  safe  for the Courts to convict  them  under
sections 498-A and 304-B IPC.  In support of his contention,
counsel  for  the  appellants has  placed  reliance  on  the
decisions  of the Supreme Court in the matter of Amar  Singh
v.  State of Rajsthan reported in 2010 AIR SCW 5141  and  in
the  matter  of  Durga Prasad and another v. State  of  M.P.
reported in 2010 AIR SCW 3673.  

7.    On  the  other  hand counsel for the  respondent/State
supports  the  judgment impugned and  submits  that  a  very
specific    allegation   has   been   made    against    the
accused/appellants  and  that  Khorbahra  Ram  Sahu  (PW-1), 
Parvati Sahu (PW-2) and Fukeshwari (PW-3) have categorically 
stated  that  deceased  was  subjected  to  cruelty  by  the
accused/appellants.  This apart,  he  submits  that  a  very
prompt report was lodged by the father of the deceased  just
next  day after the incident and therefore it cannot be said
that  implication of the accused persons is an afterthought.
He submits that though the witnesses may not have elaborated 
the  instances of cruelty or demand of dowry  but  once  the
allegation to this effect is made, there is no occasion  for
this  Court  to  disbelieve the same. He submits  that  soon
before  the  death i.e. 12.7.2001 the deceased  had  made  a
complaint  to her father Khorbahra Ram Sahu (PW-1) regarding 
ill-treatment  by  the accused/appellants which  establishes
the  fact  that soon before the  death she was subjected  to
cruelty. He submits that Fukeshwari (PW-3) is an independent
witness  and  there  was  no occasion  for  her  to  falsely
implicate  the  accused/appellants. Lastly he  submits  that
even  if  the  accused/appellants have not been  charged  or
prosecuted  under the Dowry Prohibition Act,  they  are  not
entitled for any benefit. In respect of not sending copy  of
the  FIR to the concerned magistrate, he submits that it  is
not an illegality but a mere procedural irregularity and the
same  is  not fatal to the case of the prosecution. He  thus
submits  that here is a categorical allegation  against  all
the  accused/appellants  and therefore  the  conviction  and
sentence awarded to them is strictly in accordance with  law
and does not call for any interference in appeal.

8.    In  his  written  report Ex.  P-1  made  on  21.7.2001
Khorbahra  Ram  Sahu  (PW-1) has  not  made  any  allegation 
against accused/appellant No.2 Bharosa Ram Sahu - the father- 
in-law  of  the  deceased.  In  this  report,  it  has  been
mentioned that after marriage accused/appellant No.1 Yavnesh
Kumar Sahu, appellant No.3 Basan Bai Sahu and appellant No.4  
Sabita  Bai used to abuse and beat the deceased saying  that
she hailed from a poor family background and that her father
had  not  given gold and silver in marriage. He  has  stated
that  on  account  of  this act of the accused  persons  his
daughter was very sad and on 12.7.2001 when he had  gone  to 
see  her as she  was carrying pregnancy of five months,  his
daughter  had  asked him to take her with  him  as  she  was
apprehending  that she would be killed. He has  stated  that
thereafter  he  received an information from  his  relatives
that  his daughter committed suicide. In his Court statement
this witness has stated that all the accused/appellants used
to  pass  taunt to the deceased saying that gold and  silver
have  not been given in marriage and that they used to  beat
her  also.  Thereafter, he has stated that accused/appellant
No.1  and accused/appellant No.4 used to abuse the deceased. 
He  has reiterated that on 12.7.2001 when he had gone to see
his daughter, she had informed him that she was subjected to
cruelty by the accused/appellants and requested him to  take
her  to  his  house  or else she would be killed.  In  cross
examination, this witness has categorically stated  that  he
belonged  to Sahu community in which there was no custom  of 
dowry.  He  has stated that when the accused/appellants  had
come  to his house for settlement of marriage there  was  no
demand  for  dowry. According to him, even at  the  time  of
marriage no such demand was made by them. He has stated that   
it  was within the knowledge of the accused/appellants  that
his financial condition was poor and they had agreed for the
marriage  just  after  looking  at  his  daughter  i.e.  the
deceased. He has stated that on the eve of Tija festival  he
and  his 8-10 relatives had gone to bring his daughter  i.e.
the    deceased,   they   were   well   treated    by    the
accused/appellants  and they had sent  the  deceased  saying
that they could take her only for 8-10 days but the deceased
stayed in his house for about a month and during this period
she  used  to  visit the neighbours and was  feeling  happy.
Thereafter, this witness has stated that when he had gone to
take  his daughter, he and other relatives were informed  by
the  deceased that she was being subjected to cruelty by the
accused/appellants. Later, changing her version again he has
stated  that  complaint of cruelty was made by the  deceased
after reaching his house and his previous statement has been
made  by  mistake.  In paragraph No.4  he  has  stated  that
written  report Ex. P-1 has not been written by him  but  it
has been reduced to writing by someone else as was spoken by  
him  and  he  had merely signed the same. This  witness  has
further stated that accused/appellant No.2 Bharosa Ram  Sahu 
is residing at Bhilai with his daughter as he was working in
Bhilai  Steel  Plant.  He has stated that  at  the  time  of
inquest   he  had  not  made  any  allegation  against   the
accused/appellants as no such questions  have  been  put  to
him.  He has stated that 13th day ceremony was performed  by 
the  accused/appellants and till then he had not lodged  any
report.

9.   Parvati Sahu (PW-2) - mother of the deceased has stated
almost  the  same thing as has been stated  by  her  husband
Khorbahra Ram Sahu (PW-1). She has stated that when  on  the  
eve of Tija festival the deceased had come to her house, she
had  complained  of ill treatment by the accused/appellants.
She has stated that at the time of village fair the deceased
had  come  to  her house and told her that she was subjected
to  cruelty  at  the  hands of the accused/appellants.  This
witness also admits the fact that when the marriage  of  her
daughter  was  settled and even at the time of  marriage  no
demand  of  dowry  was made. In cross examination,  she  has 
categorically stated that her daughter never used to  inform
anything to her husband and she used to inform the things to
her only. She has stated that on three occasions her son-in-
law  i.e. appellant No.1 herein had come to her house  along
with the deceased. She has stated that in Sahu community  if
any  such  incident takes place, matter is reported  to  the
head  of  the  community  and  ultimately  that  family   is
boycotted.  However, in the present case, no such  complaint
was  made to the head of the Sahu community. Fukeshwari (PW-   
3)  - the so-called friend of the deceased has stated in her
evidence that after marriage when the deceased had  come  to
her  village,  she  had informed her that her  husband  i.e.
appellant  No.1  herein used to rebuke her saying  that  her
parents had not given gold and silver in marriage. According
to  this witness, the mother-in-law and father-in-law of the
deceased  also  used to abuse her. This witness  has  stated
that  deceased had informed her that whenever her father-in-
law  used to come down to Bhilai, his behaviour towards  her
was  not  good. Sub Inspector -Mahesh Sinha (PW-4)  who  had  
received  the written report from the father of the deceased
and registered the FIR has categorically stated in paragraph
No.6 that at the time of inquest, father of the deceased was
present  but had not made any complaint against the  accused
persons  in  respect of cruelty or demand of dowry.  He  has
further stated that as there was no objection by the  father
of  the deceased, ornaments worn by the deceased were  given 
to  accused/appellant No.1 herein who  happened  to  be  the
husband of the deceased. He has stated that relatives of the
deceased  have  made  the  allegation  against  the  accused
persons  whereas the neighbours and family members have  not 
made any such allegation against the accused/appellants.  He
has stated that during her pregnancy, the deceased was well-
treated  by  the  accused persons.  Tamlal  (PW-5)  who  had
accompanied  the  accused/appellants when the  deceased  was  
taken  to  the hospital after consuming poison has not  made
any allegation against the accused/appellants. He has stated
that  deceased was taken to hospital so that her life  could
be  saved.  Kirtinarayan Sudhakar (PW-6) is the Patwari  who
had  prepared the spot map Ex. P-7. Mehattar (PW-7)  is  the
village  kotwar  and he has not made any allegation  against
the  accused/appellants. Dr. Renuka Prasanno (PW-8) who  had  
conducted  the post mortem examination of the  deceased  has 
stated  that  she did not find any external  injury  on  her
body.  Dy. S.P. Banshilal Kurre (PW-10) is the Investigating
Officer  and  has  supported  the  fact  that  he  did   the
investigation in the case.

10.  Bharosa Ram (DW-1) who is the appellant No.2 herein has 
categorically stated that he was an employee of Bhilai Steel
Plant and at the time of incident was residing with his wife
Basan   Bai  (appellant  No.3  here)  and  daughter   Sabita
(appellant  No.4) at Bhilai itself. He has  stated  that  in
Sahu  community to which he belongs, there is no  custom  of
dowry.  He has stated that the deceased was living with  her
husband separately. Another defence witness Bhav Singh  Sahu  
(DW-2)  has  also  stated  that the  accused/appellant  No.2
Bharosa  Ram  was residing at Durg along with his  wife  and
daughter  and  there  was no custom of  dowry  in  the  Sahu
community. 

11.   Thus  considering the entire evidence adduced  by  the
prosecution  it  is clear that though some allegations  have
been  made by Khorbahra Ram Sahu (PW-1), Parvati Sahu (PW-2)    
and  Fukeshwari  (PW-3)  against the accused/appellants,  if
their  complete statements are taken into consideration,  it
creates  a  doubt  that the deceased died because  of  being
subjected  to  cruelty  by  the  accused/appellants.   These
witnesses have categorically admitted the fact that marriage
of  the  deceased  was solemnized with the accused/appellant
No.1  herein only after the accused/appellants had seen her.
It is also clear from the evidence of the witnesses that the
accused  persons  were well aware about the  poor  financial
condition  of  the  parents of the deceased.  Evidence  also
reflects  that Khorbahara and his other family members  were
treated  well  when  they  had  visited  the  house  of  the
accused/appellants and the allegation of cruelty at the time
of  visit  to  the house of the accused/appellants  by  8-10
relatives of the deceased has  not been established  by  the
prosecution.  Parvati  Sahu (PW-2) has categorically  stated
that deceased used to inform the things to her only and  not
to  her  husband but on the contrary Khorbahara  (PW-1)  has
stated  that  deceased  had  informed  him  about  the   ill
treatment by the accused persons. None of the witnesses  has 
made  any  statement as to which of the accused persons  had 
beaten  the  deceased  or  made any  demand  from  her.  The
witnesses  have  also failed to give any  specific  date  on
which    the   cruelty   meted   out   to   her    by    the
accused/appellants. Though Khorbahra (PW-1) has stated  that 
about  8  days back from the date of incident he had visited
the  house  of the deceased where he was informed about  the
cruelty  but  the same cannot be fully relied upon  by  this
Court  and it cannot be said that soon before the death  she
was   subjected   to   cruelty  by  the  accused/appellants.
Essential  ingredients  for  dowry  death  are  cruelty   or
harassment  for or in connection with dowry and mere  demand 
of  dowry  would not be an offence under Sections 304-B  and
498-A IPC.  While dealing with an identical question in  the
matter  of Amar Singh (supra) it has been held by  the  Apex
Court as under:
    "23.  .Thus, there was evidence in the  case  of
    Amar  Singh about his exact conduct which caused
    harassment to the deceased but there was no such
    evidence in the case of Jagdish and Gordhani.  A
    prosecution  witness who merely  used  the  word
    "harassed"  or "tortured" and does not  describe
    the   exact   conduct  of  the  accused   which,
    according  to  him, amounted  to  harassment  or
    torture  may  not be believed by  the  Court  in
    cases  under  Sections 498A and 304B  IPC.   For
    this  reason,  the High Court has taken  a  view
    that  the  charges against Jagdish  and  Godhani
    have  not  been  established  beyond  reasonable
    doubt  and  that  their case is  distinguishable
    from  that  of Amar Singh and that  Jagdish  and
    Gordhani appear to have been implicated  because
    they were members of Amar Singh's family.

    24.  In  Kans Raj v. State of Punjab and  others
    [(2000)  5 SCC 207] : (AIR 2000 SC 2324  :  2000
    AIR  SCW  2093),  this Court cautioned  that  in
    cases  where  accusations of  dowry  deaths  are
    made, the overt acts attributed to persons other
    than  the  husband  are required  to  be  proved
    beyond  reasonable doubt and by mere conjectures
    and  implications such relations cannot be  held
    guilty for the offence relating to dowry deaths.
    In   the  aforesaid  case,  this  Court  further
    observed  that  a  tendency  has  developed  for
    roping  in all relations of the in-laws  of  the
    deceased  wives in the matters of  dowry  deaths
    which,  if not discouraged, is likely to  affect
    the  case  of  the prosecution even against  the
    real culprits.

12.  Further, admittedly copy of the FIR was not sent to the
concerned Magistrate and no such document has been  produced   
by  the  prosecution and this fact has been admitted by  the
investigating officer (PW-10). This also creates a doubt  in
the   case  of  the  prosecution.  More  so,  statement   of
Fukeshwari  (PW-3)  appears  to  be  an  improved  one   and
therefore it would not be safe for this Court to make  it  a
basis  to  convict  the accused/appellants.  No  independent
witness  has been examined by the prosecution in support  of
its  case. The Court below has failed to consider  the  fact
that accused/appellants 2 to 4 -in-laws of the deceased were
residing  separately at Durg as accused/appellant  No.2  was
working  in  the  Bhilai Steel Plant.  This  fact  has  been
admitted  by  Khorbahara  (PW-1) and  also  by  two  defence
witnesses.

13.   Having thus dealt with the facts and circumstances  of
the  case as above, this Court is of the considered  opinion
that the prosecution has not brought on record any clinching
material  to  substantiate the allegations made against  the
appellants.  Evidence  of  the parents  and  friend  of  the
deceased being self contradictory in material particulars is
not  sufficient  to  uphold the conviction  slapped  by  the
Court  below  and  that  being so benefit  of  doubt  should
definitely go to the accused persons.

14.   Accordingly, the appeal is allowed. Judgment  impugned
is  set aside. Appellants stand acquitted of all the charges
levelled  against  them. Appellants are reported  to  be  on
bail. Their Bail bonds stand discharged.

                                                  Judge
