Criminal Appeal No 1004 of 2008 Ram Niwas and others Vs. State of Chhattisgarh

HIGH COURT OF CHATTISGARH AT BILASPUR          

  Criminal Appeal No 1004 of 2008


  Ram Niwas and others 
                        ...Petitioners

          VERSUS

  State of Chhattisgarh
                         ...Respondents


!  Shri Jai Prakash Shukla counsel for the appellant

^  Shri Bhaskar Pyasi PL for the respondent

 CORAM: Honble Mr Justice Pritinker Diwaker 

 Dated: 19/04/2012

: Judgement 


                         J U D G M E N T
                          (19.04.2012)

       CRIMINALAPPEAL UNDER SECTION 374 OF THE CODE OF           
                     CRIMINAL PROCEDURE


     The  appellants have preferred this appeal against  the
judgment  and  order  dated 6.10.2008 passed  by  Additional
Sessions  Judge (FTC) Mungeli, District Bilaspur in Sessions
Trial  No.  07/2007 convicting the accused/appellants  under
Section  304 (B) IPC and sentencing each of them to  undergo
rigorous imprisonment for seven years.

2.    Case  of  the  prosecution in brief is  that  deceased
Yasomati  was the wife of accused/appellant No.1 herein  and
their marriage was solemnized about ten months prior to  the
date of incident i.e. 7.3.2007 when she died after suffering
100%  burn injuries. Merg intimation Ex. P-13 was  given  on
the same day by some relative of the deceased namely Ayodhya  
Singh  Rathore (PW-13) and after merg inquiry FIR  Ex.  P-14
was  registered against the accused/appellants on  17.3.2007
for  the offence under Section 304 (B) read with 34 IPC  and
after  completion of investigation charge sheet was laid  on
13.4.2007 for the said offence.

3.    In  support of its case, prosecution has  examined  as
many  as  15 witnesses. Statements of the accused/appellants 
were also recorded under Section 313 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure in which they denied the allegations made  against
them  and  pleaded their innocence and false implication  in
the case.


4.     After  hearing  the  parties,  the  Court  below  has
convicted  and sentenced the accused/appellants as mentioned 
in paragraph No.1 of this judgment.

5.    Counsel  for the accused/appellants submits  that  the
story  put forth by the prosecution is highly improbable  as
no  independent witness except he relatives of the  deceased
has stated anything regarding demand of dowry and consequent  
harassment  and  cruelty towards her at  the  hands  of  the
accused/appellants. According to him, the statements of  the
witnesses  examined by the prosecution suffer from  material
contradictions  and  omissions and  on  the  basis  of  such
evidence conviction of the accused/appellants cannot  stand.
He  submits that as the deceased could not conceive even ten
months after her marriage, she used to remain depressed  and
probably  this might be one of the reasons for her  to  take
this  extreme  step of suicide. Counsel for  the  appellants
further  submits  that  the factum of deceased  being  under
depression  has been stated by none else but by  her  mother
Gita  Bai  (PW-8) herself. According to him, no  injury  was
found  on her body and therefore it cannot be said that  she
was being subjected to beating by the accused/appellants. He
further submits that at the time of marriage of the deceased
there  was  no  settlement of dowry etc. and that  being  so
conviction  of  the accused/appellants under Section  304(B)
IPC  is  bad  in  the eye of law. Lastly,  he  submits  that
accused/appellant No.1 has already remained in  jail  for  3
months and 17 days and likewise appellants 2 and 3 for about
one  month,  their  sentence may be reduced  to  the  period
already undergone by them. 

6.    On  the  other  hand, counsel for the respondent/State
supports  the  judgment impugned and submits  that  as  just
within  10 months of her marriage, the deceased died in  her
matrimonial  home  after  sustaining  100  per   cent   burn
injuries,  burden  to  prove  'not  guilty'  lies   on   the
accused/appellant  themselves.  According   to   the   State
counsel,  Nandini  Rathore (PW-1), Gita Bai  (PW-8),  Vishnu
Rathore   (PW-9)   and  Raj  Kumar  Rathore   (PW-12)   have
categorically stated as to the manner in which the  deceased
was  being treated by the accused/appellants and when  their
cruel behaviour became unbearable to the deceased, she chose 
to   end   her  life  by  committing  suicide.  As   regards
contradictions  and  omissions  in  the  statements  of  the
witnesses,  State  counsel submits that  they  being  rustic
villagers,  such minor discrepancies are bound to  be  there
and  if  they do not involve a great impact on the  case  in
hand,  they can be ignored. He further submits that  looking
to  the heinous act attributed to the accused/appellants  in
forcing  the  deceased to end her life does  not  make  them
entitled for any leniency and the sentence imposed  on  them
by the Court below is not on the higher side.

7.    Heard counsel for the parties and perused the material
available on record.

8.    Nandini Rathore (PW-1) has stated in her evidence that
one  Satnami  boy came to village Jhapal and informed  about
the  death of the deceased after suffering burn injuries and
thereafter   when   she   went   to   the   house   of   the
accused/appellants, her body was lying inside the house in a
burnt condition with her tongue protruded. According to this
witness,  near  the dead body, kerosene container  was  also
kept there. This witness has further stated that marriage of
the  deceased  with accused/appellant Ram  Niwas  had  taken 
place  about  one and a half year prior to the incident  and
that she too had attended the same. In the marriage, parents
of  the  deceased had given black and white TV, cycle,  fan,
almirah,  sofa, bed, chair, utensils, clothes and  ornaments
as  per  their capacity. She has further stated  that  after
marriage  when  the deceased had visited her maternal  home,
she  had come to her house also and informed her that as her
parents  had not given color TV, motor cycle and  land,  the
accused/appellants  were asking  her  to  get  back  to  her
parents  house and bring those items. The accused/appellants
are  also  said  to have abused the deceased for  demand  of
dowry.   According to this witness, on hearing this she  had
made the deceased to understand saying that her parents  had 
given  everything  as per their capacity.  She  has  further
stated  that  before marriage of the deceased, she  did  not
know  the accused/appellants and that the accused/appellants
did  not  permit  the deceased to visit her  maternal  home.
According  to her, after marriage the deceased  visited  her
parents' home twice but she was not aware as to for how many 
days  she  stayed there. This witness has again stated  that
when  the  deceased had come to her house she had  disclosed  
about  the  demand of colour TV, motor cycle and land  being
made  by  the accused/appellants. She has admitted the  fact
that  the last rites of the deceased were performed  by  her
husband   and   at   that   time  the   relatives   of   the
accused/appellants were also present. She  has  stated  that
the  husband  of the deceased was engaged in  the  vegetable
business  at Bilaspur where he had taken the deceased  also.
She  has further admitted the fact that the distance between
two  villages i.e. Semariya and Jhapal is not that much  and
one  can reach from one end to other in a bicycle within  an
hour. According to her, while giving statement to the police
she  had  informed  that the place where  the  body  of  the
deceased was lying in a burnt condition, some other articles
such as food-grains, cot etc. were also lying there but they
were  intact.  She has further admitted that after  marriage
the  deceased had not borne a child. She has however  denied
the   fact  that  she  has  given  her  statement   on   the
instructions  of  someone or that no demand  of  colour  TV,
motor cycle and land was made by the accused/appellants. She  
has  further  denied that she deposed before  the  court  in
order to implicate the accused/appellants in a false case.

      Bharat Lal Tripathi (PW-2) - the witness to the arrest
memo Ex. P-1 to P-3 has not stated anything specific and has
been  declared  hostile. Bhagwan Singh Dhruw (PW-3)  is  the
Patwari who prepared spot map Ex. P-4. Chandrahas Rajput (PW-   
4)  -  the  witness to seizer of a kerosene  container  made
under  Ex.  P-5  has  admitted his signature  on  the  same.
P.R.Nirmal  (PW-5) who at the relevant time  was  posted  as
Naib Tahsildar is the witness to inquest Ex. P-6. Dr.G.S.Dau
(PW-6)  is the witness who conducted post mortem examination  
on  the body of the deceased and submitted his report Ex. P-
7.  According to this witness, cause of death was inhalation
of  gas  as  a result of burn and the burn was ante  mortem.
This witness has however stated that no external injury  was
noticed  by  him  on  the body of the  deceased.  Radheshyam
Rathor  (PW-7)  is  the witness who took  the  body  of  the
deceased  for post mortem examination vide Ex. P-8 and  then
handed  over the same to her relatives vide Ex. P-9.   Geeta
Bai  (PW-8)-  the  mother of the deceased  has  stated  that
marriage  of  the deceased had taken place 20  months  prior
thereto  and at the time of marriage they had given a  black
and  white  TV,  cycle,  fan,  almirah,  sofa,  bed,  chair,
utensils,  clothes and ornaments etc. as per their capacity.
According  to  her, on the occasion of Hareli festival  when
her  husband had gone to the house of the accused/appellants
to  take  the  deceased to his house, the accused/appellants
did  not  send her saying that until and unless  colour  TV,
motor  cycle and land are given, they would not  permit  the
deceased  to accompany him. She has further stated  that  on
the  occasion  of Teeja festival when her son  went  to  the
house  of  the  accused/appellants to take the deceased,  at
that  time  also  on the same pretext the accused/appellants
refused  the  deceased to accompany him. According  to  her,
once  the  deceased had visited village Jhapal  to  see  her
sister-in-law,  she  had  visited  her  house  too   without
disclosing  the  same  to  anyone and  on  being  asked  the
deceased  told  her that she had come to her  house  without
informing anyone and if this fact went to the notice of  the
accused/appellants they would do away with. According to her
the    deceased   had   also   informed   her    that    the
accused/appellants used to demand colour TV, motor cycle and  
land  and  for that day also used to subject her to beating.
She  has  further stated that a day after Holi when she  had
visited  the  accused/appellants to  see  the  deceased  she
stayed  there  for one day and during this  period  she  was
informed  by  the  deceased  that  accused/appellant  No.  1
(husband  of  the  deceased) had taken her to  Bilaspur  and
subjected to beating. According to this witness on the  next
day even in her presence the accused/appellants indulged  in
abusing  and beating the deceased. According to  her,  after
getting back to her house she disclosed all this to her son,
daughter-in-law and husband. On the next day,  according  to
this  witness some Satnami boy came to her village and  gave
information about the death of the deceased after sustaining
burn  injuries and then she along-with her husband  and  son
went  to  the house of the accused/appellants. This  witness
has  further stated that due to her eyesight being weak, she
was not in a position to see but on touch she found the body
of  the  deceased to be stiff and tongue protruded and  that
she  and  her  husband  had a suspicion  that  due  to  non-
fulfillment of demand the deceased had been stifled.  Though
in her lengthy cross- examination there appear to be certain
improvements but being minor in nature they are required  to
be  overlooked as on material particulars she remained  very
firm  to what has been deposed by her in the examination-in-
chief.  Vishnu (Rajput) Rathore (PW-9) - the father  of  the
deceased  has  stated  that marriage  of  the  deceased  was
solemnized about 20 months prior thereto and at the time  of
marriage  he  had  given  black and white  TV,  cycle,  fan,
almirah,  sofa, bed, chair, utensils, clothes and  ornaments
etc. as per his capacity. On the occasion of Hareli festival
he  had gone to the house of the accused/appellants to  take
the  deceased to his house but they had refused to send  her
with  him.  According  to  this witness,  the  deceased  was
weeping  and  had told him that the accused/appellants  were
harassing her demanding colour TV, motorcycle and  land,  on
which he had asked her to bear the same and after making her
understand  he returned home. Even on the occasion  of  Tija
festival  brother  of  the deceased had  gone  to  take  the
deceased but this time also the accused/appellants  did  not
send  her and raised the same demand as stated above. Though  
in  the  evidence of this witness also there  appear  to  be
certain  exaggerations  but  being  insignificant  they  are
required  to be ignored. Rakesh Singh (PW-10) is the  police
constable  who  deposited  two sealed  packets  in  Forensic
Science  Laboratory, Raipur and acknowledgement  thereof  is
Ex.  P-10.  Baldau  Rathore (PW-11) is the  witness  to  the
notice  of inquest Ex. P-11 and inquest as well as the  spot
map  Ex. P-12. Though this witness has been declared hostile
he  has  admitted  his  signatures on  the  said  documents.
Rajkumar  Rathore  (PW-12) - brother  of  the  deceased  has
stated that marriage of the deceased was solemnized about 20-
21 months prior thereto and at the time of marriage they had
given  number  of  items  as per their  capacity.  In  cross
examination also barring minor contradictions and omissions,
this  witness  remained firm to what he has  stated  in  the
examination-in-chief. Ayodhya Singh Rathore (PW-13)  is  the
witness who gave merg intimation Ex. P-13, he was present on 
the spot and supported the seizure. Amresh Mishra (PW-14) is 
the  witness who did part of the investigation. Anil  Tiwari
(PW-15) is the police inspector who has proved the signature
of   R.D.   Tiwari  -  Investigating  Officer  who   expired
subsequently. 

9.   Before arriving at any conclusion as to the involvement
of  the accused/appellants in the case in hand or otherwise,
it  appears  necessary to take note of  the  ingredients  of
Section 304-B IPC which reads as under: 

     304B. Dowry death. - (1) Where the death  of  a
     woman  is caused by any burns or bodily  injury
     or   occurs   otherwise   than   under   normal
     circumstances  within  seven   years   of   her
     marriage  and it is shown that soon before  her
     death   she   was  subjected  to   cruelty   or
     harassment  by her husband or any  relative  of
     her  husband  for, or in connection  with,  any
     demand  for dowry, such death shall  be  called
     "dowry  death"  and  such husband  or  relative
     shall be deemed to have caused her death.
     Explanation.  - For the purpose  of  this  sub-
     section, "dowry" shall have the same meaning as
     in section 2 of the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961
     (28 of 1961).
     (2)   Whoever  commits  dowry  death  shall  be
     punished  with imprisonment for  a  term  which
     shall  not  be less than seven years but  which
     may extend to imprisonment for life."

A  close  look  of  the  evidence of the  witnesses  clearly
indicates  that  just  within a  year  of  marriage  of  the
deceased  with accused/appellant No.1 she used to  be  meted 
out   harassment   and  cruelty  at   the   hands   of   the
accused/appellants  demanding colour  TV,  motor  cycle  and
land.  Evidence  clearly  speaks that  whenever  father  and
brother  of the deceased visited her matrimonial house,  the
accused/appellants did not permit her to accompany  them  to
her maternal home. This Court does not find any force in the
argument  of  the counsel for the appellants  that  all  the
witnesses examined by the prosecution being the relatives of
the  deceased  should  not be relied  upon  to  convict  the
accused/appellants  as they being the  interested  witnesses
can   not   be   expected  to  state  in   favour   of   the
accused/appellants for the reason that in the cases of  like
nature  it  is only the relatives who can give  the  correct
description  of the facts disclosed to them by the  deceased
and simply because they being related to the deceased, their
testimony  can  not be turned a blind eye  to.  This  apart,
there  is ample evidence to show that the accused/appellants
had  time and again asked the deceased to go to her parental
house  and  get  the  colour TV, motor cycle  and  land  and
without  which she was asked not to visit there.  All  these
things  are sufficient to create a great disturbance on  the
mind  set of a newly wedded girl ultimately forcing  her  to
finish  herself. Perhaps this is what has happened  in  this
case also.

11.   Thus  in  view of what has been discussed above,  this
Court  does  not see any illegality or irregularity  in  the
findings   recorded  by  the  Court  below  convicting   the
accused/appellants under Section 304 (B)  IPC.  Accordingly,
the  appeal  being without any substance  is  liable  to  be
dismissed  and the judgment impugned affirmed.  Appeal  thus
fails  and is dismissed as such. Judgment impugned being  in
consonance   with   the  evidence  of  witnesses   is   left
undisturbed. The appellants are already reported  to  be  in
jail, therefore, no order regarding their surrender etc.  is
required to be passed.

                                                  Judge
