First Appeal No 77 of 2000 Smt Mamta Vaishnav Vs. Govinddas Vaishnav

HIGH COURT OF CHATTISGARH AT BILASPUR        


              First Appeal No 77 of 2000



   Smt Mamta Vaishnav  
                       ...Petitioners

                        Versus

   Govinddas Vaishnav
                       ...Respondents



! Shri Manoj Paranjpe Advocate for the appellant


^ Shri  H B Agrawal Senior Advocate with Smt Meera Jaiswal Advocate for the respondent


 CORAM: HONBLE SHRI N K AGARWAL J         


 Dated: 17/01/2012


: Judgement 

                       JUDGMENT
               (Delivered on 17.01.2012)

  APPEAL UNDER SECTION 28 OF THE HINDU MARRIAGE ACT 1955             

1.    The appeal, in a matrimonial case, by the wife is
directed   against  the  judgment  and   decree   dated
17.01.2000 passed by the 5th Additional District Judge,
Raipur   in   Civil  Suit  No.13-A/1998   whereby   and
whereunder the appellant's petition filed under Section
13(1)(ia)  of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955  (for  short
`the  Act  of  1955')  for grant of  divorce  has  been
dismissed. 

2.   Facts of the case in brief are as under :-

(i)  Marriage  between  the  appellant  -  Smt.   Mamta
     Vaishnav  and respondent - Govinddas Vaishnav  was
     solemnized  on 9.5.1993 at village Kirna,  Raipur,
     as  per  Hindu  Rites  and Customs.   Out  of  the
     wedlock,  the couple was blessed with  a  daughter
     namely Rashim.

(ii) According to the appellant, during her stay at her
     matrimonial home, she was subjected to cruelty  by
     the respondent, his mother and sister; her mother-
     in-law  and  sister-in-law  (respondent's  sister)
     used  to harass and torture the appellant for  not
     bringing sufficient dowry; at their instance,  the
     respondent  also  used to beat the  appellant;  in
     addition, the appellant was not provided  adequate
     food,  as  a result of malnutrition, the appellant
     and  her  daughter  fell ill; since  there  was  a
     threat to the appellant and her daughter, she  was
     constrained to leave the matrimonial home with her
     father on 4.8.1995.

(iii)      The  respondent filed his written  statement
     alleging  therein that in fact the appellant  left
     her  matrimonial home on the eve of Tija  festival
     on  4.8.1995 and even after a period of  15  days,
     she  did  not  come to join her matrimonial  home;
     when  respondent approached her father repeatedly,
     he  was  merely  assured that the appellant  would
     join  his  company  in the matrimonial  home  very
     soon,  his  repeated attempts to  bring  back  the
     appellant  proved futile; on this, the  respondent
     sent  a  registered notice to the appellant asking
     her to join in his company in the matrimonial home
     and  thereafter a petition under Section 9 of  the
     Hindu  Marriage  Act was filed for restitution  of
     conjugal rights; the appellant was never subjected
     to  cruelty by him or even by his family  members;
     since   she   belongs  to  an  urban   background,
     therefore,  she does not want to join his  company
     in village Kirna.

3.   The trial Court framed the following issues:
                        Okkn fo"k;
     (1A  D;k]  vkosnd  vukosnd  ls  dzwjrk   ds
     &amp;    vk/kkj  ij  ls  fookg foPNsn  djus  dk
          ikTk gS \

     (2A  D;k  vkosnd vukosnd lss LTkh/ku  izkIr
     &amp;    djus dh ik=rk j[krh gS \

     (3A  lgk;rk ,oa okn&amp;O;;\
     &amp;

4.    The  trial, vide its order dated 13.08.1999,  has
struck  off  the  defence  of  the  respondent  as  the
respondent  failed to deposit the amount of maintenance
despite the order of the Court dated 29.01.1999.

5.    The appellant examined himself as (A.W.1), Bharat
Lal  Vaishnav (A.W.2), Narendra Prasad Vaishnav (A.W.3) 
and Murli Das Vaishnav (A.W.4).  The respondent did not
examine any witness. 

6.     The   trial  Court,  vide  judgment  and  decree
impugned, dismissed the divorce petition filed  by  the
appellant/wife finding inter alia: appellant failed  to
establish cruelty on the part of the respondent.

7.   Shri Manoj Paranjpe, learned counsel appearing for
the  appellant  would submit: the trial Court  did  not
appreciate  the evidence of the appellant  and  of  her
witnesses  in its proper perspective and the fact  that
respondent's   defence  has  been  struck   off   while
dismissing   the  appellant's  petition  for   divorce.
According  to  the appellant's counsel,  appellant  has
duly proved her case for grant of decree of divorce.

8.    On  the  other  hand, Shri  H.B.Agrawal,  learned
Senior   Advocate  with  Smt.  Meera  Jaiswal,  learned
counsel  for the respondent supported the judgment  and
decree and contended that averments made in the divorce 
petition  itself are not sufficient to grant decree  of
divorce  on  the  ground  of  cruelty,  and  therefore,
despite fact that respondent's defence has been  struck
off,  the trial Court has rightly dismissed the divorce
petition filed by the appellant.

9.    I have heard counsel for the parties, perused the
record of the trial Court including judgment and decree
impugned. 

10.  The question falls for consideration of this Court
is  whether the appellant/wife has made out a case  for
dissolution of marriage under Section 13(1)(ia) of  the
Act? 

11.   Section  13 of the Act, which is useful  for  our

present purpose, reads as under:

     "13.  Divorce.--- (1) Any marriage solemnized,
     whether  before  or after the commencement  of
     this  Act,  may,  on a petition  presented  by
     either  the husband or the wife, be  dissolved
     by  a decree of divorce on the ground that the
     other party-

        (i)  xxxx

        (ia)  has, after the solemnization  of  the
        marriage,   treated  the  petitioner   with
        cruelty; or

12.  The Supreme Court, in the case of G.V.N.Kameswara  
Rao   v.   G.   Jabilli,  (2002)  2  SCC  296,   while
interpreting cruelty within the meaning of Section  13
(1) (ia) of the Act of 1955, has held: cruelty can  be
said  to  be  an act committed with the  intention  to
cause  sufferings to the opposite party, and  observed
in paras 9 and 10 of its judgment as under:
     "9.  Under  Section 13 (1)(i-a) of  the  Hindu
     Marriage  Act, on a petition presented  either
     by the husband or the wife, the marriage could
     be  dissolved  by a decree of divorce  on  the
     ground   that the other party has,  after  the
     solemnization  of  the marriage,  treated  the
     petitioner  with  cruelty.  "Cruelty"  is  not
     defined in the Act.  Some of the provisions of
     the  Hindu  Marriage Act were amended  by  the
     Hindu  Marriage  Laws (Amendment)  Act,  1976.
     Prior  to the amendment, "cruelty" was one  of
     the  grounds  for  judicial  separation  under
     Section  10  of the Act.  Under that  section,
     "cruelty"  was  given an extended  meaning  by
     using an adjectival phrase viz. "as to cause a
     reasonable  apprehension in the  mind  of  the
     petitioner   that  it  will  be   harmful   or
     injurious for the petitioner to live with  the
     other  party".  By the Amendment Act of  1976,
     "cruelty"  was  made one of  the  grounds  for
     divorce  under  Section 13  and  the  relevant
     provision reads as follows:

     "13.  Divorce.--- (1) Any marriage solemnized,
     whether  before  or after the commencement  of
     this  Act,  may,  on a petition  presented  by
     either  the husband or the wife, be  dissolved
     by  a decree of divorce on the ground that the
     other party-

        (i)       *         *         *

        (i-a)  has, after the solemnization of  the
        marriage,   treated  the  petitioner   with
        cruelty; or
        (i-b)     *         *         *
        (ii)-(ix) *         *         *

     10.    The   omission  of  the  words,   which
     described  "cruelty" in the unamended  Section
     10   of  the  Hindu  Marriage  Act,  has  some
     significance  in  the sense  that  it  is  not
     necessary  to  prove that the  nature  of  the
     cruelty   is   such  as  to  cause  reasonable
     apprehension  in  the mind of  the  petitioner
     that  it  would be harmful for the  petitioner
     to  live with the other party.  English courts
     in   some   of   the  earlier  decisions   had
     attempted to define "cruelty" as an act  which
     involves conduct of such a nature as  to  have
     caused  damage to life, limb or health  or  to
     give  rise to reasonable apprehension of  such
     danger.   But  we  do not think  that  such  a
     degree of cruelty is required to be proved  by
     the  petitioner  for obtaining  a  decree  for
     divorce.   Cruelty can be said to  be  an  act
     committed   with   the  intention   to   cause
     sufferings  to the opposite party.   Austerity
     of  temper,  rudeness of language,  occasional
     outburst  of anger, may not amount to cruelty,
     though it may amount to misconduct."

13.   The  existence  of cruelty depends  not  on  the
magnitude   but   rather  on   the   consequences   of
matrimonial  offence of cruelty actual or apprehended.
Personalities of the parties are an important  element
for  the decision as to whether the status between the
two spouses had been cruel. Cruelty as envisaged under
the Act is not restricted to acts of physical violence
and  may extend to behaviour which may cause pain  and 
injury   to  the  mind  as  well  as  to  render   the
continuance  in  matrimonial home an ordeal  where  it
becomes  impossible for them to live together  without
mental  agony,  torture  or distress.  The  expression
"cruelty"  as envisaged under Section 13  of  the  Act
clearly admits in its ambit and scope such acts  which
may  even  cause  mental  agony  to  aggrieved  party.
Cruelty  may  result  where  the  complaining   spouse
establishes his/her being treated with cruelty whether
physical,  mental, social or otherwise  but  the  acts
complained  of must be more serious than the  ordinary
wear  and tear of marriage falling in the category  of
conscious  acts  cruel  in  nature  as  that  is   the
underlying requirement of the provision.

14.   The  intention to be cruel is not  an  essential
element of cruelty as envisaged under Section 13(1)(i-
a)  of the Act. If bitter waters are flowing it is not
necessary  to  enquire from which source they  spring.
The  intention or motive behind the cruelty  has  lost
significance  in the changed society  and  the  social
atmosphere  of the present day. It is sufficient  that
if the cruelty is of the type which indicates that the
relations between the spouses had deteriorated to such
an extent  due to the conduct of one or the other that
it  has  become  impossible for them to live  together
without mental agony. In marital matters, the feelings
and attitudes of minds are material.

15.  Test of cruelty to be inferred by any conduct  of
spouse in its ordinary and natural meaning. Cruelty is
not  defined specifically. It is Courts responsibility
to  interpret analysis and define it. The  allegations
of  ill-treatment,  abusing  indulgence  in  undesired
activities,  neglect  of matrimonial  obligations  and
driving  out the wife out of her matrimonial  home  by
her  husband is mental cruelty. Mental cruelty  causes
grievous injury and creates reasonable apprehension of
unsafe.

16.  The Supreme Court in case of N.G. Dastane (Dr) v.
S.  Dastane, (1975) 2 SCC 326 observed in paras 24  to
26 as under:

          "24. The normal rule which governs civil
          proceedings is that a fact can  be  said
          to  be established if it is proved by  a
          preponderance of probabilities. This  is
          for  the  reason that under the Evidence
          Act,  Section 3, a fact is  said  to  be
          proved when the court either believes it
          to  exist or considers its existence  so
          probable that a prudent man ought, under
          the   circumstances  of  the  particular
          case,  to act upon the supposition  that
          it  exists.  The  belief  regarding  the
          existence of a fact may thus be  founded
          on a balance of probabilities. A prudent
          man faced with conflicting probabilities
          concerning a fact-situation will act  on
          the supposition that the fact exists, if
          on weighing the various probabilities he
          finds  that  the  preponderance  is   in
          favour   of   the   existence   of   the
          particular  fact. As a prudent  man,  so
          the  court applies this test for finding
          whether  a fact in issue can be said  to
          be   proved.  The  first  step  in  this
          process is to fix the probabilities, the
          second to weigh them, though the two may
          often  intermingle.  The  impossible  is
          weeded  out  at  the  first  stage,  the
          improbable  at  the second.  Within  the
          wide  range of probabilities  the  court
          has often a difficult choice to make but
          it   is  this  choice  which  ultimately
          determines  where  the preponderance  of
          probabilities  lies.  Important   issues
          like  those which affect the  status  of
          parties  demand a closer  scrutiny  than
          those  like  the  loan on  a  promissory
          note:  "the  nature and  gravity  of  an
          issue  necessarily determines the manner
          of  attaining reasonable satisfaction of
          the truth of the issue1"; or as said  by
          Lord Denning, "the degree of probability
          depends   on   the  subject-matter.   In
          proportion as the offence is  grave,  so
          ought  the  proof  to  be  clear".   But
          whether  the issue is one of cruelty  or
          of  a  loan  on a pronote, the  test  to
          apply  is whether on a preponderance  of
          probabilities  the  relevant   fact   is
          proved.  In civil cases this,  normally,
          is  the  standard of proof to apply  for
          finding  whether the burden of proof  is
          discharged.
          25.  Proof  beyond reasonable  doubt  is
          proof   by   a  higher  standard   which
          generally  governs  criminal  trials  or
          trials involving inquiry into issues  of
          a   quasi-criminal  nature.  A  criminal
          trial   involves  the  liberty  of   the
          subject which may not be taken away on a
          mere preponderance of probabilities.  If
          the probabilities are so nicely balanced
          that  a  reasonable, not a vascillating,
          mind cannot find where the preponderance
          lies,  a  doubt  arises  regarding   the
          existence  of the fact to be proved  and
          the  benefit  of  such reasonable  doubt
          goes  to  the  accused. It is  wrong  to
          import such considerations in trials  of
          a purely civil nature.
          26.  Neither Section 10 of the Act which
          enumerates  the  grounds  on   which   a
          petition for judicial separation may  be
          presented  nor Section 23 which  governs
          the jurisdiction of the court to pass  a
          decree  in any proceeding under the  Act
          requires that the petitioner must  prove
          his  case  beyond  a  reasonable  doubt.
          Section  23  confers on  the  court  the
          power   to  pass  a  decree  if  it   is
          "satisfied"  on  matters  mentioned   in
          clauses  (a)  to  (e)  of  the  section.
          Considering that proceedings  under  the
          Act  are  essentially of a civil nature,
          the    word   "satisfied"   must    mean
          "satisfied   on   a   preponderance   of
          probabilities" and not "satisfied beyond
          a reasonable doubt". Section 23 does not
          alter  the  standard of proof  in  civil
          cases."

17.   The  High  Court of Calcutta in  case  of  Broja
Kishore Ghosh v. Smt. Krishna Ghosh (AIR 1989 Calcutta  
327)  observed in para 10 as under:

          "10.  What acts would constitute  mental
          cruelty depend upon the circumstances of
          each  case  e.g. environment, status  in
          society,       education,       cultural
          development,   local   customs,   social
          condition,    physical    and     mental
          conditions  of the parties.   Each  case
          depends  upon  a variety  of  facts  and
          circumstances.  Reference  may  be  made
          among a host of decisions to one of  our
          court  reported  in  AIR  1978  Cal  87,
          Bijoli  Chowdhury v. Sukomal  Chowdhury.
          In  fact, there is unanimity of judicial
          opinion  that to constitute cruelty  the
          conduct  complained of should be  "grave
          and  weighty" so as to make cohabitation
          virtually  unendurable.   It   must   be
          something  more  serious than  "ordinary
          wear  and  tear of the married life"  as
          Lord  Asquith  observed  in  Buchler  v.
          Buchler, (1947) 1 All ER 319. Again  the
          conduct  complained of  "must"  be  such
          that no reasonable person would tolerate
          it  or  consider  that  the  complainant
          shall  be  called  upon  to  endure  it.
          Before  conduct can be called cruel,  it
          must touch a certain pitch of severity."

18.  A Division Bench of Kerala High Court in case  of
Gangadharan  v.  T.K. Thankam, reported  in  AIR  1988
Kerala 244, has held in para 19 as under :

          "19.  In  the  statement of objects  and
          reasons of the Amending Act of 1976, the
          object  was stated to be liberalise  the
          provisions  relating  to  divorce  (vide
          Gazette  of India Extraordinary Part  II
          Jan-April 1976 page 780), and therefore,
          it  is difficult to agree with the  view
          that  the  amendment  was  intended   to
          restore   the  law  as  to  cruelty   as
          interpreted    by    English     Courts.
          Therefore, the intention in brining  the
          amendment   could  not  have   been   to
          reintroduce  the concept  of  danger  of
          life  or limb.  According to the amended
          provision, the courts have to  interpret
          and   analyse  and  define  what   would
          constitute cruelty depending  upon  many
          factors  such asocial status of parties,
          their  education,  physical  and  mental
          conditions, customs, and traditions  and
          come  to  its own conclusion  that  acts
          proved  would  amount to  cruelty  in  a
          given case.  It is difficult to lay down
          a  precise  definition  or  to  give  an
          exhaustive    description     of     the
          circumstances  which  would   constitute
          cruelty.   The amendment was brought  on
          the  basis  of  the 59th report  of  Law
          Commission which was prior to  Dastane's
          case to the effect that it is sufficient
          to prove cruelty as a ground for divorce
          and  leave it to the court on the  facts
          of  each  case  to  decide  whether  the
          conduct  amounts  to cruelty.    In  our
          view  the  cruelty should be of  such  a
          nature  as to satisfy the conscience  of
          the  court that the relationship between
          the parties had deteriorated to such  an
          extent  that it would be impossible  for
          them  to  live  together without  mental
          agony,  torture or distress  to  entitle
          the  party to secure divorce.   Physical
          violence is not absolutely essential  to
          constitute   cruelty  and  a  consistent
          course     of     conduce     inflicting
          immeasurable  mental agony  and  torture
          may  well constitute cruelty within  the
          meaning  of the Act. Mental cruelty  may
          consist of verbal abuses and insults  by
          using   filthy   and  abusive   language
          leading   to  constant  disturbance   of
          mental peace of the other party."


19.   The Supreme Court, in the case of Shobha Rani  v.
Madhukar Reddy, (1988)  1 SCC 105 has held: the  demand   
for dowry is prohibited under law.  That by itself is a
bad enough.  That amounts to cruelty entitling the wife
to get decree for dissolution.

20.  Now reverting to the facts of the present case, it
is  crystal clear that as per the averments made in the
divorce petition by the appellant and also the evidence
adduced by the appellant as well as her witnesses,  she
was  subjected to cruelty by the respondent, his mother
and   sister;   her  mother-in-law  and   sister-in-law
(respondent's  sister) used to harass and  torture  the
appellant for not bringing sufficient dowry;  at  their
instance,  the  respondent  also  used  to   beat   the
appellant; in addition, the appellant was not  provided
adequate  food,  as  a  result  of  malnutrition,   the
appellant and her daughter fell ill.

21.    It is also pertinent to note that defence of the
respondent has been struck off by the trial  Court  for
non-payment of maintenance; respondent did  not  adduce 
any evidence in support of the defence taken by him  in
the  written statement.  The statement of the appellant
as well as her witnesses remain unrebutted.  As per the
submission of the appellant's counsel, which  was  also
not  controverted  by  the  respondent's  counsel,  the
petition  filed  by the respondent for  restitution  of
conjugal rights has already been dismissed.  The letter
Ex.P.20 written by the appellant to her father and  the
letter  of  appellant's father to  respondent's  father
also  go to show, the respondent and his family members
used to ill-treat the appellant.

22.   The averments made in the petition with regard to
demand  of  dowry and beatings by the husband  and  his
family  members  to  the appellant and  the  fact  that
appellant  used to be kept without food are  sufficient
averments within the meaning of Order 6 Rule 4  of  the
C.P.C. and it cannot be said that the petition was  bad
for  non-compliance of Order 6 Rule 4  of  C.P.C.   The
Supreme  Court in the case of Shobha Rani  v.  Madhukar 
Reddy (supra) has already held: the demand dowry itself
amounts to cruelty.
     Further,  if  the appellant was given beatings  by
husband and her in-laws in lieu of demand of dowry, she
was   not  provided  adequate  food  and  as  a  result
malnutrition, the appellant and her daughter  fell  ill
during the period of her stay with the respondent, then
the   above  facts  itself  amount  to  harassment  and
cruelty.

23.     In  the  light  of the fact  that  respondent's
defence  has been struck off during trial and again  he
has not paid the amount of maintenance to the appellant
in  accordance with the order passed by this  Court  on
16.10.2002,  it  can be reasonably inferred,  appellant
succeeded  in discharging her initial burden  to  prove
the ground of cruelty for grant of divorce.

24.  The parties are living separately for a period  of
17   years.   The  appellant  was  ill-treated  by  the
respondent and his family members in lieu of demand  of
dowry.  The above fact leaves no manner of doubt in  my
mind  that  the  respondent is bent upon  treating  the
appellant  with cruelty.  It is abundantly  clear  that
the   marriage  between  the  parties  is  broken  down
irretrievably  and there is no chance of  their  coming
together  or  living  together again,  all  efforts  of
reconciliation failed.  Having regard to the facts  and
circumstances of the case, I am of the opinion that the
marriage between the parties should be dissolved  under
Section 13 (1) (ia) of the Act of 1955.

25.  In view of foregoing, in the considered opinion of
this  Court,  the  learned trial  Court  has  erred  in
dismissing the petition filed by the appellant.

26.   In  the result, the appeal deserves to be and  is
hereby allowed and the marriage between the parties  is
dissolved.  The appellant is free to recover the amount
of  interim  maintenance granted  in  her  favour  till
decision of this appeal in accordance with law.

27.  A decree be drawn accordingly.

28.  No order as to costs.
                                                  Judge
