Criminal Appeal No 319 of 1997 Sushil Kumar Agrawal Vs. State of Madhya Pradesh

HIGH COURT OF CHATTISGARH AT BILASPUR          

  Criminal Appeal No 319 of 1997


  Sushil Kumar Agrawal 
                        ...Petitioners

        VERSUS


  State of Madhya Pradesh 
                           ...Respondents


!  Smt Raksha Awasthy counsel for the appellant

^  Shri Vaibhav  Goverdhan PL    for     the respondent

 CORAM: Honble Mr Justice Pritinker Diwaker 

 Dated: 16/08/2012

: Judgement 



                         J U D G M E N T
                          (16.08.2012)

      CRIMINAL APPEAL UNDER SECTION 374 OF THE CODE OF           
                     CRIMINAL PROCEDURE


     This appeal has been preferred against the judgment and

order  dated 18.1.1997 passed by Additional Sessions  Judge,

Bilaspur,  in  Sessions  Trial No. 152/1997  convicting  the

accused/appellant under Section 498-A IPC and sentencing him  

to  undergo rigorous imprisonment for two years and pay fine

of  Rs.  2000,  in  default of payment of  fine  to  further

undergo rigorous imprisonment for three months.


2.    Appellant herein is the husband of deceased Pushpa Bai

and  their  marriage was solemnized in  the  year  1980.  On

3.9.1986 after suffering 50% burn injuries the deceased  was

taken  to  Belgahna hospital from where she was  shifted  to

District  Hospital  and then she was referred  to  Sector  9

hospital,  Bhilai.  On 3.9.1986 itself report  Ex.  P-6  was

lodged  by the accused/appellant in police station  Belgahna

with  respect  to  deceased  sustaining  burn  injuries.  On

4.9.1986  dying  declaration of the deceased  Ex.  P-12  was

recorded by Naib Tehsildar namely R.N. Singh (PW-13) and she  

succumbed  to the injuries on 7.9.1986. On 8.9.1986  written

report  was  lodged by father of the deceased  namely  Shyam

Sundar  Agrawal  (PW-20)  and on  13.9.1986  an  un-numbered 

report was recorded in Belgahna police Chowki. After inquiry

on  14.9.1986  FIR  Ex.  P-10  was  registered  against  the

accused/appellant,  his  mother  and  two   brothers   under

Sections 306 and 498-A IPC. Post mortem examination  on  the  

body of the deceased was conducted on 7.9.1986 vide Ex. P-14 

by  Dr.  S.S. Dhillan (PW-18) and according to him cause  of

death  was  shock and sepsis due to superficial burn.  After

investigation,  charge sheet was filed against  the  accused

persons on 12.6.1987 for the offences under Sections 306 and

498-A IPC. 


3.    In  support of its case, prosecution has  examined  22

witnesses.  Statements  of  the accused  persons  were  also

recorded under Section 313 of the Code of Criminal Procedure

in  which they denied the charges levelled against them  and

pleaded their innocence and false implication in the case.



4.     After  hearing  the  parties,  the  Court  below  has

acquitted  the  other accused persons  of  all  the  charges

levelled    against    them.   It   also    acquitted    the

accused/appellant  of the charge u/s 306 IPC  but  convicted

and  sentenced him as mentioned above in paragraph  No.1  of

this judgment.


5.    Counsel for the accused/appellant submits that in  the

dying  declaration  of the deceased, she  has  categorically

stated  that while making tea she had suffered burn injuries

and  that  she was happy in life and was not ill-treated  by

the accused/appellant or anyone else. She submits that after

death  of the deceased, a false allegation has been made  by

her  father, mother, brother, sister and uncle and based  on

such allegations accused/appellant cannot be convicted under

Section  498-A IPC. She submits that in one of  the  letters

Ex.  P-19 the allegation of cruelty has been made but it  is

not  clear  from  the same as to against  whom  it  is.  She

further  submits that only on the basis of stray  instances,

accused/appellant  cannot be convicted under  Section  498-A

IPC.  She  submits  that as on the basis of  same  piece  of

evidence  the  other accused persons have been acquitted  by

the  Court below, the present appellant should also  receive

the same treatment. In support of her submission, she placed

reliance on the decision of the Supreme Court in the  matter

of  Girdhar Shankar Tawade v. State of Maharashtra  reported

in AIR 2002 SC 2078. 


6.    Supporting  the  judgment impugned,  counsel  for  the

respondent/State submits that the findings recorded  by  the

Court below are strictly in accordance with law and there is

no  illegality  or infirmity in the same.  He  submits  that

father,  mother, brother, sister and uncle of  the  deceased

have categorically stated as to the manner in which deceased

was  subjected  to cruelty by the accused/appellant  whereas

against the other accused persons who have been acquitted by 

the Court below the allegations are not so specific.


7.    Heard counsel for the parties and perused the material

available on record.


8.    Ramesh  Kumar  (PW-11) - brother of the  deceased  has

stated that marriage of deceased with accused/appellant  was

performed in the year 1980 and that whenever she visited his

house,  she  used  to inform that on small matters  she  was

subjected to beating. About 6-7 months prior to the date  of

her  death, a phone call was received from the neighbour  of

the  deceased  informing that condition of the deceased  was

serious  and  when he went to see her, he  found  number  of

injuries  on  her body including head and the  deceased  had

informed  him  that  she was brutally beaten.  Deceased  had

further    informed   that   she   was   beaten    by    the

accused/appellant for demand of dowry. About a year prior to

the  date  of  her death, when he had gone to the  house  of

accused/appellant,  he (accused/appellant)  had  beaten  his

sister  (deceased) demanding money from her. On the date  of

incident, after receiving the information about the deceased

sustaining  burn  injuries, his mother, brother  and  father

went  to  Bilaspur  where they came to  know  that  she  had

suffered 45% burn injuries and looking to her condition  she

was shifted to Bhilai after arranging an ambulance where she

expired  subsequently. Though inquest was performed  in  his

presence and also in presence of his brother, no inquiry was

made from him nor his statement was recorded. At the time of

inquest,  he  had not informed the police about the  cruelty

meted  out to the deceased by the accused/appellant as  this

fact  was not asked to him. After about one year of marriage

of  deceased she was subjected to cruelty in her matrimonial

home  and  this fact was narrated by the deceased  one  year

after  her marriage when she had come to her parents' house.

According  to this witness, whenever she visited his  house,

she  used to inform about cruelty and harassment being meted

out to her in her matrimonial home for demand of dowry. When

the  deceased suffered head injury as a result  of  beating,

she  was  brought  to Korba for treatment and  when  in  his

presence  she was beaten by the accused/appellant,  she  did

not  suffer any external injury but she did suffer  internal

injury.  Hari  Shankar  Tulsiyan  (PW-12)  -  uncle  of  the

deceased  has  stated that there used to be dispute  between

the  accused/appellant  and the  deceased.  He  has  further

stated   that   as   the   financial   condition   of    the

accused/appellant  was  not good, he was  seeking  financial

help  from his father-in-law. This witness is stated to have

received  an information that he was called at Akaltara  for

settling the dispute between the accused/appellant  and  the

deceased  where he had gone with the parents of the deceased 

and  made  the accused/appellant understand and advised  him 

not  to indulge in beating the deceased. In presence of  the

deceased,  this  witness is also stated to  have  asked  the

accused/appellant about there being any complaint  regarding

her  character but in spite of his advice, accused/appellant

had  uttered  bad  words  to  the deceased.  Thereafter,  he

received an information about the serious condition  of  the

deceased  and  when he went to see her in  the  hospital  at

Bilaspur,  she informed that it is the accused  persons  who

had  made  her  condition like that  by  subjecting  her  to

beating. Geeta Devi (PW-14) - the mother of the deceased has

stated  that about a week before death of the deceased,  she

had come to her house on the occasion of Rakhi festival.  On

the  date of incident, she received an information from  the

neighbour  of  the  accused persons that  the  deceased  had

suffered  burn  injury and when she went to  Bilaspur  along

with  her  relatives,  she  saw  the  deceased  in  a  burnt

condition but she did not have a talk with her and that  she

was  only  weeping. Deceased had asked her to  be  taken  to

Korba as she was tortured in matrimonial home. Deceased also 

requested her not to send again to her matrimonial house. On

enquiry  being made, the deceased had told her that  as  she

used to remain sad, once she poured kerosene on her body  on 

which her mother-in-law asked her as to why she was creating

drama  and she should burn herself if she wanted so  and  as

this  utterance  was unbearable to her, she set  herself  on

fire.  This  witness has further stated  that  whenever  the

deceased  visited her house, she used to tell her  that  she

was  being ill-treated in her matrimonial home and that once

an  injury was inflicted on her head. She has further stated

that  the deceased had asked a financial help of Rs.  10,000

for  opening  the shop of utensils and that on one  occasion

she was beaten by her brother-in-law also. According to this

witness,  one  year  after her marriage,  the  deceased  was

beaten  by  the  accused persons. Kiran  Agrawal  (PW-15)  -

sister  of  the deceased has stated that in the hospital  at

Bilaspur she saw the deceased in a burnt condition  but  she

did  not  have a talk with her. She has stated that whenever

the  deceased visited her parents' house, she used to inform

that  on  small  matters  she  was  being  tortured  in  her

matrimonial home and was beaten by the accused/appellant and  

her  brother-in-law. Shyam Sundar (PW-20) -  father  of  the

deceased  has stated that for about 1-2 years after marriage

the  deceased  lived  happily in her matrimonial  house  but

thereafter   she   was   subjected   to   cruelty   by   the

accused/appellant, her brother-in-law and mother-in-law.  In

the  year  1986  he  received a  letter  from  the  deceased

requesting  him to visit her as she was being  subjected  to

torture and if he did not come to her, she would become mad.

Thereafter,  he received a telephonic information  from  the

neighbour  of  the deceased that the deceased  was  behaving

abnormally  and  when  he went to see the  deceased  in  the

hospital at Bilaspur, her condition was serious and that she

informed  her  mother  that  as  she  could  not  cook  food

properly,  she  was subjected to beating with  the  help  of

burning wood and that the accused/appellant used to ask  for

money for opening the shop. Deceased also informed him  that

she  was beaten by the accused/appellant for demand of money  

and  that  with  the  help  of his  relatives  he  made  him

(accused/appellant) to understand and not to do  like  that.

According to this witness, he lodged the report Ex. P-17 and

three letters vide Ex. P-18 to P-20 were seized from him  by

the  police. He could not lodge the report immediately after

the   incident  as  he  was  mentally  disturbed.  In  cross

examination,  this witness has reiterated that the  deceased

was subjected to cruelty in her matrimonial home.


      Dr.  Rajiv Ratna Tiwari (PW-1) is the witness who  had

issued  memo  Ex. P-1 informing the police to  record  dying

declaration  of the deceased. Satyendra Kumar Mishra  (PW-2) 

is  the  witness  who has proved record of telephone  calls.

D.D.  Shukla  (PW-3) is the Sub Inspector  who  assisted  in

investigation.  Dr.  Ku.  S. Rao  (PW-4)  is  the  Assistant

Surgeon  who had medically examined the deceased at Bilaspur  

and  found number of injuries on her body. Kanahiyalal  (PW-

5),  Khekhatram (PW-6), Yashwant Pratap Singh (PW-7) and Ram    

Narayan  (PW-8)  are  the  witnesses  who  assisted  in  the

investigation.   Nandram Tamboli (PW-9) is the  Patwari  who

prepared spot map (Ex. P-11). Sulakashna Sharma (PW-10)  has   

stated  that  whenever  the deceased  visited  her  parents'

house,  she  used to meet her also and inform that  she  was

subjected to cruelty and beating at her matrimonial home for

not bringing sufficient dowry. R.N. Singh (P

W-13)  -  Naib  Tehsildar is the witness who recorded  dying

declaration  of the deceased vide Ex. P-12.  He  has  stated

that  before  recording dying declaration  he  obtained  the

certificate  from  the  doctor about the  condition  of  the

deceased and that in the dying declaration the deceased  had

disclosed  that while making tea she suffered  burn  injury.

She  also disclosed that at the time of incident her mother-

in-law, father-in-law, brother-in-law and maid servant  were

present  but  her  husband was not  present.  Deceased  also

disclosed  to him that no quarrel had taken place  and  that

she was not burnt by anyone and that she was admitted in the

hospital by the accused/appellant herein. Harishchand Bondia

(PW-16)  is  the neighbour of father of the deceased  namely

Shyam Sundar (PW-20) who has stated that once he had gone to   

the  house of the accused/appellant with some other  persons

where the deceased had informed that she was being beaten by 

the  accused/appellant. M.R. Kalihari (PW-17) is the witness

who  recorded FIR Ex. P-10 on the basis of un-numbered  FIR.

Dr.  S.S. Dhillan (PW-18) is the witness who conducted  post

mortem  examination on the body of the deceased  and  opined 

that  cause of death was shock and sepsis due to superficial

burn.  Hari Prasad Agrawal (PW-19) is the witness to inquest

Ex.  P-15  and P-16. Gopiram Agrawal (PW-21) is the  witness

who happens to be the relative of the father of deceased. He

has  stated that after receiving information he had gone  to

Bilaspur  along with father of the deceased (PW-20)  and  on

the  way  he  met the accused/appellant but  he  refused  to

accompany them but he accompanied them by force. Ram Krishna     

Mishra (PW-22) is the witness to inquest Ex. P-15.


9.    Minute  examination of the evidence of  the  witnesses

particularly that of Ramesh Kumar (PW-11) Tulsiyan  (PW-12),

Geeta  Devi  (PW-14) Kiran Agrawal (PW-15) and Shyam  Sundar   

(PW-20)  makes it clear that the deceased was  subjected  to

cruelty  by the accused/appellant and there is no reason  to

disbelieve the statements of these witnesses. Of course,  at

some places the witnesses have exaggerated their version but

from  the  evidence available on record it is apparent  that

the    deceased   was   subjected   to   cruelty   by    the

accused/appellant. There is evidence that the  deceased  was

beaten  by  the accused/appellant for demand of  money.  The

decision  of  the  Supreme Court taken  support  of  by  the

counsel  for  the accused/appellant is of  no  help  to  the

accused/appellant as the facts involved in that case and  in

the  present  one are altogether different. In the  case  in

hand  apart  from  the  letters Ex.  P-18,  P-19  and  P-20,

witnesses  have also stated as to the manner  in  which  the

deceased  was  subjected to cruelty. Relying  on  the  dying

declaration  of  the deceased the Court  below  has  already

acquitted  the accused/appellant under Section 306  IPC  but

looking to the allegations made against him and the evidence

of  the  witnesses it has convicted him under Section  498-A

IPC which according to the considered opinion of this Court,

is  just  and proper. Accordingly, the findings recorded  by

the  Court below convicting the accused/appellant u/s  498-A

IPC  being in conformity with the evidence of the witnesses,

do not call for any interference in this appeal.

10.   However, as the incident had taken place in  the  year

1986,  that  by now the accused/appellant must be  about  55

years  of  age and the fact that he has already remained  in

jail  for about five months, this Court is of the considered

opinion that it would be in the interest of justice  if  the

sentence  imposed on him is reduced to RI for one year  from

that of two years.


11.  Order accordingly.


12.    Appeal  thus  partly  allowed.   Conviction  of   the

accused/appellant  u/s  498-A IPC  is  maintained.  Sentence

imposed on him by the Court below is however reduced  to  RI

for one year from that of two years.



13.   As  the  accused/appellant is on bail, he be  arrested

forthwith  and  sent to jail for serving out  the  remaining

part of the sentence imposed on him.



                                                  Judge
