Criminal Appeal No 2215 of 1997 &  Criminal Appeal No 2072 of 1997 Raj Kumar Bajaj Vs. State of Madhya Pradesh

HIGH COURT OF CHATTISGARH AT BILASPUR          

  Criminal Appeal No 2215 of 1997 &amp;  Criminal Appeal No 2072 of 1997


  Raj Kumar Bajaj

   Pappu
                    ...Petitioners

           VERSUS


  State of Madhya Pradesh 
                           ...Respondents


!  Shri Sunil Sahu counsel for the appellants

^  Shri Pravin Das Dy GA for the respondent

 CORAM: Honble Mr Justice Pritinker Diwaker 

 Dated: 07/08/2012

: Judgement 


                    J U D G M E N T
                     (07.08.2012)

 CRIMINAL APPEALS UNDER SECTION 374 OF THE CODE OF CRIMINAL               
                         PROCEDURE.


     As these two appeals arise out of the same judgment and

order  dated  24.9.1997  passed by Special  Judge/Additional

Sessions Judge, Raipur in Special Criminal Case No. 426/1996 

convicting  the  accused/appellants under  Sections  363/34,

366/34  and 506-B IPC and sentencing each of them to undergo 

rigorous imprisonment for 3 years with fine of Rs. 150/- u/s

363/34, rigorous imprisonment for 5 years with fine  of  Rs.

200  u/s  366/34 and rigorous imprisonment for 3 years  with

fine  of  Rs.  150 u/s 506-B IPC, plus default stipulations,

they are disposed of by this common judgment. 


2.    Facts of the case in brief are that on 26.10.1996  FIR

Ex.  P-3 was lodged by the prosecutrix (PW-3) aged about  16

years  at  the relevant time that on 21.10.1996 at  about  4

p.m.  when  she  was  going to her mother  who  was  selling

vegetable in the market, on the way accused/appellants whose

names she came to know later, met her, accused Raja who  was   

having  a  knife  threatened her, took her to  Danitola  and

confined  her  in  a  room which was  bolted  from  outside.

Thereafter,  both the accused/appellants left the  spot.  As

both the accused/appellants were calling each other by name,

she  came  to know about their names. Before taking  her  to

Danitola,  they  collected the key of the  said  house  from

another  house at Gokulpur and on the way while  sitting  in

rickshaw,  accused/appellant Raja was pressing  her  breasts

showing  her knife. In the evening accused Raja  came  there

and  committed forcible sexual intercourse with her  and  he

remained  with  her  for the entire night  and  during  this

period  he  threatened her too. She was kept in  confinement

for  three  days and when accused Raja used to go out,  lock

was  put  on  the  door and in the night he used  to  commit

sexual intercourse with her. On 25.10.1996 accused Raja left

the  place  after informing her that he was going to  Nagpur

and  at about 1-1.30 in the midnight, her father, mother and

neighbour  came there and called her by name and  after  the

latch  of the house was opened by someone, she came  out  of 

the house and informed the incident to her mother and father

and  then the report was lodged. Based on this FIR, offences

under  Sections 363, 366, 376, 34, 342, 506-B IPC and 3  (1)

(xii)   of   the   Scheduled  Caste  and   Scheduled   Tribe

(Prevention  of  atrocities)  Act (for  short  the  "Special

Act")   were   registered  against  the  accused/appellants.

Prosecutrix  was  medically examined on  26.10.1996  by  Dr.

(Smt.)  Asha  Tripathi (PW-8) who gave her report  Ex.  P-6.

After completion of investigation, charge sheet was filed by

the  police  on  13.11.1996 for the offences under  Sections

363,  366,  376, 34, 342, 506-B IPC and 3 (1) (xii)  of  the

Special   Act.   Court  below  framed  the  charge   against

accused/appellant  Pappu  under  Sections  363/34,   366/34,

342/34,  376/34, 506-B IPC and 3 (2) (v) and 3 (1) (xii)  of

the  Special Act and under all the Sections except 506-B IPC

against accused Raja also.


3.    In  support of its case, prosecution has  examined  12

witnesses.  Statements of the accused/appellants  were  also

recorded under Section 313 of the Code of Criminal Procedure

in  which  they denied the charge levelled against them  and

pleaded their innocence and false implication in the case.


4.     After  hearing  the  parties,  the  Court  below  has

acquitted  the  accused/appellants  of  the  charges   under

Sections 376, 342 IPC as also the charges under the  Special

Act  but  convicted  and  sentenced  them  as  mentioned  in

paragraph No.1 of this judgment.


5.    Counsel for the accused/appellants submits that  there

is  no legally admissible evidence available on record  with

respect  to  the age of prosecutrix and the  only  piece  of

evidence  against the accused/appellants is Ex. P-15-A  i.e.

the photocopy of Kotwari register in which date of birth  of

the  prosecutrix is mentioned as 20.7.1980. He submits  that

this  document  has  merely been filed by the  investigating

officer  (PW-12) but has not been proved by the  prosecution

as required under the law. He submits that even the original

Kotwari  register  was  not produced before  the  Court  and

therefore the same has no legal sanctity. He submits that in

the document Ex. P-15-A date of birth of the prosecutrix  is

mentioned as 20.7.1980 but on what basis and by whom  it  is

recorded, has not been proved by the prosecution. He submits

that  prosecutrix  was in the company of  accused/appellants

for  five  days without offering any resistance  and  during

this  period  though  she  used to roam  around  freely,  no

complaint  was  made  by  her to  anyone.  Counsel  for  the

accused/appellants  further submits that  after  taking  the

house  on  rent  the  prosecutrix started  living  with  the

accused/appellants and though she was already  married,  she

refused to live with her husband and all this shows that she

was a consenting party and wanted to live in the company  of

accused Raja. 


6.    On  the  other  hand, counsel for the respondent/State

supports the judgment impugned and submits that the findings

recorded by the Court below are based on due appreciation of

the  evidence of the witnesses and therefore no interference

with the same is called for.


7.    Heard counsel for the parties and perused the material

available on record.


8.    Prosecutrix (PW-3) has stated in her evidence that  on

the  date  of incident while she was going to her mother  to

sell  vegetables, on the way accused/appellants met her  and

took  her  to  a  house situated at Danitola locality  after

being  threatened  by  knife  where  she  was  subjected  to

forcible sexual intercourse by accused/appellant Raja and at

that time accused Pappu remained out of the house by bolting

the  door from outside and that he did not do anything  with

her.  As both the accused/appellants were calling each other

by  name,  she  could know their names.  According  to  this

witness,   she   stayed  in  the  said  house   along   with

accused/appellant Raja for four days and during this  period

accused Pappu also used to visit there. She has stated  that

when  accused Raja went out, he used to lock the  door  from

outside and make physical relations with her on return. Four

days  thereafter her parents came there and  took  her  with

them in the absence of accused Raja and then the report  was

lodged. According to this witness, about a year prior to the

date of incident her marriage had taken place with one Manoj

resident of  Bhandara and that she stayed in her matrimonial

home  only  for three days but during this period she  never

slept  with her husband and was sleeping with her mother-in-

law  and that after marriage, her husband never took her  to

her  matrimonial home on account of insufficient dowry being

given to him. There are several contradictions and omissions

in  paragraphs No. 17, 18, 19 and 23 of the evidence of this

witness if compared to her case diary statement and the FIR.

This  witness  has admitted that when she was  kept  in  the

house, on account of threats given by accused/appellant Raja

she  did  not raise any hue and cry nor did she call  anyone

for  help. Sukhauram (PW-1) - father of the prosecutrix  has

stated   that  about  a  prior  thereto  marriage   of   the

prosecutrix  had  taken  place  and  she  was  sent  to  her

matrimonial home. He brought his daughter (prosecutrix) back

on  the  occasion of Tija festival and when  his  son-in-law

visited  his house to bring her, she was not sent  with  him

and he got back alone. On the date of incident, according to

this witness, the prosecutrix left the house saying that she

was  going  to  her mother to take vegetable  and  when  her

mother returned home at about 8 p.m. he asked her about  the

prosecutrix,  she (his wife) told him that she (prosecutrix)

did  not go to her. This witness has further stated that  on

the  third  day his nephew Sangeet (PW-11) came to  him  and

told  that he had seen the prosecutrix standing at the  door

of  one house. Thereafter, he along with other persons  went

to  the  said house and on being called aloud for 3-4 times,

she  came out and then the report was lodged. In respect  of

her  age,  this witness has stated that he did not  remember

the date of birth of the prosecutrix but it was recorded  in

the  Kotwari  register.  This witness  has  stated  that  no

missing  report of the prosecutrix was lodged by  him.  Smt.

Memin Bai (PW-2) - mother of the prosecutrix has stated that

on  or around Dashera festival she had gone to the market to

sell  vegetable  and in the evening when she returned  home,

her husband asked her about the prosecutrix and she told him

that she did not go to her and then search was made for her.

Thereafter,  according to this witness, it was  informed  by

Sangeet  (PW-11) that he saw the prosecutrix at the door  of

one  house  and  when she along with her husband  and  other

persons went there and as the door was shut from inside,  it

was  pushed open and the prosecutrix came out and  disclosed 

the  incident  to her. Dhaniram (PW-4) - the  owner  of  the

house  where  prosecutrix was allegedly kept by the  accused

persons has stated that on the date of incident accused Raja

and prosecutrix came to him on rickshaw for taking his house

on  rent. According to him, at that time the prosecutrix was

sitting  in  rickshaw and on being asked by him  about  her,

accused  Raja  told him that she was his wife. According  to

this  witness,  he  knew  accused Pappoo  since  before  and

accused  Raja  had  come  to him with  his  reference.  This

witness has further stated that one day when he went to  the

room of accused Raja for settling the rent, prosecutrix  who

was  combing  her hair by sitting in the verandah  told  him

that he (accused Raja) had gone to Nagpur.  Anjore (PW-5) is

the  witness who accompanied Sukhauram (PW-1) and Memin  Bai     

(PW-2) to the house of Dhaniram (PW-4) but he has not stated

anything specific. Yashwant (PW-6) is the witness to seizure

of underwear and nail cutter made under Ex. P-4.  Nanda Gwal

(PW-7)  is  the witness who has proved caste certificate  of

the prosecutrix Ex. P-5. Dr. (Smt.) Asha Tripathi (PW-8)  is

the  witness who medically examined the prosecutrix and gave

her  report Ex. P-6 opining that she was habitual to  sexual

intercourse, no external or internal injury was there on her

person  and  that  two  fingers easily entered  her  vagina.

Though  medical report Ex. P-6 shows that for  determination

of  age  the  prosecutrix was referred for  x-ray,  no  such

report  is on record. Smt. Laxmi Bai (PW-9) has stated  that

she saw the prosecutrix and accused Raja living in the house

of   her  brother-in-law  on  rent.  She  has  stated   that

prosecutrix used to go out for answering the call of  nature

and  to the nearby hand pump to fetch water. Prosecutrix  is

also  stated to have roamed here and there freely and talked

to  her also but did not make any complaint to her regarding

the  fact  that she was confined in a room by accused  Raja.

Maniram (PW-10) is the neighbour of Dhaniram (PW-4) who  has  

stated  that  the house where the prosecutrix  was  kept  by

accused Raja was never locked and that she used move  freely 

without  making any complaint. Sangeet (PW-11) -  cousin  of

the  prosecutrix has stated that he came to  know  from  the

father of the prosecutrix that she was missing. According to

him, one day he saw the prosecutrix standing at the door  of

one  house  and  accordingly he informed  the  same  to  her

father. C.P. Singh (PW-12) is the investigating officer  who

supporting  the  case  of the prosecution  has  stated  that

during investigation he seized one Kotwari register Ex. P-15

and  photocopy  of the relevant page Ex. P-15A.  Ex.  P-15-A

reflects  the date of birth of the prosecutrix as 20.7.1980.

However,  the  original Kotwari register  was  not  produced

before the Court and there is no evidence to show as  to  on

what  basis  her date of birth was recorded in  the  Kotwari

register as 20.7.1980.


9.    Minute  examination of the evidence of  the  witnesses

particularly that of the prosecutrix (PW-3), her parents (PW-

1  and  PW-2)  and Laxmi Bai (PW-9) goes to  show  that  she

(prosecutrix) was a consenting party. Evidence further shows

that  the prosecutrix lived in the house of Dhaniram  (PW-4)

along with accused Raja for five days and used to go out for

answering  the  call of nature and fetching water  from  the

hand  pump  but  during this long period she,  in  spite  of

having  full  opportunity, did not  make  any  complaint  to

anyone  about  her  being confined by the  accused/appellant

Raja.  This conduct of the prosecutrix also makes  it  clear

that   she   was   a  consenting  party  to   the   act   of

accused/appellant Raja. Now the only question  is  regarding

her  age.  Prosecution has filed photocopy  of  the  Kotwari

register  (Ex. P-15-A) but even this document has  not  been

proved  by the prosecution in accordance with law.  Original

Kotwari register has not been produced in the Court  by  the

prosecution nor there is any evidence to show as to on  what

basis  the  date of birth of the prosecutrix was entered  in

the said Kotwari register as 20.7.1980. Even the parents  of

the  prosecutrix have not stated anything regarding the  age

of   the  prosecutrix.  Moreover,  the  doctor  (PW-8)   who

medically examined the prosecutrix has stated that she was a

fully   grown  up  woman.  Though  the  record  shows   that

prosecutrix was referred for x-ray for determination of age,

there is no such report on record.


10.  Thus in view of the aforesaid discussion, this Court is

of  the  considered opinion that the findings of  the  Court

below are not based on just appreciation of the evidence  on

record  and  that  being  so the judgment  impugned  is  not

sustainable in the eye of law. Accordingly, the appeals  are

allowed.   Accused/appellants  in  both  the   appeals   are

acquitted  of  the charges levelled against them.  They  are

reported to be on bail. Their bail bonds stand discharged.



                                                   Judge
