Criminal Appeal No 401 of 2008 Ajay Koushik and another Vs. State of Chhattisgarh

HIGH COURT OF CHATTISGARH AT BILASPUR          


  Criminal Appeal No 401 of 2008


  Ajay Koushik and another
                            ...Petitioners

           VERSUS


  State of Chhattisgarh
                         ...Respondents


!  Shri   Dhirendra  Pandey  counsel   for   the  appellants


^  Shri    Vaibhav   Goverdhan   PL   for    the  respondent


 CORAM: Honble Mr Justice Pritinker Diwaker 

 Dated: 18/01/2012

: Judgement 


                    J U D G M E N T
                     (18.01.2012)

  CRIMINAL APPEAL UNDER SECTION 374 OF THE CODE OF CRIMINAL              
                         PROCEDURE.


     This appeal has been preferred against the judgment and
order  dated  8.4.2008 passed by Additional Sessions  Judge,
Bilaspur,   in  Sessions  Trial  No.  13/2008  holding   the
accused/appellants  guilty under Section  304  (B)  IPC  and
sentencing each of them to undergo rigorous imprisonment for
seven years.

2.    Facts  of  the  case  in brief are  that  marriage  of
deceased  Lata  was  solemnized with accused/appellant  No.1 
herein  about 8-9 months prior to the date of incident  i.e.
16.2.2007.  Accused/appellant No.2 is the  mother-in-law  of
the  deceased.  On 16.2.2007 the deceased burnt  herself  by
pouring  kerosene oil on her body and she died on  the  same
day.  Merg intimation Ex. P-3 was given by Vidyanand Koushik 
(PW-8) and after merg enquiry FIR Ex. P-4 was registered  on
15.10.2007  under section 304 (B) IPC. After  completion  of
investigation challan was filed by the police on  28.12.2007
for the said offence.

3.     So   as   to  hold  the  accused/appellants   guilty,
prosecution  has  examined 12 witnesses. Statements  of  the
accused/appellants were also recorded under section  313  of
the  Code  of  Criminal Procedure in which they  denied  the
charge levelled against them and pleaded their innocence and
false  implication  in  the case. This  apart,  two  persons
namely  Panchram (DW-1) and Dr. Santosh Kumar Kaushik (DW-2)     
have  also  been examined by the defence in support  of  its
case.

4.    After  hearing the parties, the trial Court  convicted
and   sentenced  the  accused/appellants  as  mentioned   in
paragraph No.1 of this judgment. Hence, this appeal.

5.   Counsel for the appellants submits that the allegations
made  against the accused/appellants are general  in  nature
and based thereon they cannot be convicted under Section 304 
(B)  IPC.   He  submits  that the  incident  took  place  on
16.2.2007  whereas case diary statements  of  the  witnesses
were  recorded on 16.10.2007, 25.10.2007 and 31.10.2007  and 
none  of  them has made any specific allegation against  the
accused/appellants. He further submits that at the  time  of
inquest  done  on  16.2.2007, father of the deceased  namely
Makhanlal Koushik (PW-1) was present but he too has not made  
any allegation against the accused/appellants.

6.    On  the  other  hand counsel for the  respondent/State
supports  the  impugned judgment and submits  that  deceased 
Lata  died  within  8-9  months  of  her  marriage  and  the
witnesses  have categorically stated that she was  subjected
to cruelty by the accused/appellants for demand of dowry. He
further  submits that the witnesses themselves  have  stated
that as they were in shock after the incident, they did  not
make any statement against the accused/appellants. 

7.    Heard counsel for the parties and perused the material
available on record.

8.    Makhanlal Koushik (PW-1) - the father of the  deceased
has  stated that marriage of his daughter (deceased  herein)
was solemnized with accused/appellant No.1 last year thereto
and  that  at the time of marriage he had given TV,  cooler,
almirah, sofa-set all worth Rs. 1,50,000. According to  this
witness,  as  his  elder  son had expired  3-4  years  prior
thereto  the  deceased  did not make any  complaint  to  him
against  the  accused/appellants perhaps on account  of  the
fear  that  it  may give shock to him but she  had  informed
Khorbahrin and Hira Bai that the accused/appellants were not
permitting her to watch TV and harassing her making a demand 
for   motorcycle.   This  witness   has   stated   that   on
Mahashivratri  festival he suddenly went to the  matrimonial
house of the deceased where her body with burn injuries  was
lying  and  her tongue had protruded. In cross  examination,
this  witness  has stated that after coming to know  through
his  co-brother Babulal who was also residing in the village
of    accused/appellants   that   the    family    of    the
accused/appellants was very good and that  accused/appellant
Ajay  was  engaged  in tailoring work, he got  the  deceased
married  to him. He has further stated that at the  time  of
settlement of marriage, father of accused/appellant Ajay had
asked  him to give dowry as per his capacity but no specific
demand  for  motorcycle was made by him.  This  witness  has 
further  stated that even at the time of marriage no  demand
for  motorcycle  was  made  by  anyone.  According  to  this
witness,   when   he   had  gone  to  the   house   of   the
accused/appellants to bring back his daughter, the father of
accused/appellant Ajay requested him to stay there at  least
for  one day and then on the second day without there  being
any  grudge,  the  appellants  permitted  his  daughter   to
accompany  him. He has further stated that during his  visit
to  the  house of the accused/appellants nobody had objected
him  to  meet his daughter. This witness has further  stated
that  about a week thereafter, his son-in-law also  came  to
his  house on a motorcycle to take the deceased back, stayed
there in the night and then on the next day he got back with
her.  He has stated that 3-4 months thereafter when he again
went  to  the  house of the accused/appellants to  take  his
daughter,  this time also he stayed there for a day  and  no
demand   of  motorcycle  or  complaint  regarding   anything
whatsoever  was made either by accused Ajay  or  his  family
members  rather  he was given very good treatment  by  them.
This  witness went on saying that when again his  son-in-law
visited  his house on bicycle to take back the deceased,  no
demand  of  motorcycle  was made by him.  This  witness  has 
reiterated  that  at  no  point  of  time  he  received  any
complaint either from accused/appellant Ajay or his  parents
for not giving motorcycle in marriage. He has further stated
that though after marriage the deceased visited his house on
three  occasions, she did not make any complaint  either  to
him,  her  mother  or  even  to  her  sister  regarding  her
harassment  at  the  hands of the accused/appellants  making
demand of motorcycle. He has stated that even on the date of
incident   he   had   stayed   in   the   house    of    the
accused/appellants till the last rites were completed and it
is  in  his presence the police came there and made  certain
enquiry  from him in regard to death of Lata but he informed
the  police  people that he was not aware of any dispute  in
the  family of the accused/appellants. He has further stated
that  when  on the next day of the incident he came  to  his
village the incident was disclosed to his family members and
also  to Khorbahrin and Hira Bai. According to him, by  this
time  his  sister-in-law, one Khorbahrin and  Hira  Bai  had
already  informed  his wife that the deceased  had  informed
them  that  the  accused/appellants were harassing  her  for
motorcycle  and  then he went to Chakarbhata police  station
and made a report accordingly. Hirabai (PW-2) - the aunt  of
the  deceased has stated that whenever the deceased  visited
her maternal home, she used to call her to her house and ask
about her well-being on which she used to tell her that  the
accused/appellants were harassing her demanding  motorcycle. 
According  to this witness, immediately after the  death  of
Lata, her statement was recorded by the police in which  she
had  disclosed  each  and everything. Sakina  (PW-3)  -  the
friend  of  the  deceased has stated that 2-3  months  after
marriage when the deceased came to her village, she informed
her  that  the accused/appellants were demanding  motorcycle
from  her  and  for this they were beating and  abusing  her
also.  There  appear  to  be  material  contradictions   and
omissions in the Court statement and case diary statement of
this  witness.  Khorbahrin (PW-4)  -  another  aunt  of  the
deceased has stated that the deceased had informed her  that
on  account of not giving motorcycle, the accused/appellants
were  harassing  her  and they did not allow  her  to  watch
colour  TV.  According to this witness,  her  statement  was
recorded  by the police four days after the death  of  Lata.
Dilharan  (PW-5) is the witness of inquest Ex. P-1  who  has
stated that at the time of inquest no complaint was made  by
the  father of the deceased. Girjabai (PW-6) - mother of the
deceased  has  stated  that  after  marriage,  the  deceased
visited her house on four occasions but she did not make any
complaint against the accused/appellants and that only after
her  death when she returned to her house, she was  informed
by  Hirabai,  Sakina and Khorbahrin that  her  daughter  had
informed them that the accused/appellants used to harass her
for  motorcycle. Makhanlal (PW-7) is the witness of  inquest
Ex.  P-1 and seizure of certain articles made under Ex. P-2.
Vidyanand  Koushik  (PW-8)  is the  witness  who  gave  merg
intimation  Ex.  P-3  to the police. This  witness  has  not
stated  anything  specific against  the  accused/appellants.
Shivnarayan Pandey (PW-9) is the witness who took  the  body 
of  the  deceased  for  post mortem  examination.  Dr.  A.R.
Banjare  (PW-10)  is the witness who conducted  post  mortem 
examination on the body of the deceased and gave his  report
Ex.  P-5. This witness has stated that as in the trachea  of
the  deceased carbon particles were found, it could be  said
that  the burn injuries were ante-mortem. P.C. Sonekar  (PW-
11)  is the investigating officer who has supported the case
of  the  prosecution.  Arvind Kumar Dwivedi (PW-12)  is  the
witness   who   assisted   the  investigating   officer   in
investigation.  Panchram  (DW-1)  has  stated  that  as  the
deceased  was  in  the grip of   some evil spirit,  on  four
occasions  he  had  practiced sorcery on  her.  Dr.  Santosh
Koushik (DW-2) has stated that as the deceased was suffering
from hysteria and her blood pressure used to be on the rise,
he had treated her by naturopathy.

9.    Having  thus discussed the facts of the  case  in  the
light of the evidence of the witnesses it becomes clear that
Lata died on 16.2.2007 and though at the time of inquest her
father was present in the house of the accused/appellants he
did not make any allegation against anyone and for the first
time  the  case  diary  statements  of  the  witnesses  were
recorded on 16.10.2007, 25.10.2007 and 31.10.2007.  Some  of 
the  witness have though deposed that their statements  were
recorded  immediately after the incident, the record  speaks
otherwise.  Statement  of Makhanlal  Koushik  (PW-1)  -  the
father of the deceased makes it clear that immediately after
marriage, on two occasions he had gone to the house  of  the
accused/appellants but no complaint whatsoever was  made  by  
his  daughter rather the accused/appellants had well treated
him  and  requested him to stay in their house at least  for
one  day.  It  further  makes it clear  that  no  demand  of
motorcycle etc. was made by anyone.  Likewise, mother of the 
deceased   has  categorically  stated  that  no  demand   of
motorcycle was ever made by the accused/appellants and  that 
she  had come to know about the same through Hirabai, Sakina 
and  Khorbahrin  only after the death of her daughter.  This
apart,  there  is no evidence on record to  show  that  soon
before   death   the   deceased   was   harassed   by    the
accused/appellants to such an extent that she was left  with
no  other option but to end her life. In these circumstances
it  can  be said that the prosecution has utterly failed  to
prove its case by leading cogent and clinching evidence  and
that  being so the accused/appellants are entitled  to  have
benefit of doubt.

10.  In the result, the appeal is allowed. Judgment impugned
convicting  and  sentencing  the  accused/appellants   under
Section 304 (B) IPC is set aside. They are acquitted of  the
charge levelled against them. Appellant No.1 is reported  to
be  in jail. He be set free forthwith if not required in any
other  case.  Appellant No.2 is already on  bail.  Her  bail
bonds stand discharged. 

                                                     Judge
