

THE HONOURABLE SRI JUSTICE VAMAN RAO           
CRL.P.No.479  of  2000 


 11/02/2000


S.Rama Vijaya Lakshmi.  

petitioner

State of A.P.,


respondent 


Counsel for the petitioner:Mr. K.Chatinya, Advocate.

Counsel for the Respondent: The Public Prosecutor.





:Order:

This petition under Section 482 Cr.P.C seeks quashing of proceedings in
CC.No.136 of 1999 on the file of XXII Metropolitan Magistrate - cum - Mahila
Court at Hyderabad in which the petitioner-accused No.2 along with other accused
faces charges under Sections 498-A. 494 and 406 I.P.C and Sections 4 and 6 of
Dowry Prohibition Act.
The petitioner herein is alleged to be the women with whom accused No.1 had
contracted second marriage while his marriage with the defacto complainant was
still subsisting and thus she committed the offence under Section 494 IPC.  A
reading of the charge sheet would show that she is also sought to be fasten with
liability under Section 498-A and 406 IPC.
The contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner is that offences under
Section 498-A and 406 IPC can by no stretch of imagination can be attributed to
the petitioner herein.  In regard to the offence under Section 494 IPC, the
learned counsel for the petitioner contends that there is absolutely no material
to show that the petitioner had married the accused No.1 with the knowledge that
he was already married the defacto complainant and as such the proceedings in
CC.No.136 1999 against the petitioner are liable to be quashed.
The learned Public Prosecutor raises a preliminary objection that this petition
is not maintainable inasmuch as the petitioner has moved the learned XXII
Metropolitan Magistrate with an application for discharging the petitioner
herein and that the learned Magistrate having dismissed the application the
petitioner ought to have approached the Sessions Judge in revision inasmuch as
she has not done so this petition cannot be maintained.  I do not think this
contention has any substance.  The petitioner seeks quashing of the proceedings
against her on the ground that the material placed by the prosecution before the
Court does not make out any offence against the petitioner herein.  Mere fact
that the petitioner had given an application before the trial Court for
discharging her on the same grounds on which the present petition is filed, does
not debar him from approaching this Court under Section 482 Cr.P.C.
It is fairly conceded by the learned Public Prosecutor that as far as offence
under Section 498 and 406 IPC are concerned there is nothing to connect the
petitioner with this alleged offence.  In regard to the offence under Section
494 IPC the only ground on which the petitioner could not have been charged for
this offence would be on the ground that she abetted the commission of the said
offence on contracting second marriage with the accused No.1 while his marriage
with the first wife was subsisting.  The charge sheet and the depositions of
witnesses on the basis on which the charge sheet is based do not seem to have
anything to suggest that the petitioner had the knowledge that A-1-the husband
was already married when the marriage of A-1 and the petitioner was performed.
On the otherhand, the statements of the defacto complainant, brother of the
defacto complainant and her father would show that when they approached the
petitioner after her marriage with accused NO.1, the petitioner represented to
them that she had absolutely no knowledge that A-1 was already married to the
defacto complainant.  In view of these alleged denial the prosecution has not
collected any material during investigation to suggest otherwise namely that the
petitioner herein had knowledge of A-1's earlier marriage.  In the absence of
such material, it is not possible to fasten a criminal liability for the offence
under Section 494 IPC against the petitioner. In these circumstances, it will be
abuse of the process of law if the petitioner is made to undergo ordeal of trial
along with the other accused.
 In the result, this petition is allowed and the proceedings in CC/.No.136 of
1999 on the file of XXII Metropolitan Magistrate-cum-Mahila Court, Hyderabad as
far as the petititioner-A-2 is concerned shall stand quashed.





























