

THE HON'BLE SRI CHIEF JUSTICE S.B.SINHA AND THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE RAMESH               
CRP No.4495 of 2001  

22-11-2001 

P.Srinivasa Rao

P. Indira and Anotherr

Counsel For Petitioner:R.M.K. Kishore, Advocate

counsel For Respondents:V.Venugopal Rao, Advocate for M.C. Adi Murthy, Advs   


:JUDGMENT:   
S.B. Sinha, C.J.
Whether an Interlocutory Application for grant of interim maintenance to a Hindu
wife and her mentally retarded minor child towards provision of food, clothing
as well as medical attendance and treatment and education to the child, filed in
a suit brought under the provisions of Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 1956
(for short 'the Act') for maintenance against the husband, can be entertained by
a Court therefore in exercise of the inherent powers of the Court under Section
151 of the Code of Civil Procedure, despite the absence of a specific provision
in this behalf in the Act, is the question involved in this Civil Revision
Petition.
FACTS:  
The 1st respondent herein was married to the petitioner on 22-10-1986 as per
Hindu rites and customs. Out of the said wedlock, 2nd respondent was born. He is
mentally retarded. The 1st respondent was allegedly being harassed by the
petitioner. Her parents were unable to meet the demands of her husband and in-
laws for more and more amount of dowry although a huge amount had been paid at  
the time of the marriage. Allegedly, even the 2nd respondent was not being
provided with any medical treatment. It is alleged that the petitioner deserted
the respondents. Therefore, they filed a suit in the Court of Judge, Family
Court, City Civil Court for grant of maintenance at the rate of Rs.2,500/- per
month under the provisions of the Act.
An application for grant of interim maintenance at the rate of Rs. 1500/- per
month was filed which was marked as IA No.468 of 2000. The 2nd respondent was  
studying in the Special Education Centre for mentally handicapped Institute of
Genetics, Hyderabad in Primary-II.
The learned Judge, Family Court, on a prima facie consideration of the material
placed before him, by reason of the impugned order dated 24-6-2001, directed
payment of Rs. 1000/- per month towards interim maintenance. Questioning the 
said order, this revision petition has been filed.
SUBMISSIONS:    
The learned Counsel for the petitioner would urge that in a suit for maintenance
under the provisions of the Act, no application for interim maintenance would be
maintainable. The Judge, Family Court has no jurisdiction to pass an interim
order of the nature under Section 151 of the Code of Civil Procedure. The
learned Counsel in support of the said contention has placed strong reliance on
G. Appanna v. G. Seethamma, MANU/AP/0079/1972 : AIR1972AP62 , Ramchandra v.        
Snehalata Dei, MANU/OR/0033/1977 : AIR1977Ori96 and A. Subrahmanyam v. A. Rama       
Devi, MANU/AP/0144/2000 : 2000(2)ALD1 .   
The learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents, on the other hand,
would submit that the petitioner as husband and father had a statutory
obligation to maintain the respondents. The right of wife and a minor child to
be maintained under the Act cannot be postponed till the determination of the
issue on merits. The learned Counsel would urge that if the respondents have
been able to show that they were not being maintained by the petitioner, they
are entitled to be granted interim maintenance pendente lite. Therefore, it is
one of such circumstances where the Court would be entitled to pass an order ex
debito justitiae particularly when the relationship between the parties is
admitted.
In the instant case, the petitioner does not dispute the solemnisation and
consummation of the marriage with the 1st respondent and his statutory
obligation to maintain his wife and son. His contention before the learned
Judge, Family Court, as also before us is that an application for interim
maintenance under Section 151 of the Code of Civil Procedure is not
maintainable.
STATUTORY PROVISIONS:      
8. The Parliament enacted Hindu Adoption and Maintenance Act, 1956 codifying the 
law relating to adoption and maintenance among Hindus. 
9. Section 18 of the Act, which provides for maintenance of wife, reads as
follows:
(1) Subject to the provisions of this Court, a Hindu wife, whether married
before or after the commencement of this Act, shall be entitled to be maintained
by her husband during her lifetime.
(2) A Hindu wife shall be entitled to live separately from her husband without
forfeiting her claim to maintenance-
(a) if he is guilty of desertion, that is to say, of abandoning her without
reasonable cause and without her consent or against her wish or of wilfully
neglecting her;
(b) if he has treated her with such cruelty as to cause a reasonable
apprehension in her mind that it will be harmful or injurious to live with her
husband; 
(c) if he is suffering from virulent form of leprosy;
(d) if he has any other wife living;
(e) if he keeps a concubine in the same house in which his wife if living or
habitually resides with a concubine elsewhere;
(f) if he has ceased to be a Hindu by conversion to another religion;
(g) if there is any other cause justifying her living separately.
(3) A Hindu wife shall not be entitled to separate residence and maintenance
from her husband if she is unchaste or ceases to be a Hindu by conversion to
other religion.
10. Therefore, under Sub-section (1) of Section 18 a Hindu wife is entitled to
be maintained by her husband during her lifetime and under Sub-section (2) she
is also entitled to live separately from her husband without forfeiting her
claim to maintenance in the circumstances enumerated under clauses (a) to (g)
therein. Under Section 20 of the Act, the children or the aged parents are
entitled to be maintained. Under clause (b) of Section 3, 'maintenance' has been
defined in the following terms:
"Maintenance" includes, --
(i) in all cases, provision for food, clothing, residence, education and medical
attendance and treatment;
(ii) in the case of an unmarried daughter, also the reasonable expenses of and
incident to her marriage.
The petitioner, therefore, was under an obligation to make provision to his wife
and minor child for food, clothing, residence, education as well as medical
attendance and treatment.
Under Section 24 of the Hindu Marriage Act, where proceedings are pending a
Hindu wife is entitled to seek for maintenance pendente lite as also the
expenses of proceedings. Admittedly, at the time the respondents filed the suit
before the Family Court, Hyderabad no proceeding was pending before the Court
under the provisions of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955. However, it appears that
the petitioner on 18-4-2001 filed a petition being OP No. 21 of 2001 on the file
of the Senior Civil Judge, Avanigadda under Section 9 of the Hindu Marriage Act,
for restitution of the conjugal rights.
FINDINGS:  
The jurisdiction of a Court to pass an interim order under Section 151 of the
Code of Civil Procedure is no longer res integra. In Manoharlal v. Seth Hiralal,
MANU/SC/0056/1961 : AIR1962SC527 , the Apex Court has clearly held that where an   
order of injunction cannot be passed in terms of Order 39, Rules 1 and 2 of the
Code, an application for interim relief can be entertained by the Court in terms
of Section 151 of Code of Civil Procedure. The said decision has been followed
by the Apex Court and High Courts in a number of decisions.
In G. Appanna's case, Chinnappa Reddy, J (as his Lordship then was) speaking for
a Division Bench of this Court held that Section 18 of the Act does not
authorise the award of interim maintenance pending decision of suit in which the
very claim to maintenance is in contest. The teamed Judge relied upon a decision
of the Madras High Court in Abdul Rehman v. Tajunissa Begum, MANU/TN/0212/1953 :    
AIR1953Mad420 , wherein a similar question arose for consideration. In the said
case, a learned Judge of the Madras High Court sitting on the original side of
the High Court granted interim maintenance but in appeal filed under clause 15
of the Letters Patent, a Division Bench of the Madras High Court relying upon
the decisions in Latchanna Dora v. Malludora (1940) Mad 572 : AIR 1941 Mad. 55,
CRP No.l312 of 1930 (Mad.), Gopal Saran v. Sita Devi MANU/BH/0088/1923, and a   
decision of Viswanatha Sastri, J., in CRP No. 662 of 1950 (Madras) reversed the
order of the learned single Judge taking the view that the Court had no inherent
jurisdiction to grant interim maintenance when the very right to maintenance was
in contest in the suit. It was held that the Code confers powers on the Court to
grant relief in interim proceedings in specified cases and except in such cases,
no jurisdiction inhers in the Court to grant interim relief when the claim is
hotly contested and the same was to be granted finally by the decree after
determination of the points in controversy. The Division Bench of the Madras
High Court observed :
To grant any relief in an interim application would be to grant the relief which
can properly be granted only by the ultimate determination in the suit and the
decree following thereon. The Civil PC. confers certain powers on the Court to
grant relief in interim proceedings such as for example, power to issue
injunctions, attachments before judgments or appointment of receivers. Where
such relief is claimed the Code prescribes the conditions on which such relief
could be granted. But apart from such powers, there is no inherent jurisdiction
in Courts to grant interim relief could be granted. But apart from such powers,
there is no inherent jurisdiction in Courts to grant interim relief which
properly ought to be granted only by the decree after determination of the
points in controversy. We are accordingly of opinion that the order of the
learned Judge granting interim relief in the suit in which the claim of the
plaintiff is hotly contested, was without jurisdiction,
However, in the said case, the defendant therein denied that the plaintiff was
married to him.
The decision in Abdul Rahman's case was distinguished by Dana, J., of the
Calcutta High Court in Gouri Gupta v. Tarani Gupta, MANU/WB/0059/1968 :  
AIR1968Cal305 , holding that reasonable maintenance can be granted by the Court 
when the factum of marriage is not hotly contested. It was held:
In considerable cases where on the materials before it, the Court finds no
difficulty in assessing the reasonable maintenance and where the marriage is not
hotly contested the Court should make an order for interim maintenance in the
interests of justice by invoking the powers under Section 151 of the Code of
Civil Procedure.
The said view of the learned single Judge was affirmed on appeal by a Division
Bench of the Calcutta High Court in Tarani Gupta v. Gouri Gupta,
MANU/WB/0103/1968 : AIR1968Cal567 , taking the view that grant of interim 
maintenance is not an act of exercise of inherent jurisdiction and Court has
power to make interlocutory order in aid of suit. It was held:
The Court has power to make interlocutory orders in aid of a suit. Denial of
status does not lake away the jurisdiction of the Court. Interim maintenance is
not an act of exercise of inherent jurisdiction. Interim maintenance is granted
as an interlocutory relief in the suit.
Disagreeing with the decisions of the Calcutta High Court in Gupta's case and
concurring with the decision in Abdul Rahman's case, the Division Bench of this
Court in Appanna's case held that there was no express provision under Section
18 of the Act for grant of interim maintenance pending determination of the
issue on merits though such a power has expressly been conferred on the Court
under Section 24 of the Hindu Marriage Act for grant of maintenance pendente
lite. His Lordship Chinnappa Reddy, J., held that the provisions of Section 151
cannot be resorted to encroach upon the substantive rights and matter has to
await adjudication in the suit. It was held that the Code being intended to
regulate the procedure of Courts, the inherent power recognised under Section
151 cannot extend to matters other than procedural. It was opined:
The Code itself is intended to regulate the procedure of Courts. Section 151,
therefore, is concerned with the procedure to be followed by the Court in
deciding the cause before it. The inherent powers recognised by Section 151
cannot extend to matters other than procedural. The Court cannot resort to the
provisions of Section 151 to encroach upon substantive rights of parties or, in
an Interlocutory Application, upon matters, which await adjudication in the
suit. No order under Section 151 CPC can be made except 'in aid of the suit'.
Such an order may be 3 step towards obtaining a final adjudication in the suit
or it may be with a view to 'rendering the judgment effective, if obtained'.
It was further held:
Section 18 merely clothes a Hindu wife with the right to be maintained by her
husband. It may be more correct to say that Section 18 recognises the right of a
Hindu wife to be maintained by her husband since she possessed such a right even
under the Hindu Law. Where the husband fails to discharge the obligation of
maintaining his wife, the wife can enforce her right to maintenance by
instituting an appropriate action. To such an action the defendant may have
several defences. He may deny the marriage itself. He may deny that the marriage
is subsisting. He may plead that the wife is unchaste or has ceased to be a
Hindu. He may plead that the wife is living separately from him without any just
cause. All these questions, if pleaded, will have to be decided in the suit.
Maintenance can be awarded by the Court only after adjudication of the questions
involved in the suit. If the wife succeeds she will be awarded maintenance from
date of suit or even earlier, as the case may be. There is no question of the
husband taking advantage of the filing of the suit and stopping maintaining the
wife, as Datta J., seems to have thought, since if the wife establishes her
claim she will be entitled to recover arrears of maintenance also.
In our view Section 18 does not authorise the award of interim maintenance
pending decision on the claim to maintenance in contest in the suit. The right
of the wife to be maintained by the husband should not be confused with the
power of the Court to award interim maintenance pending an action for
maintenance where such right is in dispute. The Court has no power unless
statute expressly confers such a power on it. For example a power to award
maintenance pendents lite is expressly conferred by Section 24 of the Hindu
Marriage Act. The Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act does not contain a similar
provision.
This Court, therefore, in Appanna's case held that there is no statutory'
authority to award interim maintenance pending an action for maintenance where
the right to maintenance is in dispute.
The decision of the Apex Court in Manoharlal (supra) unfortunately was not
brought to the notice of the Division Bench of this Court Appanna's case. In
Manoharlal's case the Apex Court was considering the provisions of Order 39,
Sections 94 and 151 of CPC. Noticing difference of opinion between the various
High Courts on the question of exercise of inherent jurisdiction of the Court to
grant temporary injunctions not covered by the provisions of Order 39 CPC
agreeing with the views expressed by the Allahabad High Court and the Calcutta
High Court in Dhaneshwar Nath v. Ghanshyum Dhar MANU/UP/0214/1939, Firm Bichchha       
Rambaburam v. Firm Baldeo Sahai Surajmal MANU/UP/0234/1939, Bhagat Singh v.      
Jagbir Sawhney MANU/WB/0075/1941, and Chinese Tannery Owners', Association v.     
Makhan Lal, MANU/WB/0211/1951 : AIR1952Cal560 and disagreeing with the various    
decisions of the Madras High Court in Subramanian v. Seetarama, AIR 1949 Mad.  
104, etc., the Apex Court held:
We are of the view that the latter view is correct and that the Courts have
inherent jurisdiction to issue temporary injunctions in circumstances which are
not covered by the provisions of Order XXXIX CPC. There is no expression in
Section 94 which expressly prohibits the issue of a temporary injunction in
circumstances not covered by Order 39 or by rules made under the Code. It is
well settled that the provisions of the Code are not exhaustive, for the simple
reason that the Legislature is incapable of contemplating all the possible
circumstances which may arise in future litigation and consequently for
providing the procedure for them........,.....If the provisions of Section 94
were not therein the Code, the Court could still issue temporary injunctions but
it could do that in the exercise of its inherent jurisdiction. No party has a
right to insist on the Court's exercising that jurisdiction and the Court
exercises its inherent jurisdiction only when it considers it absolutely
necessary for the ends of justice to do so. It is in the incidence of the
exercise of the power of the Court to issue temporary injunction that the
provisions of Section 94 of the Code have their effect and not in taking away
the right of the Court to exercise its inherent power.
Referring to Section 151 of the Code, the Apex Court noticed the following
observations of the Apex Court in Padam Sen v. State of Uttar Pradesh,
MANU/SC/0065/1960 : 1961CriLJ322 .   
The inherent powers of the Court are in addition to the powers specifically
conferred, on the Court by the Code. They are complementary to those powers and 
therefore it must be held that the Court is free to exercise them for the
purposes mentioned in Section 151 of the Code when the exercise of those powers 
'is not in any way in conflict with what has been expressly provided in the Code
or against the intentions of the Legislature.
The Apex Court further noticed:
.....The inherent powers saved by Section 151 of the Code are with respect to
the procedure to be followed by the Court in deciding the cause before it. These
powers are not powers over the substantive rights which any litigant possesses.
Specific powers have to be conferred on the Courts for passing such orders which
would affect such rights of a party. Such powers cannot come within the scope of
inherent powers of the Court in matters of procedure, which powers have their
source in the Court possessing all the essential powers to regulate its practice
and procedure.
22. Noticing so, the Apex Court in Manoharlul's case held:
The section itself says that nothing in the Code shall be deemed to limit or
otherwise affect the inherent power of the Court to make orders necessary for
the ends of justice. In the face of such a clear statement, it is not possible
to hold that the provisions of the Code control the inherent power by limiting
it or otherwise affecting it. The inherent power has not been conferred upon the
Court; it is a power inherent in the Court by virtue of its duty to do justice
between the parties before it.
Further when the Code itself recognises the existence of the inherent power of
the Court there is no question of implying any powers outside the limits of the
Code. 
Though the Apex Court in the above decision has considered the issue with
reference to Section 94 CPC, we are of the view that the above observations are
equally applicable to the case of hand. Under the Hindu Adoptions and
Maintenance Act, 1956 also there is no express provision, which expressly
prohibited the grant of interim maintenance to the wife and minor children
pending final adjudication of the issue in the suit. Therefore, in the absence
of a specific provision in the Act for grant of interim maintenance, we are of
the view that the Court is not precluded from exercising its inherent
jurisdiction in the facts and circumstances of a case and where the interests of
justice warrant to grant interim maintenance to the wife and minor children. The
Apex Court in Padam Sen's case (supra) clearly held that the exercise of powers
under Section 151 of the Code are not powers over the substantive rights of the
parties. At this stage, it may be relevant to notice the observations of the
Apex Court in Manoharlal's case that the power under Section 151 is not a power
conferred upon the Court, but it is a power inherent in the Court itself by
virtue of its duty to do justice between the parties. In this view of the
matter, with due respect, we are unable to subscribe to the view expressed by
the Division Bench of this Court in Appanna's case. If the reasons of the
Division Bench of this Court in Appanna's case are accepted, hardly, there would
be a case which is hotly contested where such an application would be
maintainable.
Though there are limitations on the powers of the Court, it cannot abandon its
inherent powers. The inherent power has its roots in necessity and its breadth
is coextensive with the necessity. (See Nawabganj Sugar Mills v. Union of India,
MANU/SC/0045/1975 : [1976]1SCR803 ).    
25. In Vidya Charan Shukla v. Tamil Nadu Olympic Association, MANU/TN/0059/1991   
: AIR1991Mad323 , it has been held that the Court can exercise its inherent
jurisdiction under Articles 215 and 223 of the Constitution apart from its
jurisdiction under Order XXXIX, Rule 2-A of the Code of Civil Procedure.
In Ch. Rama Rao v. Stale of A.P. 2001 (4) ALD 554, a Division Bench of this
Court held that the High Court or even the Tribunal has inherent jurisdiction to
pass an interim order although there was no provision therefor.
There cannot be any dispute that the Court while exercising its inherent power,
should not overlook the statutory provisions and such power cannot be invoked to
nullify or stultify a statutory provision. Here the question of nullifying or
stultifying the statutory provisions cannot and does not arise. Sections 18 and
20 of the Act recognised the absolute right of a wife and minor child to seek
for maintenance. Both the provisions have not expressly prohibited to claim
interim maintenance pendente lite. Therefore, where circumstances warrant and on
prima facie satisfaction of the merits of the case, the Court is not prohibited
from exercising its inherent power of jurisdiction to grant maintenance to the
deserted wife and children pendente lite in the interest of justice.
Further, in our view, independent of the inherent power of the Court under
Section 151 CPC the wife and children are entitled for grant of interim
maintenance under the scheme and provisions of the Act itself. The expression
'maintenance' in subsection (b)(i) of Section 3 of the Act is an inclusive one
providing for provision for food, clothing, residence, education and medical
attendance and treatment. There may be number of cases where a child cannot be 
sent to school for want of money. There may also be instances where the deserted
wife or the son who are suffering from prolonged illness may be required
immediate medical assistance and treatment and they may not be able to meet the 
expenses. The mother may not be able to provide medical assistance to herself or
to her ailing child. Therefore, an urgent need may arise for medical assistance
or treatment either for the wife or the child, which may not await decision in
the suit, which will take several years to conclude. In absence of medical
assistance and treatment, the wife or the child may not survive to obtain and or
reap the fruits of the decree that may be granted by the Court ultimately. In
our view, that was not the intention of the Legislature. The very fact that the
inclusive definition contained in subsection (b)(i) of Section 3 of the Act
confer an absolute right of maintenance, the same is required to be made
effective by Court if necessary by passing an interim order. In view of the
scheme of the Act conferring an absolute right on the wife and the minor
children to seek for maintenance, a liberal construction has to be given to the
provisions of the Act to construe that such ancillary or incidental power has
been conferred on the Court by implication to grant interim maintenance to the
wife and child in cases where it is justified on prima facie satisfaction of the
merits of the case. The provisions of Sections 18 and 20 cannot be interpreted
in such a manner so as to defeat justice to the deserted wife and her dependant
child.
Even otherwise also, food, clothing, residence are essential requirements for
human survival. Providing such essential requirements to the wife and children
being the statutory and moral duty of a husband, the sane cannot be denied or
postponed. In the present context of globalisation, education is also an
important requirement and the children are to be necessarily provided with
education. Unless some interim maintenance is provided, it may not be possible
for the mother to educate her children. It may be possible that by the time the
controversy is ultimately decided after contest, the children may not be able to
get proper education for want of money and their career would be at stake.
Therefore, grant of interim maintenance towards education has relevance and
absolute necessity. If the decision of this Court in Appanna's case that interim
maintenance cannot be granted till the final adjudication of the issue on merits
is accepted, it would result in untold hardship and misery to the mother and the
minor children. The provisions of the Act being beneficial legislation in favour
of the wife and children, even if there is no provision for grant of interim
maintenance, the same should be read down so as to give effect to the intent and
object of the Act and to do human and social justice. Clothing, food, education,
medical assistance being essential things for survival cannot be denied to the
wife and children neglected by a husband till the determination of the suit
particularly in a case where the marital status is admitted by him. We are of
the view that the Court on a prima facie consideration of the matter would be a
liberty to grant interim maintenance to do justice where the cases justify grant
of maintenance pendente lite.
Where the law is not clear 'just construction' has to be invoked. In Siddappa
Vasappa Kuri v. Special Land Acquisition Officer, MANU/SC/0674/2001 : 
AIR2001SC2951 , wherein it was held: 
It is only where a provision is ambiguous that a construction that leads to a
result that more just can be adopted.
Our view is also fortified by a recent decision of the Bombay High Court in Atul
Sashikant Mude v. Niranjana And Mude AIR 1998 Bom. 234, wherein the Bombay High     
Court held that independent of the inherent power of the Court under Section 151
CPC, under the very scheme of the Act itself, the Court has power to pass ad
interim orders. Dissenting from the opinion of the Division Bench of this Court
in Appanna 's case, it was held:
.........With respect, we find it difficult to accept this reasoning. In our
opinion, the question whether the Court has jurisdiction to pass interim order
can never be dependent on the possibility of the defences to the suit. What is
more important is that the Act viz., Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 1956.
avowedly is for codifying the law relating to maintenance amongst Hindus, It is
extremely relevant to notice that the inclusive definition of' "maintenance"
states that "maintenance" includes (i) in all cases, provision for food,
clothing, residence, education and medical attendance and treatment; and (ii) in
the case of an unmarried daughter, also the reasonable expenses of and incident
to her marriage. In our opinion these aspects of maintenance clearly contemplate
grant of the same when the same is needed. That the wife, if she succeeds, will
be entitled to arrears is no consolation. For example, there may be urgent need
of medical attendance and treatment which surely cannot await the decision of
the suit after several years.
It was further observed:
.......not passing such an order, in our opinion, is not only more disastrous
but may defeat the entire object and purpose of the Act. Maintenance, as stated,
is the support to life having provision for food, clothing, residence,
education, medical attendance and treatment and shelter which, when denied, are
required immediately to be granted and cannot await the duration of a long
trial. It is relevant to notice in that behalf, that the provisions of Section
18(1) give absolute entitlement to a Hindu wife to be maintained by her husband
during her life lime. If this has to be ensured, urgent ad-interim and interim
orders as required under the circumstances of the case will have to be passed.
A right to pass an interim order need not always be exclusively conferred by the
provisions of a statute. Such a power as noticed herein before can be exercised
ex debito justitiae. Even under Article 226 of the Constitution, there is no
provision to grant interim relief. Still interim orders can be passed by the
High Court on oral application.
We may also notice that Section 125 of the Code of Criminal Procedure also does
not provide for grant of interim maintenance. Despite the same, the Apex Court
in Savitri v. Govind Singh, MANU/SC/0104/1985 : 1986CriLJ41 , held that by
necessary implication it shall be construed that power has been conferred on the
Magistrate to pass an order of interim maintenance. It was observed:
.................. Whenever anything is required to be done by law and it is
found impossible lo do that thing unless something not authorised in express
terms be also done then that something else will be supplied by necessary
intendment. Such a construction though it may not always be admissible in the
present case however would advance the object of the legislation under
consideration. A contrary view is likely to result in grave hardship to the
applicant, who may have no means to subsist until the final order is passed.
There is no room for the apprehension that the recognition of such implied power
would lead to the passing of interim orders in a large number of cases where the
liability to pay maintenance may not exist. It is quite possible that such
contingency may arise in a few cases but . the prejudice caused thereby to the
person against whom it is made is minimal as it can be set right quickly after
hearing both the parties.....
Such an incidental power is also conferred upon the Courts.
In Ramachandra v. Snehalata Dei (supra) a Division Bench of the Orissa High
Court dealing with the aspect of grant of interim maintenance under the
provisions of the Act followed the decision of this Court in Appanna's case
(supra). In the case before the Orissa High Court, marital relationship had been
terminated. The issues raised in the matter were barred by the principles of res
judicata. The Court although agreed with the decision of Madras High Court in
Abdul Rahman's case and dissented from the decision of the Calcutta High Court
in Tarani Gupta 's case (supra) as laying down ordinary rule, however, observed:
.........We agree that there may be cases where taking the extraordinary aspects
into consideration, the Court may proceed to exercise inherent powers to grant
interim relief. It is not appropriate to set limitations on Court's inherent
powers by indicting circumstances where it can be and where it cannot be
exercised.
The said decision, therefore, also recognised the power of the Court to grant
interim maintenance under Section 151 CPC. In Khadal Penthi v. Hulash Dei AIR 
1987 Ori 137, a Full Bench of the Orissa High Court noticed its earlier decision
In Ramachandra v. Snehalata (supra) and a subsequent decision of the same High 
Court in Gajapaii Naik v. Dukhnashini Naik, MANU/OR/0049/1984 : AIR1984Ori166 ,  
as also Rahman's case and held that denial of marital relationship by the
defendant would not disentitle the plaintiff from being entitled to interim
maintenance and the Court would have jurisdiction under Section 1511 CPC to
grant interim maintenance in such suits. It was observed:
..........this Court has been consistently taking the view that in a suit filed
by the wife for recovery of maintenance from her husband, the Court has power
under Section 151 of the Civil P.C. to grant interim maintenance during pendency
of the suit, but exercise of that power will depend upon facts and circumstances
in each case. Some of the relevant matters to be considered are whether there
are prima facie materials to establish marital relationship and whether the wife
is able to make out a case for grant of interim maintenance. In taking this
view, this Court has not accepted the extreme views taken by some other High
Courts, on being that the Court has no power at all under Section 151 to grant
interim maintenance in a suit for recovery of maintenance and the other that the
wife has the right to get interim maintenance notwithstanding the denial of
marital relationship between her and the defendant.
37. Referring to Section 24 of the Hindu Marriage Act, it was held:
Evidently this is not a suit under any of the provisions of the Hindu Marriage
Act, 1955. This being a suit of civil nature, the civil Court has jurisdiction
to entertain and try the suit under Section 9 of the Civil PC. The prayer for
interim maintenance cannot be one under Section 24 of the Hindu Marriage Act
which provides for grant of pendente life maintenance and expenses of the
proceeding. No suit is contemplated under Section. 18 of the Hindu Adoptions and
Maintenance Act as said section merely declares that a Hindu wife whether
married before or after the commencement of the said Act shall be entitled to be
maintained by her husband during her lifetime. In other words, the said section
merely recognises the right of a Hindu wife to be maintained by her husband,
which right was also recognised even under the texts of Hindu Law before
enactment of the aforesaid Act. Her right to be maintained as declared and
recognised by Section 18 of the said Act is an enforceable right which can be
enforced in a suit in the civil Court.........
We are in respectful agreement with the aforesaid view of the Orissa High Court.
We are of the view that construing the enforceable right under Section 18 of the
Act, having regard to the object of the Act, it must be held that the Court has
inherent power to grant interim maintenance. The Full Bench noticed the decision
of the Apex Court in Jaipur Mineral Development Syndicate v. Commissioner of
Income Tax, MANU/SC/0246/1976 : [1977]106ITR653(SC) , wherein it was held that  
every Court is constituted for the purpose of rendering justice according to law
and must be deemed to possess the necessary and inherent power in its very 
constitution to exercise all or such powers as may be necessary to do the right
and undo a wrong in the course of administration of justice. Inherent power of a
Court, as is well known, can be denied only by way of statutory interdiction.
There does not exist any provision either in the CPC or in the Act disabling the
Court from granting interim maintenance.
Incidentally, we may note that Motilal B. Naik, J., in Y. Satyanarayana v. Y.
Vijayalakshmi, MANU/AP/0695/1996 : 1996(3)ALT451 , having regard to the decision  
of the Apex Court in Savitri (supra) held that the decision of the Division
Bench of this Court in Gorivelli Appanna (supra) is not good law.
The decision of a Division Bench of this Court in Subrahmanyam v. A. Rama Devi
(supra) wherein one of us - R.M. Bapai, J., was a member was rendered in
different fact situation. It was observed that a petition for grant of interim
maintenance under Section 17 of the Family Courts Act, 1984 is not maintainable
and the proper provision for claiming interim maintenance is under Section 18 of
the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act. 
The Division Bench was also of the view that there was no provision in law
enabling the wife to claim maintenance under Section 151 CPC. However, we may  
observe that none of the authorities on which we have placed reliance above were
brought to the notice of the Division Bench. Therefore, we are unable to
subscribe to the view taken by the Division Bench. It may further be noticed
that even after arriving at the aforementioned conclusion the Division Bench
declined to interfere in the award of interim maintenance granted by the Family
Court on the ground that it was a maintenance matter.
In Shriram Bearings Limited v. ESI Corporation 1977 Lab. IC 1482, a Division
Bench of Patna High Court held that the Court constituted under Section 75 of
the Employees' State Insurance Act, has power to issue appropriate interim
relief. The said decision has been noticed by a Division Bench of this Court
recently in Ashok Leyland Limited, Ductron, Castings Limited v. Dy.
Tahsildar/Special Revenue Inspector (ESI) 200l (4) ALD 96.
In Income Tax Officer v. M.K. Mohammed Kunhi AIR 1967 SC 430, the Apex Court has   
held that the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal in exercise of its appellate
jurisdiction has incidental or ancillary power to stay the demand. Section 10(1)
of the Industrial Disputes Act also empowers the authority to grant such
ancillary or incidental power where the circumstances warrant for grant of
interim relief. (See Union of India v. Paras Laminates (P) Limited,
MANU/SC/0173/1991 : [1990]186ITR722(SC) .    
CONCLUSIONS:    
For the reasons aforementioned, we are of the opinion that the decision of this
Court in G. Appanna v. G. Seethamma reported in MANU/AP/0079/1972 : AIR1972AP62      
does not lay down the correct law and must be overruled. We are further of the
view that under Section 151 of the Code of Civil Procedure, the Court has
inherent power and jurisdiction to grant interim maintenance to the wife and
children.
We are also of the view that independent of the inherent power of the Court
under Section 151 CPC., even under the provisions of the Act itself, by
necessary implication, power has been conferred in the Court to grant interim
maintenance to the wife and minor children where circumstances so warrant and
justify to do justice on a prima facie satisfaction of the case on merits. In
such cases, the Court cannot decline to grant interim maintenance pendents lite
till the final adjudication of the controversy on merits.
Though it is alleged in the petition that the 1st respondent is working in a
Pharmaceutical Company at Hyderabad and earning Rs. 10,000/-, no material has  
been produced to that effect. However, in our view, that is a matter, which has
to be taken into consideration at the time of final adjudication of the
controversy on merits and also having regard to the fact that the 2nd respondent
being a mentally retarded person the petitioner has also a duty to look after
the welfare of his son. Having regard to the quantum of maintenance granted by
the learned Judge, Family Court, which, in our opinion, is absolutely necessary
for the maintenance of the 1st respondent and her mentally retarded child, it is
not a fit case where this Court in exercise of its revisional jurisdiction under
Section 115 of the Code of Civil Procedure can interfere with the same.
The Civil Revision Petition is accordingly dismissed. No order as to costs.
CRP.No.4495 of 2001  
N.V. Ramana, J. 
The reference came up for consideration before this Court for deciding the
question as to whether the ratio laid down in Garivelli Appanna v. Garivelli
Seethamma, MANU/AP/0079/1972 : AIR1972AP62 , is a good law?      
The points that arise for consideration are:
(1) Whether the provisions of the Hindu Adoption and Maintenance Act are
applicable in an interlocutory application claiming interim maintenance?
(2) Whether interim maintenance can be granted in exercise of the inherent
powers conferred by Section 151 of the Code of Civil Procedure?
(3) Whether Order XII, Rule 6 of the Code of Civil Procedure is applicable in
the event an application is filed under Section 151 of the Code of Civil
Procedure? 
I have had the benefit of perusing the elaborate and erudite judgment proposed
by My Lord, the Chief Justice, on behalf of the Full Bench. Since the learned
Chief Justice has succinctly dealt with the factual land legal aspects of the
matter in extenso, I do not want to dilate on those aspects once again. While I
am in respectful agreement with the conclusions reached and the reasons recorded
by the learned Chief Justice, I would like to add few words of my own.
Before dealing with the issues involved in the case under reference, it is just
and necessary to notice the definition of the word "maintenance", as defined
under Section 3(b(i) of the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 1956, which
reads:
(b) "maintenance" includes,---
(i) in all cases, provision for food, clothing, residence, education and medical
attendance and treatment."
The interpretation of the provision and its application with reference to
maintenance is recognition of the right of subsistence, support, assistance and
decent living, which one is entitled to and the other is bound by law to provide
the same. The Hindu Law, whether codified or uncodified, recognizes the right of
maintenance as a substantive right. The right to claim maintenance is dealt with
in Chapter III of the Hindu Marriage Act. Section 24 recognizes the right to
claim maintenance pendente life and expenses of the proceedings. Similarly,
under Section 125 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, the Court on an application
can grant interim maintenance,
In Savitri v. Govind Singh, MANU/SC/0104/1985 : 1986CriLJ41 , the learned Judges
of the Supreme Court, while considering the provisions of Section 125 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure regarding interim maintenance, pending final decision
in the proceedings, observed that the Courts have inherent power to grant
interim maintenance pending disposal of the main case. However, the quantum of
maintenance to be granted depends upon the fair needs of the person, who made 
the claim, and also the facts and circumstances, and relative merits of the
case.
As per the provisions of the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 1956, a wife
is entitled for maintenance irrespective of the fact her husband possesses any
property or not. It indicates that when a man marries a woman, it is an
obligation to maintain his wife. In this context it is apt to quote the
following words of "Manu":-"the aged parents, a virtuous wife, and an infant
child must be maintained even by doing a hundred misdeeds," 
The object and purpose of judicial function is to preserve and protect the
subject-matter and to see that relief sought is not allowed to be frustrated.
The Courts are entitled to interpret the Hindu Law so as not to affect the
paramount questions of public policy and without departing from the well-settled
principles of jurisprudence. In my opinion, while interpreting the personal law,
it is not safe to proceed with the case basing on mere technicalities or on the
basis of dictionary meaning assigned to a particular word, While dealing with
the right of wife to claim interim maintenance, the Court must keep in mind not
only the legal obligations, but also the moral and social obligations of
husband. In interpreting law, the Courts must mould law to meet the situations,
which are not anticipated by the Legislature in the fight of the consciousness
of the society.
It may be mentioned that, the doctrine of ancillary and incidental powers is
well recognised in Indian Law. The said doctrine postulates that, every body, be
it a Court or a Tribunal vested with judicial or quasi-judicial powers, is
endowed with ancillary and incidental powers as are necessary to discharge the
functions effectively for the purpose of doing complete justice between the
parties.
I may refer to the judgments of the Supreme Court in Grindlays Bank Limited v.
Central Industrial Tribunal 1980 SCC Supp (1) 420, Satnam Varma v. Union of
India, MANU/SC/0206/1984 : (1985)ILLJ79SC and Union of India v. Parasa 
Laminaates, MANU/SC/0173/1991 : [1990]186ITR722(SC) . In Grindlays Bank case    
(supra), the question, whether the Industrial Tribunal has got jurisdiction to
set aside the ex parte award or whether the same has become functus officio on
the expiry of 30 days from the date of publication of the ex parte award under
Section 17 of the Industrial Disputes Act, fell for consideration. The Supreme
Court observed that the Industrial Disputes Act is a piece of legislation to
ensure social justice to both the employers and the employees, and therefore,
while interpreting the provisions of the Industrial Disputes Act the Court
should interpret laws' to advance the cause of justice. After referring to
various provisions of the Industrial Disputes Act and Industrial Disputes
(Central) Rules, 1957, the Supreme Court held:-
"It is true that there is no express provision in the Act or the rules framed
thereunder giving the Tribunal to do so. But, it is a well known rule of
statutory construction that a Tribunal Of body should be considered to be
endowed with such ancillary and incidental powers as are necessary to discharge
Us functions effectively for the purpose of doing justice between the parties.
In a case of this nature, we are of the view that the Tribunal should be
considered as invested with such incidental and ancillary powers unless there is
any indication in a statute to the contrary. We do not find any such statutory
prohibition. On the other hand, there are indications to the contrary.
The dicta laid down in Grindalays Bank case (supra) was subsequently followed by
the Supreme Court in Satnam Verma case (supra) and Paras Laminates case (supra).   
In Paras Laminates case (supra) the question whether a Tribunal constituted
under a statute has powers to regulate its own procedure apart from the explicit
provisions came up for consideration before the Supreme Court in the context of
the powers exercised by a Bench of Customs, Excise and Gold (Control) Appellate 
Tribunal. After referring to the provisions of Section 129 of the Customs Act,
1962, the Supreme Court held as follows:
"There is no doubt that the Tribunal functions as a Court within the limits of
its jurisdiction. It has all !he powers conferred expressly by the statute.
Furthermore, being a judicial body, it has all those incidental and ancillary
powers, which are necessary to make fully effective the express grant of
Statutory powers. Certain powers are recognized as incidental and ancillary
powers, which are necessary to make fully effective the express grant of
statutory powers. Certain powers are recognised as incidental and ancillary, not
because they are inherent in the Tribunal, nor because its jurisdiction is
plenary, but because it is the legislative intent that the power, which is
expressly granted in the assigned field of jurisdiction, is efficaciously and
meaningfully exercised. The powers of the Tribunal are no doubt limited. Its
area of jurisdiction is clearly defined, but within the bounds of its
jurisdiction, it has all the powers expressly and impliedly granted. The implied
grant, of course, limited by the express grant and, therefore, it can only be
such powers as ore truly incidental and ancillary for doing all such act or
employing all such means as are reasonably necessarily to make the grant
effective. As stated in Maxwell on Interpretation of Statutes (11th Edn.) where
an Act confers a jurisdiction, it impliedly also grants the power of doing all
such acts, or employing such means, as are essentially necessary to its
execution."
A Hindu wife is entitled to live separately from her husband without forfeiting
her claim to maintenance, subject to fulfillment of conditions laid down under
Sub-sections (2) and (3) of Section 18 of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955. Section
4 of the Act gives overriding effect to the provisions of the Act. Section 4 of
the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955, reads as follows:
"Overriding effect of Act :--Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act-
(a) any text, rule or interpretation of Hindu Law or any custom or usage as a
part of that law in force immediately before the commencement of this Act shall
cease to effect with respect to any matter for which provision is made in this
Act.
(b) any other law in force immediately before the commencement of the Act shall
cease to have effect insofar as it is inconsistent with any of the provision
contained in this Act."
A bare reading of the above provision clearly indicates that the Hindu Law is
not static or staid, but is empiric and progressive. The Act provides right to
claim maintenance, which includes right to seek interim relief with reference to
the provisions of the Act and general provisions of the Hindu Law with the aid
and assistance of the inherent power conferred on the Court by Section 151 of
the Code of Civil Procedure. In my opinion, where new combination of
circumstances arose, it is incumbent on the Court to apply rule of law, which
could be derived from the general principles. The interpretation of law is not
merely for the determination of particular case but also in the interest of Law
as a science. As such, interpretation of law must be in accordance with Justice,
Equity and Good Conscience, and, more so, in furtherance of Justice. If the
Court prima facie comes to conclusion that the plaintiff/petitioner is entitled
to interim maintenance, it can award interim maintenance in the interest of
justice, without being fettered by orthodixical prejudices, by showing liberal
readiness to move with times.
The next point for consideration under reference is whether the interim
maintenance can be granted in exercise of inherent power of Court under Section
151 of the Code of Civil Procedure and whether Order XII, Rule 6 CPC is
applicable in the event an application under Section 151 of the Code of Civil
Procedure is made? 
The parties who suffer injury approach the Court for justice and for redressal
of their grievance. A duty is cast upon the Court in exercise its judicial power
to examine and determine the law on such grievance complained of, ascertain its
extent, and apply the remedy. The Courts are entertaining interlocutory
applications in the proceedings pending before it and making interlocutory
orders as may appear to be just and convenient. The ultimate intention is, the
relief sought should not be allowed to be frustrated. In Saviiri's case (supra),
it was observed by the learned Judges of the Supreme Court, as under:
'"In order to enjoy the fruits of the proceedings under Section 125, the
applicant should be alive till the date of the final order and that the
applicant can do in a large number of cases only if an order for payment of
interim maintenance is passed by the Court. Every Court must be deemed to 
possess by necessary intendment all such powers as are necessary to make its  
orders effective."
The inherent powers under Section 151 of the Code of Civil Procedure and the
powers conferred under the other provisions of Code of Civil Procedure i.e.,
under Section 94(e) are intended to do complete justice between the parties. A
conjoint reading of Sections 94(e) and 151 of the Code of Civil Procedure
clearly discloses that they empower the Courts to pass appropriate interim
orders as may appear to the Courts just and convenient to prevent the justice
being defeated. 'The object of the provisions is to preserve the rights of the
parties at the same place till their cause is adjudicated. As a matter of
principle if it is held that no interim maintenance can be awarded in
maintenances proceedings, it causes hardship to the parties and in some cases
there is the possibility that the main relief may also become infructuous, if
the party is not able to maintain herself pending proceedings. The law governing
grant of interlocutors order under the Code of Civil Procedure is now well
settled. In Morgan Stanley Mutual Fund v. Karhik Das, MANU/SC/0553/1994 :  
(1994)4SCC225 , the Apex Court laid down the following principles:
(a) Whether irreparable or serious mischief will ensure to the plaintiff;
(b) Whether the refusal of ex parte injunction would involve greater injustice
than the grant of it would involve;
(c) The Court will also consider the time at which the plaintiff first had
notice of the act complained so that making an improper order against a party in
his absence is prevented;
(d) The Court will consider whether the plaintiff had acquiesced for some time
and in such circumstances it will not grant exparte injunction;
(e) The Court would expect a party applying for ex parte injunction to show
utmost good faith in making the application;
(f) Even if granted, the ex parte injunction should be for a limited period of
time;
(g) General principles like prima facie case, balance of convenience and
irreparable loss would also be considered by the Court.
There are three factors either to grant or refuse to grant interim orders i.e.,
prima facie case, balance of convenience and irreparable injury. Order 12, Rule
6 of the Code of Civil Procedure contemplates decree on admission. In
maintenance cases, the grant of interim order depends upon the prima facie case
and any other relevant considerations cannot be equated with the relief to be
granted on admission under Order 12, Rule 6 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
There is no provision in the Code of Civil Procedure either inconsistent with or
prohibiting the exercise of inherent powers in granting interim relief. The
Court by expressly or necessary implications is empowered to grant interim
relief by exercising powers conferred under Sections 94(e) and 151 of the Code
of Civil Procedure.
The Supreme Court in Ramchand and Sons Sugar Mills v. Kanailal Bhargava AIR 1966   
SC 1897, had stated that inherent powers of the Court are in addition to and
supplementary to the powers expressly conferred under the Code of Civil
Procedure. 
In Cotton Corporation India v. United India Bank, MANU/SC/0375/1983 :
[1983]3SCR962 , the Apex Court held that inherent power of the Court under
Section 151 of the Code of Civil Procedure extends to grant of injunctions
beyond those provided under Order 39, Rule I of the Code of Civil Procedure.
A Division Bench of this Court in J. Sudhersana Devi v. J. Vasudeva Reddy1990
(1) LS 128, held that interim maintenance can be granted in exercise of the
inherent powers under Section 151 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
In C.V. Satyaitarayana and others v. V. Venkata Ratnam and others 1987(2) APLJ 
236, a Division Bench of this Court held that in view of the decision in
Savitri's case (supra), the decision rendered in Garivelli Appanna 's case
(supra) is no longer good law.
A Full Bench of the Orissa High Court in Khadal Penthy v. Hulash Dei and Anr.,
MANU/OR/0036/1989 : AIR1989Ori137 (FB), held:   
"since the claim for maintenance is to be filed in a suit, the civil Courts
which have jurisdiction to try the suits of civil nature, have the power under
Section 151 of the Code of Civil Procedure to grant interim maintenance during
the pendency of the suit."
A Division Bench of the Bombay High Court in Atul Sashi Kuntar Mude v. Niranjan
Atul Mude AIR 1998 Bom. 234, had an occasion to interpret Sections 18, 19 and 20 
of the Act and held that the Courts have power to grant interim maintenance.
The Supreme Court in Manohar Lal Chopra v. Raj Bahadur Rao Raja Seth Hiralal, 
MANU/SC/0056/1961 : AIR1962SC527 , held:    
"Section 151 itself says that nothing in the Code shall be deemed to limit or
otherwise affect the inherent power of the Court to make orders necessary for
the ends of justice. In the face of such a clear statement, it is not possible
to hold that the provisions of the Code control the inherent power by limiting
it or otherwise affecting it. The inherent power has not been conferred upon the
Court; it is a power inherent in the Court by virtue of its duty to do justice
between the parties before it. Further when the Code itself recognizes the
existence of the inherent power of the Court, there is no question of implying
any powers outside the limits of the Code."
So, there cannot be any doubt regarding the inherent powers of the civil Courts
in the mailers before it. The civil Court can exercise such inherent powers with
the only limitation that it should not be inconsistent with other provisions of
the Code of Civil Procedure or contrary to any other law. In the light of the
above discussion, it must be held that granting interim maintenance in a suit
for maintenance is not inconsistent with any provision of the Code of Civil
Procedure or contrary to any other law.
For the aforementioned reasons, 1 am not able to agree with the view taken in
Garivelli Appanna 's case (supra). The reference is answered accordingly

?1.2000 (1) ALT 351; Abdul Rehman v. Tajunissa Begum,  
2.AIR 1953 Mad. 420; Ashok Leyland Limited, Ductron, Castings Limited v. Dy.
Tahsildar/Special Revenue Inspector (ESI),
3.2001 (4) ALD 96;   Atul Sashikant Mude v. Niranjana Atul Mude, AIR 1998 Bom. 
234; Bhagat Singh v. Jagbir Sawhney, 
4.AIR 1941 Cal. 670; Rama Rao v. State of A.P.,
5.2001 (4) ALD 554;  C.V. Satyanarayana and Ors. v. Venkata Ratnam and Ors.,  
6.1987 (2) APLJ 236; Chinese Tannery Owners', Association v. Makhan Lal, 
7.AIR 1952 Cal. 560; Cotton Corporation India v. United India Bank,
8.AIR 1983 SC 1272;  Dhaneshwar Nath v. Ghanshyam Dhar,    
9.AIR 1940 All. 185; Firm Bichchha Rambaburam v. Firm Baldeo Sahai Surajmal,  
10.AIR 1940 All. 241;G.Appanna v. G. Seethamma,   
11.AIR 1972 AP 62;   Gajapati Naik v. Dukhnashini Naik,
12.AIR 1984 Orissa 166; Garivelli Appanna v. Garivelli Seethamma,
13.AIR 1972 AP62;    Grindlays Bank Limited v. Central Industrial Tribunal,
14.1980 SCC Supp(1) 420; Gopal Saran v. Sita Devi, 
15.AIR 1924 Patna 69; Gouri Gupta v. Tarani Gupta,
16.AIR 1968 Cal. 305; Income Tax Officer v. M.K. Mohammed Kunhi,  
17.AIR 1967 SC 430;   Khadal Penthi v. Hulash Dei,
18.AIR 1987 Orissa 137;Khadal Penthy v. Sulash Dei, 
19.AIR 1989 Ori. 137;  J.Sudhersana Devi v. J. Vasudeva Reddy,
20.1990 (1) LS 128;    Jaipur Mineral Development Syndicate v. Commissioner of
Income Tax, 
21.AIR 1977 SC 1348;   Latchanna Dora v. Malludora, 
22.(1940) 2 Mad LJ 572=AIR 1941 Mad. 55; Manoharlal v. Seth Hiralal,
23.AIR 1962 SC 527;    Morgan Stanley Mutual Fund v. Karhik Das, 
24.1994 (4) SCC 225;   Nawabganj Sugar Mills v. Union of India,
25.AIR 1976 SC 1152;   Padam Sen v. State of Uttar Pradesh, 
26.AIR 1961 SC 218;    Ramchand and Sons Sugar Mills v. Kanailal Bhargava, 
27.AIR 1966 SC 1897;   Ramchandra v. Snehalata Dei,  
28.AIR 1977 Orissa 96; Satnam Varma v. Union of India,
29.AIR 1985 SC 294;    Savitri v. Govind Singh,
30.AIR 1986 SC 984;    Shriram Bearings Limited v. ESI Corporation,
31.1977 Lab.IC 1482;   Siddappa Vasappa Kuri v. Special Land Acquisition
Officer,
32.JT2001 (9) SC 176;  Subramanian v. Seetarama,  
33.AIR 1949 Mad. 104;  Tarani Gupta v. Gouri Gupta,
34.AIR 1968 Cal. 567;  Union of India v. Paras Laminates (P) Limited,
35.(1990) 4 SCC 453;   Vidya Charan Shukla v. Tamil Nadu Olympic Association, 
36.AIR 1991 Mad. 323;  Y.Satyanarayana v. Y. Vijayalakshmi, 
37.1996 (3) ALT 451 
