

THE HONOURABLE SRI JUSTICE D.S.R.VARMA          
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 532 OF 1994      

2-7-2001

 M.SRINIVASULU AND ANOTHER        



THE STATE OF A.P.  REP., BY    
THE PUBLIC PROSECUTOR,       
HIGH COURT OF A.P., HYDERABAD        


Counsel for the Appellants         : MR. M.LAXMANA SHARMA      

Counsel for the Respondent: PUBLIC PROSECUTOR      


:O R D E R: 
        This appeal is filed against the judgment of the II Additional
Metropolitan Sessions Judge, Hyderabad in S.C.No.167 of 1993 dated 05.07.1994  
convicting the appellant Nos 1 and 2 herein, under Section 304-B and sentencing
them for a period of 10 years rigorous imprisonment and a fine of Rs1000/- and 7
years rigorous imprisonment and a fine of Rs.500/- respectively.
        The case of the prosecution briefly is as follows:
        The deceased Padma @ Pitchamma married to accused No.1 Sreenivasulu on      
21.05.19
89.  At the time of marriage, PW1-father of the deceased gave Rs.10,000/- in
cash, five tolas of gold, other household articles worth Rs.3000/-and Rs.1200/-
towards clothes to accused No.1.  Accused No.1 was employed as sub-staff of 
Karnataka Bank, Secunderabad.  Accused No.2 is the mother of accused No.1 and   
she used to visit accused No.1 in the city and did not allow the deceased to
fulfil conjugal obligations. At the instigation of accused No.2, accused No.1
has demanded Rs.5,000/- more from the parents of the deceased to purchase a  
Scooter as additional dowry.  PW1-father of the deceased paid the said amount to
accused No.1. In spite of the same, both the accused made repeated demands for 
additional dowry upon the deceased. On one occasion, a sum of Rs.1,000/- and on 
another occasion a sum of Rs.2,000/- was paid by PW1 to the accused.  But the 
accused persons did not stop ill-treatment and harassment towards the deceased.
After some time, when the deceased and her parents came to know that accused No   
2 was performing another marriage to accused no.1, immediately they went to the
house of the accused but accused No 1 refused to take the deceased into the
house. Accused No.2 ill-treated the deceased and both the accused asked the 
deceased to go back to her parents house.  Accused No.1 threatened to immolate 
the deceased and accused No. 2 threatened to poison the deceased and insisted to 
stay in the house of in-laws. Therefore, the deceased was taking shelter in the
house of her parents and about 2 months prior to the incident, on the assurance
given by both the accused before the elders, the deceased joined accused Nos.1
and 2 to fulfil conjugal obligations.  In spite of the same, the accused
continued ill-treatment and harassment against the deceased for more dowry.     
Because of the persistent ill-treatment and cruelty meted out by the accused
towards the deceased, on 17.09.1992 at about 9.30 a.m., the deceased set herself
ablaze and died with 100% burn injuries in Gandhi Hospital while undergoing
treatment.
        In support of its case, the prosecution has examined in all 11 witnesses,
got marked Exs.P1 to P16 and Mos.1 and 2.  For defence, Ex.D1 and Ex.D2 were   
marked. PW1 and PW2 are father and mother of the deceased respectively. PW3 is   
the relative of PWs 1 and 2. PW4 is the elder brother of the deceased.  PW5 is
the sister of the deceased.  PW6 is the caste elder.  PW7 is a panch witness.
PW8 is the inquest panch. PW9 is the Mandal Revenue Officer who conducted   
inquest over the dead body of the deceased. PW10 is the Doctor who conducted 
autopsy over the dead body of the deceased and  PW11 is the Investigating
Officer.
        PW1, father of the deceased deposed that at the time of marriage of the
deceased with accused No.1, a sum of Rs.10,000/- , three tulas of gold in
addition to the household articles,  Rs.1200/- for the purchase of clothes and
clothes worth Rs.1,000/- were given to the accused.  The marriage was performed
on 21.05.1989. For two years after the marriage, they lived together happily.
There after, accused No.1 shifted his residence to Kawadiguda, Secunderabad.
Even after that, the deceased and accused no.1 were living happily.  Later on
accused No.2 came to the house of accused No.1and the deceased and started   
residing with them.  Thereafter, accused No.1 started demanding Rs.5,000/- as
additional dowry for purchasing a scooter from the parents of the deceased.     
To make the deceased happy, the said amount was paid by PW1 on 26.06.1991.  Even    
after the payment of the additional amount of Rs.5,000/-, A1 did not care the
deceased.  He even stopped to come to Gundala Village. After some time, the
deceased went to the residence of A1 and lived for 12 days with him.
Subsequently on 17.09.1992, he received a telephone call that the  deceased
        died with burn injuries.
PW1 along with PW2 and others came to Hyderabad and found the deceased dead with     
burn injuries. He further stated that on one occasion accused No.1 expressed
that if the deceased was allowed to stay with him, he will pore kerosene and
burn her to death. Upon that the deceased expressed that she would prefer to die
at the place of her husband and was not willing to leave her husband. Some how
he persuaded the deceased and took her to his house. 
Exs.P2 to P7 are the letters addressed by the deceased to her parents.  In the
cross-examination he admitted execution of Ex.D1-letter addressed by him to  the
President, Gangaputra Sangam, Gundala Village.  The contents of the said letter      
are that PW1 had received an amount of Rs.12,000/- from the father of accused
No.1 and it was further agreed by the father of accused No.1 before the elders,
to give the balance of articles on 01.01.1993 i.e., 1) Rs.5,000/- which was
given at the time of marriage towards clothes and 2) 50 grams of gold.  It was
further mentioned in the said letter that if those articles are given on
01.01.1993 as agreed, he would withdraw the case. Further it appears from the
said letter that the father of A1 would pay Rs.5,000/- towards the marriage
expenditure.  Ex.D2 another letter discloses that some articles including cash,
gold, etc. were given back to PW1.      PW1 also stated that on a letter addressed
by the accused to bring his daughter to Gundala, PW1 and PW2 took their daughter 
to Gundala.      From Gundala she was taken to Hyderabad by the accused.  For two  
months she stayed with the accused at Hyderabad. PW2 went and brought the   
deceased for a festival to their village.  Thereafter his eldest daughter and
the deceased daughter went to Hyderabad.  Thereafter his deceased daughter did
not return.
        The evidence of PW2-mother of the deceased is also on the same lines. It
was categorically stated by her that they received an amount of Rs.37,000/-
which was given on different occasions.
        PW3 who is the brother of PW1 deposed that he gave Rs.5000/- to A1 which  
was given to him by PW1.  He further states that the said amount was given to
accused No.1 for the purpose of purchasing a scooter.  From the cross
examination of any of these witnesses nothing could be elicited to describe
their trust-worthiness.
PW4 who is the brother of the deceased  also speaks about giving of
Rs.10,000/- cash, five tolas of gold, amount for suit and household articles.
He admits the signature of his father i.e., PW1 on Ex.D1.
        PW5, the sister of the deceased also speaks about payment of Rs.5000/- to
accused No.1. 
        PW6 who is a caste elder deposed that in the panchayat held on 1-1-1992
with regard to the deceased,  the accused agreed to take the deceased to his
house and accordingly the deceased was sent to the house of the accused and on 
that occasion an amount of Rs.5000/- was given to the accused as demanded by  
him.  It was elicited in the cross examination that his daughter was married to
the brother of the deceased.
        It is evident from the above evidence on record that the deceased was
subjected to harassment frequently and in that process there was a specific
demand of Rs.5000/- and the same was paid by the parents of the deceased. It is
further admitted that the marriage of the deceased was performed on         21-
5-1989.  The deceased        died  on      
17-9-1992.  Therefore, it is evident that the death of the deceased has taken
place within a period of 7 years from the date of the marriage.
         Now it is the specific case of the prosecution that after the marriage of
the
deceased with accused No.1 there was persistent demand for additional dowry and 
she was not even allowed to live with him.  An additional dowry amount of Rs.500
0/- was paid on 26-6-1991 from that date, till her death she lived only for 12 d
ays with accused No.1.  In the cross examination, persistent harassment could no
t be successfully refuted.  The evidence of PW1 and PW2 discloses that while the
 deceased was taken to the house of accused No.1, the deceased was not allowed t 
o live with him.         But ultimately only at the interference of the mediators it
wa 
s agreed by the accused to take the deceased that too only after         payment of
Rs.
5000/-. It is also the evidence of  PW1 and PW2 that on couple of occasions
an a
dditional amount of Rs.1000/- and Rs.2000/- was also paid to the accused.  Even
assuming that the accused had been making demand for additional dowry of Rs.5000  
/- to purchase a scooter, it is to be examined whether the said act amounts to h
arassment or there was any harassment in any other manner.  The answer to this
is available in Exs P2 to P7.  Of course, there is some controversy with regard
to Ex.P7. Exs.P6 and P5 were written by the father of accused No.1.  Therefore,
Exs.P5 and P6 may not be really relevant to establish the cruelty or harassment
on the part of the accused. The next question is what is the effect of Exs.P2,
P3 and P4 even if the other exhibits i.e.,P5, P6 and P7 are eschewed from
consideration.  Exs,P2, P3 and P4 are the letters addressed by the deceased on 
different dates to her parents. The contents of the letters are to the effect
that by 1st the deceased wanted money urgently from her parents, that both the
deceased and accused No1 would come to their house. If Pw1 does not pay the  
amount she does not know what will happen to her, that she had become sandwich  
between her parents and her in-laws.  It was also further categorically stated
that A1 was raising dispute for money and ultimately she demands her father that
if at all he has love and affection towards her, he would give the amount.  From
the date of her marriage, she was subjected to so many troubles and she further
described A1 as demon.  She further preferred to have a marriage with some      
"madiga" person  rather than to marry A1. She makes a request to PW1 that he 
should not come to her house nor she would  go to his house as she was sandwich 
between these two families.  In Ex.P4 also she expresses deep sense of anguish
of her marriage with A1.         The contents need not be extracted because the
trial court has extracted verbatim in its judgment.  I have gone through the
said judgment. The contents of Exs P2 to P4 also discloses that the deceased was
being subjected to cruelty and mental agony and she was suffering from deep
sense of insecurity between these two families particularly in the hands of A1
and A2 and she was never happy.  In other words, Exs P2 to P4 speak about the 
conduct and behaviour of A1.
        The trial court had further discussed about Ex.P7.  It was noticed at page
3 of Ex.P7 which was also a letter addressed by the deceased that the first
accused declared that he was going to have a 2nd marriage by divorcing the
deceased. However, there was a dispute raised by the defence with regard to
Ex.P7.  A categorical finding was given by the trial court upon the contents of
Ex.P7 as well as the hand writing, that the allegation made in Ex.P7 cannot be
ruled out as created for the purpose of this case.       It was further observed
by the trial court that the said allegation has got a sequence from the letters
written by the deceased on earlier occasions.   Therefore, it was found that it
cannot be concluded that Ex.P7 was a concocted letter written for the purpose of
this case that in as much as the said letter was found to be not signed by the
deceased.  I am not inclined to attach much significance to this document.
Nonetheless as already found by me that Exs. P2, P3 and P4 and their contents 
would speak about the amount of harassment and mental agony suffered by the  
deceased in the hands of A1 and A2.  A significant fact to be noted  is that it
is not the case of the defence at any point of time that Exs P2, P3 and P4 are
not written by the deceased at all.  In such a case there is absolutely no
reason to disbelieve the contents of those letters addressed by the deceased to
PW1 and further the contents of the said letters are totally in corroboration
with the evidence of prosecution witnesses particularly PW1 and PW2.
        Therefore, it can safely be concluded that the accused are responsible for
the death of the deceased in as much as the death of the deceased was caused due 
to the cruelty, harassment and mental agony suffered in the hands of the
accused.  Therefore, for the above reasons, I am convinced that the trial court
has rightly discussed all these aspects before convicting A1 for the offences
punishable under Sections 304 B and 498 A of I.P.C.
        Now, it is to be examined whether accused No.2 is also responsible or not.
The evidence on record reveals that there is no specific statement made by any
of the prosecution witnesses viz., Pws 1 to 6 against A2 nor it is the case of
PW1 and PW2 who are the parents of the deceased that A2 had played an active  
role provoking A1 or forcing PWs.1 and 2 to give more money nor there is any
allegation that A2 subjected the deceased to any cruelty, except a blanket
allegation that the deceased was also subjected to cruelty at the hands of A2
also.  Nevertheless Exs P2, P3 and P4 do reveal that A2 was also involved.      I
already discussed about the quality of Exs.P2, P3 and P4.  Only in ExP3 letter
addressed by the deceased there was a mention of A2.  From that solitary
expression in one letter it is very difficult to gauge the quantity and quality
of harassment meted out to the deceased in the hands of A2.  In the normal
parlance any member of either of the two families would be referred to in
plurality.  Therefore, just because there is a reference of mother in law it
cannot be safely be inferred that A2 also had an active and vital role in the
alleged cruelty towards the deceased.
        Therefore, in these circumstances, I am of the considered view that the
prosecution could not successfully prove the case against A2 and as such A2 is
entitled to benefit of doubt.
As pointed out by the Supreme Court in KANS RAJ V STATE OF PUNJAB1 that "for the     
fault of the husband, the in laws or the other relations cannot, in all cases,
be held to be involved in the demand of dowry.  In cases where such accusations 
are made, the overt acts attributed to persons other than husband are required
to be proved beyond reasonable doubt.  By mere conjectures and implications such
relations cannot be held guilty for the offence relating to dowry deaths.  A
tendency has, however, developed for roping in all relations of the in laws of
the deceased wives in the matters of dowry deaths which, if not discouraged is
likely to affect the case of the prosecution even against the real culprits.    
In their over enthusiasm and anxiety to seek conviction for maximum people, the
parents of the deceased have been found to be making the efforts for involving
other relations which ultimately weaken the case of the prosecution even against
the real accused."
        Therefore, in view of the above observations and also in view of the
evidence on record against A2 she cannot be held responsible for the offences
punishable under Sections 304(B) and 498-A also.  At this stage the learned
counsel for the appellants vehemently submits that Exs,P2 to P7 are not seized
by the police during the course of investigation and on the contrary, only
during the course of trial those documents were brought on record.   However, he
fairly admits that there is no legal embargo prohibiting admission of such
letters in cases like the one on hand.  Further he places heavy reliance on
Ex.P7 letter which was not signed.  In this regard I already discussed about the
document ExP7 letter and its veracity.   The trial court also had considered
elaborately as regards Ex.P7 letter.  However, I also did not rely on the Exs P5
to P7 inspite of reliance placed by the trial court.  I am of the considered
view even after eschewing ExsP5, P6 and P7 from consideration Exs.P2, P3 and P4  
are sufficient documentary evidence which corroborates the oral testimony of the
prosecution witnesses particularly PW1 and PW2.  Further there is not even a
suggestion by the defence during entire cross examination of PW1 and PW2 with 
regard to veracity of Exs P2, P3 and P4.  The only cross examination is with
regard to the veracity of Ex.P7.        Ex.P7 and its veracity was eliminated from
consideration.  Therefore, I do not find any force in the above submission.
        Accordingly I find that the judgment of the trial court is well reasoned
in so far as A1 is concerned and in-so-far as a A2 is concerned benefit of doubt
shall be extended in view of the material available on record and also in the
light of the judgment referred to supra.  Therefore, she is entitled to
acquittal for the offences under Section 304 B and 498 A.
Coming to the quantum of punishment awarded against A1 that is imprisonment for 
ten years under Section 304 B and 498 A is concerned I have examined the 
relevant record and found that the accused was an young man aged about 29 years 
when the offence was committed.  He was an employee at that time.  Whether he is 
in service or not is not known. In all probability, he might have lost his job
also.   Having regard to the circumstances, I hold that the punishment imposed
against A1 is slightly on higher side.  Accordingly I reduce the punishment of
rigorous imprisonment  from  10 years to 7 years.
        In the result, the appeal is partly allowed and the judgment of the Trial
court is modified as below.
The conviction and sentence recorded against A2 on all counts is set aside and
her bail bonds shall stand cancelled.  A1 is convicted under sections 304 B and
498-A of I.P.C. But the sentence is reduced from 10 years rigorous
imprisonment to 7 years rigorous imprisonment and fine of Rs.1000/- is imposed
in addition to the amount already imposed and in default he shall undergo 6
months Simple Imprisonment.                                                                     
                                                                                                        
                        2-7-2001




?1 AIR 2000 SC 2324  
