

THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE B. SUBHASHAN REDDY  THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE GHULAM MOHAMMED                      
CMA No. 1548 of 1998  

06-04-2001 

Manchala Rushikesh  


Terala Pradeep Kumar and others 


<GUARDIANS AND WARDS ACT, 1890 - - Ss.19 and 25  - - Custody of minor Children -     
- Petition by natural father - -      Wife committed suicide leaving behind
twins of ten months old.

Burden lies on the person opposing application for custody of ward to
prove that welfare of the ward would be better served by keeping the ward away
from applicant - - Guardian Onus is heavier when the guardian happens to be the
very father.

>HELD:  

From a perusal of Section 25 of the Act, it is clear that it is attracted
only if a ward leaves or is removed from the custody of a guardian....The
guardian contemplated by this section includes every kind of guardian known to
law.... From the above, it is clear that the father is the guardian of the minor
until he is found unfit to be the guardian of the minor.  The welfare of the
minor is paramount consideration while ordering their custody. In view of the
section 25 of the Act,  the onus  is on  the person  who opposes
the application by a guardian for the custody of a ward under this section to
make out that the welfare of the wards be better served by  its being kept out
of the custody of its guardian and retained in the custody of the person against
whom the application is made.  This onus is particularly heavy when the guardian
is the father of the child.   Likewise, under section 19 the burden of proof to
deny the natural father the custody of his child would be very heavy to
establish his unfitness and the court will require very strong reasons for
interference with the father's right to custody.


Counsel for the Petitioners       : M/s. C. Poornaiah & Co.

Counsel for respondents   : Mr.Vijay Kumar Heroor.



:Order:

Judgment: (Per GHULAM MOHAMMED, J )       
The unsuccessful petitioner-appellant preferred this appeal against the
order dated 22.4.1998 in O.P.No.801 of 1994 on the file of the Principal
District Judge, Ranga Reddy.
The above O.P.No.801 of 1994 was preferred by the appellant-natural father
of the wards, under section 25 of the Guardian and Wards Act, ( for short "the
Act" ),  for custody of minor children by name Shravani and Shravanti.
For the purpose of convenience,  the parties are addressed as petitioner
and respondents as per their array in O.P.No.801 of 1994.
The petitioner married the deceased on 12.9.1983 as per the Hindu rites
and customs at Kanchibhavan, Ramkote, Hyderabad.  Smt. Geetha joined the   
petitioner for marital life at petitioner's house. Smt. Geetha gave birth to
twins namely Shravani and Shravanthi on 6.9.1986 at Swapna Nursing Home,  
Hyderabad. The cradle ceremony of the twins was performed  at her mother's house
and subsequently Smt. Geetha came to the petitioner's house.
It is stated that petitioner's family is a joint family headed by their father
Manchala Shankaraiah who, however, died on 23.5.1991.  Smt. Geetha lived with 
the petitioner happily till 23.7.1987.  On 21.7.1987 Smt. Geetha and the
petitioner visited the house of the respondents for attending annual ceremony of
father of Smt. Geetha and they returned to Bhongir.  It is further stated that
on 23.7.1987 on the midnight Smt. Geetha committed suicide. It is stated that a
partnership business in the name of Shi
Radhakrishna Tiles factory consisting of the brother of the petitioner, her
sister's husband, namely Uppalanchi Muralidhar Rao and V. Lingam ran into losses
and came to be closed.  Smt.  Geetha demanded her sister's husband Muralidhar 
Rao  and her sister to settle the affairs of the said factory for which they did
not respond and her brothers and mother did not extent the support of her
demand.  Having disgusted with the attitude of the respondents she committed
suicide.
It is further stated that the minor children were ten months old as on the
date of the death of Smt. Geetha.  On the morning of 24.7.1987 all the
respondents came to Bhongir and without proper enquiries with the petitioner and
other members of his family, the 1st respondent lodged a complaint in Bhongir
Police Station.    The Police registered a case against the petitioner and other
members of his family under section 304-B IPC.  After competition of the
investigation the police filed a final report stating that it is a mistake of
fact.  The respondents have taken the children to their house at Hyderabad and
brought them back to Bhongir on the next day and they requested the petitioner
to show extra care on the children.  The children were with them for six months
and an amount of Rs.1,00,000/- each in the name of the children was deposited by
the petitioner in UTI Children Growth Fund.
 Having noticed this deposit, the respondents approached the petitioner and
requested him to send the children to their house for some time on the ground
that the petitioner did not recover from mental shock due to sudden demise of
his wife.    They promised the petitioner to send the children once or twice in
a week to be with him for a day or two.  The petitioner reluctantly conceded to
the request of the respondents. The respondents have kept up their promise for
one year and later changed their mind and did not permit the petitioner to visit
their house to see the children.  The petitioner demanded the respondents to
send back his children.  But the respondents postponed the matter on one pretext
or the other and got them admitted in Princeton Public School, Hyderabad. The
petitioner used to visit the school to see the children but the respondents did
not even like his visits and informed the school authorities not to permit the
petitioner to see the children.  Thus, it is stated that the respondents have
kept the children away from the petitioner in a planned manner.
It is further stated by the petitioner that during his visits to school he came
to know that the respondents 1 and 3 admitted the children by changing their
surnames and styling the children as their own daughters. When the petitioner
tried to take copies of the school records such as admission register, the
respondent filed a petition on 10.4.1993 with false allegations that the
petitioner is trying to harass them and that he committed murder of their
sister.
 The petitioner got issued a legal notice on 17.6.1993 to the respondents
directing them to send back the Wards to him, for which the  respondent got
issued a reply denying the right of the petitioner for custody of the children.
Hence, the present O.P. was filed by the natural father of the Wards for return
of the custody of the wards from the respondents.
The respondents filed a counter opposing the application of the
petitioner.    It is pertinent to note that the respondents have not disputed
that the petitioner is natural father of the minor children.   It is stated that
the wards were resided at Bhongir with the petitioner till 24.7.1987 on which
day their mother was killed by the petitioner and members of his family.  The
children were aged about 10 months as on the date of death of their mother and
they never stayed at Bhongir after 24.7.1987. The contention of the petitioner
that Smt. Geetha lived happily with the petitioner till the mid-night of
23.07.1987 is utterly false.  The petitioner and the member of his family
harassed Geetha for more dowry and subjected her to un-toleratable mental agony
and cruelty. On      21-7-1987, when the deceased Geetha visited Saroornagar,
Hyderabad for attending funeral ceremony of her father Ramnath Guptha, the
deceased disclosed her mother about the cruel attitude and treatment of the
petitioner and members of his family.
It is further stated that in order to escape from the clutches of law, the
petitioner started pasteurizing the brutal murder of Geetha as suicide and that
the respondent No.1 has filed a complaint with S.H.O. Bhongir Police Station who
registered the case in Crime No.88 of 1987 under section 304B IPC against the
petitioner and members of his family. It is the case of the respondents that the
police did not conduct any further investigation and did not record statements
of any witnesses, and since there was no progress in the case, the respondent
no.1 filed a petition before the police Bhongir and also in the Court of
Judicial First Class Magistrate, Bhongir for necessary action and that
application was rejected.  Since the date of death of Geetha the minor children
have been staying under custody of respondent No.1 and they were neither sent by
the respondents on any occasion nor taken to Bhongir by the petitioner.   It is
stated in the counter that the petitioner and his family members decided to get
rid of burden of the children and them gave minor children to the respondent 1
and 3 in adoption for which the respondents have agreed by receiving the wards
in the presence of well wishers and the petitioner also gave a written
declaration  Ex.B.1 dated  2.2.1988 ratifying the earlier adoption.
It is further stated that the respondents have sent elaborate reply to the
petitioner's notice stating that the petitioner has no right to demand the
custody of the children.  The petitioner having not taken any steps at any point
of time is claiming custody of the wards with a view to swallow  the money
invested in the welfare of the children and he has no locus standi to claim the
same. 
On the above pleadings, the parties have adduced the evidence.  On behalf
of the petitioner P.Ws.1 to 4 were examined and Exs.A.1 to A.40 were marked.
P.W.1 is the petitioner-natural father of the wards, P.W.2 is the younger
brother of P.W.1, P.W.3 is sister-in-law of P.W.1 and P.W.4 is friend of P.W.1
who deposed that no proposal for adoption of minor girls was discussed and
dispute the last three sentences regarding adoption of minors in Ex.B.1.
The respondents examined RWs.1 to 3 and marked Exs.B.1 to B.68.  R.W.1 who     
is maternal uncle, R.W.2 friend of R.W.1 who is also attestor of Ex.B.1, and
R.W.3 friend of R.W.1 and also attestor of Ex.B.1,  and marked  Exs.B.1 to B.68.
On the above pleadings, the trial Court framed an issue  as

under:

"   The point for consideration is : Whether the petitioner is entitled to
custody  of minor children Shravani and Shravanthi ? "


The lower Court on consideration of the evidence, declined to grant
custody of the wards to the petitioner.  Hence, the present appeal by the
petitioner.
Learned counsel for the appellant contended that the learned Judge  has
not considered the matter in proper perspective and  without noticing the fact
that the father being the natural and lawful guardian having a preferential
right to the custody of the minor children, the lower Court has erred in
observing that the petitioner has not taken any interest of the wards.  It is
further contended that the observation of the learned Judge that the petitioner
has not evinced any interest is based on surmises and conjectures and in  fact
the evidence adduced by the petitioner Exs.A.1 to A.40 would show that he showed
interest for the welfare of the children and he is not unfit to be the guardian
of the children.  It is further contended by the learned  counsel for the
petitioner that the lower court  ought to have noticed that once it is not
disputed that the father is not fit to be the natural guardian, it is presumed
that the children's interest will be properly protected by the father and that
the learned Judge  by placing undue reliance on Ex.B.1, which is a declaration
given by the petitioner, erroneously held that since the date of declaration the
petitioner ceased to have any interest over the property of minor children.  It
is the case of the petitioner that the last three sentences in Ex.B.1 relating
to adoption of minor girls were introduced subsequent to obtaining of his
signature.
On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondents supported the order
under appeal. The learned counsel for the respondents contended that the trial
court having noticed about the care and custody and also welfare of the children
who are staying with the maternal uncle since the death of their mother, has
rightly dismissed the petition.
The legal controversy thus lies in a narrow compass namely whether the
petitioner who is the natural father of the wards is entitled to the custody of
the wards the provisions of the Act.  To decide the same it is expedient to
examine the relevant provisions of the Act.
The relevant provision is section 17 and 19 of the Act.  Section 17 provides for
matters to be considered by the Court in appointing guardian and while section
19 deals with guardians not to be appointed in certain cases.
"  17 (1) In appointing or declaring the guardian of a minor, the Court shall,
subject to the provisions of this Section, be guided by what, consistently with
the law to which the minor is subject, appears in the circumstances to be for
the welfare of the minor.
(2) In considering what will be for the welfare of the minor, the Court shall
have regard to the age, sex and religion of the minor, the character and
capacity of the proposed guardian and his nearness of kin to the minor, the
wishes, if any, of a deceased parent, any existing or previous relations of the
proposed guardian with the minor or his property.
(3) ...
Section 19 reads as follows :
" Nothing in this chapter shall authorize the court to appoint or to declare a
guardian of the property of a minor whose property is under the superintendence
of a court of Wards or to appoint and declare a guardian of the person.
(a) of a minor who is a married female and whose husband is not, in the opinion
of the court, unfit to be guardian of her person, or
(b) of a minor whose father is living and is not, in the opinion of the court,
unfit to be guardian of the person of the minor, or
(c) .....

The issue relating to this aspect was considered by the Apex Court in  ROSY
JACOB v. JACOB A. CHAKRAMAKKAL ( (1) 1973 SCC   840 ). The Supreme Court in this       
case has held  that from a perusal of  Section 25 of the Act, it is  clear that
it is attracted only if a ward leaves or is removed from the custody of a
guardian of his person and the court is empowered  to make an order for the
return of the ward to his guardian if it is of the opinion that it will be for
the welfare of the ward to return to the custody of his guardian.  The Court is
entrusted with a judicial discretion to order return of the ward to the custody
of his guardian, if it forms an opinion that such return is for the ward's
welfare.  The use of the words " ward" and " guardian" leaves little doubt that
it is the guardian who, having the care of the person of his ward, has been
deprived of the same and is in the capacity of guardian entitled to the custody
of such ward, that can seek the assistance of the Court for the return of his
ward to his custody.  The guardian contemplated by this section includes every
kind of guardian known to law.  The Supreme Court in that judgment has further
held as under :
"  Section 25 of the Guardians and Wards Act contemplates not only actually
physical custody but also constructive custody of the guardian which term
includes all categories of guardians.  The object and purpose of this provision
being ex facie to ensure the welfare of the minor ward, which necessarily
involves due protection of the right of his guardian to properly look after the
ward's health, maintenance and education, this section demands reasonably 
liberal interpretation so a to effectuate that object.  Hyper-technicalities
should not be allowed to deprive the guardian, the necessary assistance from the
Court in effectively discharging his duties and obligations towards his ward so
as to promote the latter's welfare.
......
The Court's power under section 25 of the Guardians and Wards Act is to be
governed primarily by the consideration of the welfare of the minors concerned.
The discretion vested in the Court is, as is the case with all judicial
discretions to be exercised judiciously in the background of all the relevant
facts and circumstances.  Each case has to be decided o its own facts and other
cases can hardly serve as binding precedents, the facts of two cases in this
respect being seldom- if ever identical.

......
In considering the question of the welfare of the minors due regard has of
course to be paid to the right of the father to be the guardian and also to all
other relevant factors having a bearing on the minor's welfare. There is a
presumption that a minor's parents would do their very best to promote the
children's welfare and, if necessary, would not grudge any sacrifice of their
own personal interest and pleasure. This presumption arises because of the
natural, selfless affection normally expected from the parents for their
children...
Where there is no dichotomy between the fitness of the father to be entrusted
with the custody of his minor children and considerations of their welfare, the
father's fitness has to be considered, determined and weighed predominantly in
terms of the welfare of his minor children in the context of all the relevant
circumstances.  If the custody of the father cannot promote their welfare
equally or better than the custody of the mother, then, he cannot claim
indefeasible right to their custody under Section 25 merely because there is no
defect in his personal character and he has attachment for his children - which
every normal parent has."
From the above, it is clear that the father is the guardian of the minor
until he is found unfit to be the guardian of the minor.  The welfare of the
minor is paramount consideration while ordering their custody. In view of the
section 25 of the Act,  the onus is on the person who opposes the application by
a guardian for the custody of a ward under this section to make out that the
welfare of the wards be better served by  its being kept out of the custody of
its guardian and retained in the custody of the person against whom the
application is made.  This onus is particularly heavy when the guardian is the
father of the child.   Likewise, under section 19 the burden of proof to deny
the natural father the custody of his child would be very heavy to establish his
unfitness and the court will require very strong reasons for interference with
the father's right to custody. In the facts and circumstances of the present
case, it is in this background of the legal position we have to analyze the
evidence adduced, both oral as well as documentary,  to prove the unfitness or
otherwise of the father  and also see whether the welfare of the child  would be
better served in the hands of the father or the respondents.
The petitioner was examined as P.W.1.  He deposed that the minor children were
with him till March 1988 and thereafter his brothers-in-law and mother-in-law
took the children to their house and he used to visit the house of his brother-
in-law to see the children and later they prevented him. It is stated that in
the month of February or March 1988 his brothers-in-law and mother-in-law came
to Bhongir to negotiate regarding custody of minor children. It is further
deposed that they ( respondents ) requested them to send both the minors for
some period to their house, and at that time the petitioner  was under shock due
to the death of his wife.  On their request and after consulting elders they
sent the minor girls to respondents for some period.  Once in a week either
petitioner or  his brother used to go to the house of the respondents and bring
the children.  It is further deposed that subsequently, their outlook changed
and started avoiding to show the girls to the petitioner.
It is further stated that without consulting the petitioner the respondents
admitted both the minors in Princeton Public School, Hyderabad by changing the
name of the father of the minor girls.  It is further deposed that on many
occasions the petitioner send the elderly persons for the custody of children
and that they did not care with their advise.  It is further deposed by the
petitioner in his examination in chief that he did not marry keeping in view the
welfare of the his minor daughters and that all his family members are ready and
willing to look after the welfare of his daughters.  The witness deposed that
last three lines in page No.2 of Ex.B.1 and three signatures appearing on Page
No.1 were not present when he signed on the document.  In the cross examination
nothing was elicited to disprove the statements of petitioner.
P.W.2 who is the younger brother of P.W.1 deposed in the same lines as that of
P.W.1.    P.W.3 sister-in-law of the petitioner. She deposed that theirs' is a
joint family and her children and children of brothers of her husband are living
together for the purpose of education at Hyderabad.   P.Ws.2 and 3 have
consistently denied about the adoption of the children by the maternal uncles.
P.W.4, who was present in the auditor's office at the time of P.W.1 giving
declaration - Ex.B.1, on perusal of the document Ex.B.1, deposed that the last
three lines regarding adoption of minor were not typed in Ex.B.1 and that  no
such proposal for adoption of the minor girls was discussed. He deposed that in
his presence R.W.1, P.W.1 signed over the document and at that time except P.W.1  
no one signed as  2nd declarant.  He further deposed that on that day Vidya
Bhushan did not come to Auditor's office.  The document was got written on the
advise of Auditor  keeping in view of tax problem. He also deposed about the
deposit of investment of Rs.1,00,000/- in UTI in favour of each minor girl.
 R.W. 1- who is the maternal uncle deposed that the minor wards were
brought from the house of the petitioner on 25.7.1987 and they are residing with
him till now. He deposed that the minor children were admitted in the school and
when they are exhibiting talent in the fields of singing and dancing the
petitioner wanted custody of the wards.  It is further stated that the minor
children are in the custody of the maternal uncle since the death of her mother
and they became closely affectionate and associate with the members of his
family and for the last 11 years they are under the care and custody of the
maternal uncle who took possible care to bring them up in the education.
R.Ws.2 and 3 are claimed to be attestors of Ex.B.1.
 The learned Judge discarded the story put forth by the petitioner in view of
Ex.A.24 which is an application submitted by the petitioner to Principal,
Princeton Public School, L.B. Nagar, where two minor children were studying.
"  M. Shravani and M.Shravanthi are the twins  born to me through my wife
Manchala Geetha on 6.9.1986.  Due to some circumstances best known to my    
deceased wife she committed suicide on 23.7.1987.  Thereafter, as per the
understanding between me and the brothers of my deceased wife my both the above  
said children who were minors aged about 10 months at the time of death of my
wife, my brothers-in-law Terala Pradeep Kumar, Terala Vidhya Bhushan and Terala
Virupaksha have requested me to take care of the said children for some time in
their house. As I was also under mental distress and agony due to sudden death
of my wife, I agreed for that proposal.  Subsequently, I came to know that my
above stated brothers-in-law joined the said two girls in your institution by
changing the parents names and also surnames."  
The learned Judge further observing that as the presence of R.Ws.2 and 3 was not
denied by the petitioner in his cross examination,  there are no reasons to
disbelieve the evidence of R.Ws.2 and 3, and held that Ex.B.1 declaration was
signed by P.W.1 on 7.2.1988 and that contents of Ex.B.1 declaration show that
P.W.1 seized to be the guardian for the property of minor children since that
date.  The learned Judge also observed that the children were staying with their
maternal uncle since the date of death of deceased and that the evidence on
record did not show that the petitioner has taken any care in bringing them up
or he is in visiting terms with the respondents after the death of their mother.
The Court observed that for the last 11 years the wards are under the care and
custody of their maternal uncle who have taken care to bring them up in
education and in extra curricular activities.
It is not in dispute that Ex.B.1 is the declaration given by the petitioner.  It
also speaks about the investment in UTI for a sum of Rs.1,00,000/- each  in
favour of two minor girls. It further states that the petitioner has no claim or
interest in the above said investment/money at any time,  nor any of his
successors in interest/legal heirs. It further states that  Father, mother,
brother, sister-in-law of the petitioner have gifted Rs.10,000/- each to raise
the fund for investing Rs.1,00,000/- in the name of one child.  Petitioner
contributed Rs.1,00,000/-  by selling gold, silver and other valuable articles
and also her personal savings.  The version of the petitioner is that last three
lines, under Ex.B.1 regarding adoption of his daughters  were added subsequent
to signing of the document by the petitioner on Ex.B.1. The Court below observed
that the question whether R.1 and R.3 adopted minor children Shravanti and
Shravani  is not the scope of enquiry in O.P., and the evidence adduced on
either side on this respect needs no consideration for adjudication on the point
involved in the petition.  On perusal of the contents of Ex.B.1 the trial court
held that Ex.B.1 was signed by P.W.1 on 7.2.1988  and that the contents of
Ex.B.1 showed that the petitioner seized to be the guardian of the property of
the minor children from that date.  Curiously, R.W.1 in his examination in chief
has deposed as follows:
" Ex.B.1 is the document myself and my Advocate perused the document and we   
pointed out that aspect of giving girls in adoption was not mentioned in it as
agreed by them. The petitioner took the document and written by incorporating
the last 3 sentences of Ex.B.1 regarding the giving girls in adoption to us.
When petitioner, myself, Ramesh ( PW  2 ), Eswar signed over Ex.B.1, R-3 also
sign upon Ex.B.1.  It is not correct to suggest that last 3 sentences of Ex.B.1
regarding the aspect of adoption of minors and also the word consented by is
incorporated by us subsequently.
The learned Judge observed that the petition is filed by the petitioner for
custody of minor children  and his claim is that he is the natural father of
minor children and so he is entitled to their custody until he is proved to be
unfit to be their guardian. However, the learned Judge without giving any
finding on the aspect of whether the father is unfit to be the guardian of the
minor children or not has dismissed the petition.  The fact that the petitioner
is natural father of the children is not disputed by the respondents at all. On
a perusal of the entire material on record, there is no averment regarding
unfitness of the father to be guardian and no instances are indicated by the
respondents.  It is only stated that since from the date of death of Geetha, the
wards are staying with maternal uncle and as per Ex.B.1, the petitioner ceases
to have any interest in the property of the wards in view of the adoption. The
trial court disbelieved the evidence mainly relying upon Ex.B1, which itself
creates a doubt in view of the insertion of the last three lines subsequently.
In fact, as stated above, it was deposed by the R.W.1  in his examination in
chief that subsequently the last three lines were inserted.    In the earlier
portion of the declaration, nowhere it is mentioned about the adoption.  The
petitioner consistently denied regarding the adoption.In this regard,
learned counsel for the petitioner rightly contended that no  endorsement was
made by the petitioner on the alleged last three lines regarding adoption of the
children and thus the findings of the lower Court on this aspect ex-facie suffer
from perversity.   In our view the findings of the  court below in that regard
are not correct.
The another reason given by the trial court is that the evidence brought on
record clearly shows that the appellant did not evince any interest in the minor
children and it is only when the minor wards are showing proficiency in the
dancing and singing, the petitioner came up with this application belatedly. The
trial court has not recorded any specific finding about the unfitness of the
natural father as required under section 19 of the Act, and in the absence of
any evidence  regarding the unfitness of the father, the trial court was not
justified in denying the custody to the petitioner.  The petitioner-natural
father has invested  a sum of Rs.1,00,000/- each in favour of the wards,
claiming no right or interest in the said money.  Added to that, there appears
to be  no evidence on record that the petitioner remarried again. A careful
perusal of the evidence on record also does not give an impression that the
interests of the minors would not be served if they are given custody to the
petitioner. In the circumstances stated above, in our view, the court below
erred in rejecting the petition filed by the natural father claiming custody of
the children from the maternal uncle of the wards.  Considering the totality of
the circumstances, we hold that the petitioner is entitled to seek the custody
of the minor children.
 For the foregoing reasons, we do not agree with the reasoning adopted by the
lower Court.  The impugned order is therefore set aside and the appeal is
allowed.  Consequently O.P. 801 of 1994 preferred by the father of the wards is
allowed  giving custody of the minors to the father.  However, in the facts and
circumstances of the case, without costs.


?1.1973 SCC 840.  

