

THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE T.CH. SURYA RAO        
CRIMINAL REVISION CASE No.989 OF 2000       

14-03-2001 

Syed Mohd. Ghouse                               



Noorunnisa Begum and others.            

<CRIMINAL PROCEDURE CODE - - Sec. 125 - - Maintenance proceedings by a Muslim        
lady - - Husband denied the very marriage and pleaded that the alleged wife and
child to be strangers - - DNA test directed by Family Court to know paternity -
- Legality of the direction assailed - - Court cannot compel to give sample of
blood for any test - - In case of refusal to give blood for test without valid
reason, necessary inference follows.

>HELD:  

        DNA Test is now a developed test, which conclusively determines, with
reference to the gene characteristics, the paternity of a child....Before
ordering the blood test, either for D.N.A, or other test the Court has to
consider the facts and circumstances of the given case and the ramifications of
such an order. But the Court cannot compel a person to give the sample of blood.
However, if that person refuses to give blood sample without any valid reason
the Court is at liberty to draw the inference as a necessary corollary in sequel
thereof.
AIR 1993 S.C. 2295: Distinguished.


For the Petitioner: Mr. P.R.Prasad, Advocate.

For the Respondents: Mr. R.Timma Reddy, Advocate.   


:ORDER:  


The petitioner assails the docket order dated 18.8.2000 passed by the learned
Judge, Family Court of Hyderabad.  The revision petitioner is the respondent in
M.C.No.13 of 1998 pending on the file of the Family Court, Hyderabad.  The
respondents 1 and 2 herein are the petitioners in the said M.C.No.13 of 1998.
They filed the petition under Section 125 of the Cr.P.C. seeking maintenance on
the premise that the first petitioner married the respondent in the year 1983 as
per Muslim Personal Law at Hyderabad, and during their lawful wedlock, the
second petitioner-minor was born to them, and that the respondent after the
marriage ill-treated the first petitioner and harassed her demanding more dowry
from her parents and eventually deserted both the petitioners. It is further
averred in the petition that the respondent being the Superintendent in Anwar-
ul-uloom Boys High School, Nampally, drawing a monthly salary of Rs.10,000/-,
besides income he is getting from tuitions in an amount of Rs.5,000/- per month
and rents from his own house at Rs.2,000/- and thus having had sufficient means,
neglected and refused to maintain the petitioners.
That petition was resisted by the respondent mentioning, inter alia, in the
counter filed by him that the petitioners are utter strangers to him and he is
at a loss to understand as to what prompted them to file the maintenance
petition with false and mischievous allegations.
When the petition was coming up for enquiry, the learned Judge, Family Court,
passed the impugned docket order to the following effect:
" PW.2 present.   Respondent is directed to undergo D.N.A. Test to know the
paternity of the child - Both the parties are directed to appear before the
Director of C.C.M.B. Hyderabad on 5.9.2000 at 10.30 A.M.  Respondent is directed
to deposit a sum of Rs.8,000/- temporarily as charges by 1.9.2000.  Call on
7.9.2000."
As aforesaid, the revision petitioner assails the said order.  The moot question
that crops up for determination is whether the court can direct the respondent
to submit himself to the DNA Test.  The Apex Court in GOUTAM KUNDU VS. STATE OF       
WEST BENGAL (1.) held in Paragraph 26 thus:   
"From the above discussion it emerges:-
(1) That courts in India cannot order blood test as a matter of course;
(2) Wherever applications are made for such prayers in order to have roving
inquiry, the prayer for blood test cannot be entertained.
(3) There must be strong prima facie case in that the husband must establish
non-access in order to dispel the presumption arising under section 112 of the
Evidence Act.
(4) The Court must carefully examine as to what would be the consequence of
ordering the blood test; whether it will have the effect of branding a child as
a bastard and the mother as an unchaste woman.  
(5) No one can be compelled to give sample of blood for analysis."
That was a case where the wife and minor daughter filed a petition for
maintenance against the appellant.    The marriage between the parties was not
denied.  However, the paternity of the child was denied.  Consequently, the
liability to pay maintenance to the child was also denied. At that stage, the
husband filed a petition for blood test of the minor and of himself so as to
prove that he was not the father of the child.  When that application was
dismissed, a revision was filed before the High Court, which also dismissed the
same.  Consequently, he approached the Apex Court.  The Apex Court, while 
reviewing the law prevailing in various foreign countries and the law prevailing
in the country, ultimately deduced the five points enumerated supra.
Obviously, the marital tie between the parties, inter se, was not in dispute in
that case and only the paternity of the child was very much in dispute.  Taking
the recourse to the presumption under section 112 of the Evidence Act, the Apex
Court was of the view that it is for the appellant to prove non-access so as to
dispel the presumption of legitimacy that could be drawn under section 112 of
the Evidence Act.
That was a position prior to the advent of the DNA Test.   DNA Test is now a
developed test, which conclusively determines, with reference to the gene
characteristics, the paternity of a child.  The Apex Court expressed its concern
about the ramifications of such a blood test in the interests of the child.
However, the decision does not say that such blood test cannot be ordered at
all.  It all depends upon the facts of a particular case.  Nonetheless, the Apex
Court was so emphatic on one aspect that no one can be compelled to give sample 
of blood for analysis.
It is thus obvious that before ordering the blood test, either for D.N.A, or
other test the Court has to consider the facts and circumstances of the given
case and the ramifications of such an order. But the Court cannot compel a
person to give the sample of blood. However, if that person refuses to give
blood sample without any valid reason the Court is at liberty to draw the
inference as a necessary corollary in sequel thereof.
In view of this authoritative pronouncement of the Apex Court, the impugned
order directing the respondent to submit himself to DNA Test cannot be
sustained.  In the result, the revision petition is allowed in the light of the
observation made inter alia in the order and consequently the impugned order is
hereby set aside.


?1. AIR 1993 SC 2295  
