

The Hon'ble Sri Justice V.Eswaraiah
Crl.Appeal No.349 of 1995

01/08/2001 

Vanamala Amaranadh   

petitioner


The State of Andhra Pradesh through the
Public Prosecutor, High Court of AP, Hyderabad.


respondent 


For the petitioner:    Mr.A.Prabhakar Rao

For  respondent  :  Public Prosecutor



:ORDER:  
The sole accused filed this appeal against the Judgment in S.C.No.137 of 1993,
dt.16.6.1995 on the file of the Sessions Judge, Warangal convicting him for the
offences under sections 498-A and 306 of the Indian Penal Code and sentencing
him to undergo R.I. for two years for the offence punishable under section 498-A
I.P.C. and to suffer R.I. for 7 years for the offence punishable under section
306 I.P.C.
The brief facts of the case are that the appellant, a resident of Govardhangiri
village of Raghunathapally Mandal, Warangal district married the deceased viz.,
Vanamala Bhagya Lakshmi, a resident of Shivunipally village of the same Mandal
and the distance between the village of the accused and his in-laws village is
about 4 kilometres.  At the time of marriage, the father of the deceased paid an
amount of Rs.6,000/- as dowry to the accused in addition to other articles as
per their custom. After one year of the marriage, the marriage was consummated
and the deceased joined her husband and was living with him at Govardhanagiri at
her in-laws place. She has given birth to a female child and after four years of
the marriage, the accused started harassing and ill-treating her to get more
dowry from her parents.  The deceased committed suicide by pouring kerosene on 
herself on 19.3.1991 at about 10.30 AM and she was taken to the hospital by her
mother and the husband (appellant) and she was admitted in the hospital at
Warangal at about 12.55 PM.  She sustained 70% burn injuries all over the body
and her statement was recorded by the Magistrate and she died at 9.30 PM in the
night on the same day.
 P.W.1 is the father of the deceased. P.W.2 is the mother of the deceased. P.W.3
is the brother of the deceased.  They have not supported the case of the
prosecution and all of them were turned hostile. P.W.4 is the panch witness to
the scene of offence and through him Ex.P-4 panchnama is marked. P.W.5 is the 
inquest panch and through him Ex.P-5 got marked. P.W.6 is the I Additional
Munsif Magistrate, Warangal who recorded the dying declaration on 19.3.1991 at
about 3.30 PM in the presence of the Doctor P.W.10. P.W.7 is the Doctor who 
conducted the Post-mortem examination and Ex.P-8 is the Post-mortem certificate. 
P.W.8 is the Head Constable who received the intimation from the hospital
regarding the admission of the deceased and also the information of the death of
the deceased. After receipt of the information, he gave a requisition to the
Mandal Revenue Officer to conduct inquest Ex.P-5.  P.W.9 is the Doctor who
admitted the deceased person in the hospital at about 12.55 PM and he made 
entries in the medico legal register and he questioned the deceased as to how
she received the burn injuries and her statement is recorded in the register as
follows:
" Alleged to have been sustained burning by herself with kerosene by about 10.30
AM on 19.3.1991 at her mother's residence due to teasing of husband for dowry"
The said endorsement is marked as Ex.P-12.  
The cause of the death as told by the deceased herself is that she committed
suicide for teasing by her husband for dowry. At the time of recording dying
declaration by the Magistrate, P.W.10 the Doctor certified that the patient is
conscious and fit during the declaration of the above statement.  P.W.11 is the
Investigating Officer who arrested the accused on 25.3.1991 and seized certain
articles viz., MOs. 1 to 4.
As the parents and the brother of the deceased turned hostile, the case rests
only on the two dying declarations i.e., Ex.P-6 recorded by the Magistrate P.W.6
and the Ex.P-12 recorded by the Doctor P.W.9 in the medico legal register.  No
doubt the parents in whose house the deceased committed suicide did not support 
the case of the prosecution but the learned Judge convinced himself and found
the accused guilty mainly relying on the dying declarations Exs.P-6  and
P-12.
Sri Padmanabha Reddy, learned senior counsel appearing for the appellant submits
 that there are two dying declarations and they are neither proved nor volunteer
ed. As the deceased died in the house of her parents, she was not in a position
to make a true statement as admittedly the mother of the deceased P.W.2 stated i
n her oral evidence that she tutored her daughter to give statement to any Gover
nment Officer if asked that she committed the act as a result of demand of dowry
 by the accused.  He further submits that the Doctor who recorded Ex.P-12 has no
t stated that whether the deceased was in a fit mental condition to state the
things. In Ex.P-12 it is stated that due to teasing of husband for dowry she
committed the act of pouring kerosene and setting herself ablaze but where as in
the dying declaration Ex.P-6 recorded by the Magistrate P.W.6, she stated that
her husband was demanding dowry and she has been vexed with it and poured   
kerosene on her body and set fire. The learned senior counsel submits that there
is variation in the aforesaid two dying declarations.  In Ex.P-12 it is stated
that due to teasing of her husband for dowry she committed the aforesaid act but
whereas in Ex.P-6 it is stated that her husband was demanding dowry and she has 
been vexed with it and therefore she poured kerosene on her body and set herself
ablaze. He states that teasing of the husband for dowry cannot be equated or
similar to the one in Ex.P-6 wherein she has stated that her husband is
demanding dowry and she has been vexed with it and therefore there is a
variation in the two dying declarations and it is unsafe to rely upon those two
dying declarations to convict the accused.  Prima-facie, I am not inclined to
accept the contentions of the learned senior counsel as both the things relating
to the dowry only. The teasing of the husband is only relating to the dowry. As
he was demanding the dowry, she has been vexed. It is only an explanation in
different words but it cannot be said that there is a clear distinguishable
variation in both the dying declarations.  The doctor who recorded the statement
in Ex.P-12 no doubt has not explained to the deceased the true version of
recording the statement but he has only noted the version of the deceased at the
time her admission in the hospital, but where as in Ex.P-6 dying declaration it
is mentioned by the learned magistrate that after he put some questions to her
and after satisfying himself about the condition and consciousness of the
deceased, thereafter he proceeded with recording of her statement.
  Question: What happened?  
Ans   : As my husband is demanding the dowry, I have been vexed with it and
poured kerosene on my body and set fire.
Question: Have you anything else to say?
Ans  : Nothing else to say.
She has declared that the above recording of the statement is true version on
reading over the same to her and in proof of her admission, which is the correct
and true version she has also put her thumb impression.The dying declaration was
recorded by P.W.6 in the presence of Doctor P.W.10 and he has endorsed on the  
dying declaration stating that the patient is conscious and fit during the
declaration of the above statement.
Learned senior counsel further submits that even assuming that there is no
variation in both the declarations, there is no certificate by the doctor
certifying the state of mind that existed before recording the dying declaration
and the Magistrate's satisfaction with regard to patient's consciousness for
giving proper answers to the questions put-forth by him is not sufficient and
therefore, it is not safe to rely on the dying declaration Ex.P-6. In support of
his contention he relied on a decision of the apex court in PAPARAMBAKA ROSAMMA      
V. STATE OF A.P.1   
In the aforesaid case also the learned Magistrate recorded the dying declaration
and at the end of the dying declaration, the Doctor has appended a certificate
saying that the patient is conscious while recording the statement.  The
question that needs to be considered is as to whether the Magistrate could have
come to a definite conclusion that the injured was in a fit state of mind to
make a declaration in the absence of the certificate by the Doctor certifying
the state of mind that existed before recording the dying declaration.  Their
lordships were of the opinion that in the absence of medical certificate the
injured was in a fit state of mind at the time of the making declaration, it
would be very much risky to accept the subjective satisfaction of the Magistrate
who opined that the injured was in a fit state of mind at the time of making the
declaration and accordingly the apex court held that the dying declaration must
be treated as circumstantial evidence only but not as a substantive evidence
under section 32 of the Indian Evidence Act. The said Judgment was delivered by
three Hon'ble Judges of the Supreme Court on 13th September, 1999.  Exactly 
sixteen days thereafter, three Hon'ble Judges of the Supreme Court in KOLI
CHUNILAL SAVJI AND ANOTHER V. STATE OF GUJARAT2 held as follows:          
"With regard to the condition of the deceased, the Magistrate who recorded the
dyi8ng declaration has been examined as a witness.  She has categorically stated
in her evidence that as soon as she reached the hospital in the Surgical Ward of
Dr.Shukla, she told the doctor on duty that she was required to take the
statement of Dhanuben and she showed the doctor the police yadi.  The doctor
then introduced her to Dhanuben and when she asked the doctor about the 
condition of Dhanuben, the said doctor categorically stated that Dhanuben was in
a conscious condition.It further appears from her evidence that there has been
no endorsement on the dying declaration recorded by the Magistrate with regard
to the condition of the patient but there has been an endorsement on the police
yadi, indicating that Dhanuben was fully conscious.  In view of the aforesaid
evidence of the Magistrate and in view of the endorsement of the doctor on the
police yadi and no reason having been ascribed as to why the Magistrate would
try to help the prosecution, we see no justification in the comments of Mr.
Keswani that the dying declaration should not be relied upon in the absence of
the endorsement of the doctor thereon. "

In view of the aforesaid latter Judgment of the three Hon'ble Judges of the apex
court, the two dying declarations made by the deceased in this case one at the
time of admission by the Doctor and latter one recorded by the learned
Magistrate corroborate each other and there is no material inconsistency in
those two declarations i.e., Exs.P-12 and P-6. Therefore, I have no hesitation
to come to the conclusion that the two dying declarations made are truthful and
voluntary and can be relied on by the prosecution in bringing home the charge
against the accused person and the prosecution case must be held to have been 
established beyond reasonable doubt. 
In view of the aforesaid latter Full Bench Judgment of the apex court, I am not
inclined to consider the other decisions cited by the both the counsel.
As regards the conviction for the offence under section 498-A I.P.C, it is
proved beyond all reasonable doubt as per the dying declarations of the deceased
that the husband of the deceased was teasing the deceased for dowry and 
demanding the dowry and therefore, for the said wilful conduct of the husband,
the deceased was subjected to cruelty driving herself to commit suicide as the
said demand of dowry caused her mental injury.   As far as the offence under
section 498A, I.P.C. is concerned, there is a legal presumption under section
113-A of the Indian Evidence Act, according to which when a question arises as
to whether the commission of the suicide by a woman for her subjection to the
cruelty by her husband, if the lady commits suicide within 7 years from the date
of her marriage and on the statement made by the deceased that her husband 
demanded dowry, therefore she committed suicide, it can safely be presumed that
she was subjected to cruelty by her husband and accordingly I upheld the
Judgment of the trial court with regard to conviction for the offence committed
by the appellant under section 498-A I.P.C.
With regard to the offence under section 306, I.P.C, the question that arises
for consideration is as to whether the husband abetted the commission of such
suicide by the deceased.  Abetment is defined under section 107, I.P.C.
According to section 107, I.P.C, a person abets doing of the thing who
instigates any person to do that thing and intentionally aids by any act or
illegal omission doing that thing.  Here doing of that thing is committing
suicide.  The deceased committed suicide at the house of her parents but not in
the house of the accused.  The question of abetting that thing of committing
suicide by the husband does not arise in this case as he has not aided or
abetted for setting herself suicide pouring in kerosene and putting on
fire.Therefore, I am not inclined to sustain the Judgment of the trial court for
the offence committed under section 306, I.P.C. and accordingly the appellant is
entitled for an acquittal for the offence punishable under section 306, I.P.C.
and he is acquitted for the offence under section 306 I.P.C.
So far as the punishment under section 498-A, I.P.C. is concerned, I am inclined
to reduce the sentence imposed by the trial court in view of the fact that the
deceased committed suicide at her parents house but not in the house of the
accused and her parents and brother also did not support the case of the
prosecution and therefore, I am inclined to take a lenient view and the sentence
imposed by the learned Sessions Judge for the offence punishable under section
498-A I.P.C is reduced and limited to three months. The appellant is entitled
for set-off for the imprisonment already undergone by him.
 The appeal is partly allowed and the impugned order is modified to the extent
indicated above.




?1 1999 S.C.C (Crl.) 1361
2 (1999) 9 S.C.C. 562


















