

HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE CH.S.R.K.PRASAD        
CRIMINAL REVISION CASE NO.710 of 2000      

 01/03/2002

P.Ilesh Yadav                                   

petitioner

P.Suvarna and another.                          

respondent 

Counsel for the Petitioner: Mr. Miland G.Gokhale

Counsel for the Respondent: The Public Prosecutor.


:ORDER:  

1)  Heard the learned counsel for the Revision-Petitioner.  This revision is
preferred by the husband against the orders passed in M.C.No.1 of 1998 by the
Family Court, Secunderabad, awarding maintenance of Rs.500/- per month from the 
date of filing of  petition i.e., 5-1-1998.

2) It is undisputed fact that the marriage of  revision petitioner with the
first respondent took place on 31-3-1994 as per Hindu rites and customs.  It is
also equally not disputed  that prior to marriage betrothal ceremony was
performed on 18-4-1993. The revision petitioner is said to be working as a
linemen in telephones department. It is alleged that at the time of marriage,
the parents of the 1st respondent gave RS.5,000/- in cash and presented Bajaj
Chetak Scooter and house hold articles, 11 tulas of gold ornaments to the
revision petitioner. They spent Rs.75,000/- towards marriage expenses.  It is
further alleged that the parents of the 1st respondent  presented Rs.1,000/-
towards clothes and 1/2 tula of gold ring to the revision petitioner at the time
of betrothal ceremony and incurred Rs.30,000/- for the function. The revision
petitioner and his family members  have asked  the 1st respondent  to bring
additional dowry of Rs.50,000/-  from her parents. Immediately after the
nuptials the 1st respondent was sent to her parents house and after one month
she again joined the revision petitioner within 15 days.  The revision
petitioner and his family members poured kerosine on her with an intention to
kill her. On hearing the cries of the 1st respondent, neighbours came and
rescued her. The revision petitioner and his family members have stated in the
panchayat that they do not like the 1st respondent and they want to perform the
marriage of the revision petitioner with another girl for getting more dowry.
Thereafter, the 1st respondent  and her family members made efforts for re-
conciliation but the revision petitioner did not take her back. It is also
alleged that the revision petitioner married one
-2-
 Roopa d/o. Krishna  r/o. Hyderabad  and living with her and begot a child
through her. It is further alleged that the revision petitioner is also doing
milk business and earning Rs.5,000/- per month. It appears that 1st respondent
has filed C.C.No.32/96 on the file of Mahila Court, Hyderabad, against the
revision petitioner u/s.498-A IPC and the same is pending. She also lodged
another complaint vide FIR No.7/98 u/ss.34,107, 403,494,120-B IPC r/w.6 and 8 of
Dowry Prohibition Act before the Women Police Station, Hyderabad, on 29-1-1998. 
It is also alleged by the revision petitioner that the 1st respondent and her
family members with the help of police forced him to enter in to mutual divorce
agreement and he was forced to pay Rs.30,000/- . It is also alleged by the
revision petitioner that they got it mentioned in the agreement that he agreed
to pay Rs.1,00,000/- towards permanent alimony to the 1st respondent. It appears
that mutual divorce  agreement was drafted by both the advocates. After enquiry,
the learned Judge awarded maintenance of Rs.500/- p.m. to the 1st respondent
after taking in to consideration of the income of the revision petitioner.

3) It is a case where compromise is said to have been entered  in the Women
Police Station, Begumpet, where Rs.30,000/- is said to have been paid to first
respondent  by the revision petitioner. The order of granting maintenance has
been assailed  on the ground that there was no discussion  about exhibits  and
there is no evidence on record to show that the revision petitioner  had entered
in to a second marriage with some girl and there was no material to  show that
the revision petitioner had left the company  of  the 1st respondent. It is also
contended  by the learned counsel for the revision petitioner that there is no
proper evaluation of evidence.

4) The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the 1st respondent  did not appear
before the Court.  The Sub Inspector of Women Police Station has been examined 
as R.W.2. She spoke  to  compromise etc., The payment of  
-3-
RS.30,000/ - is supported by the documentary evidence and also the evidence of
R.W.2 supports the same.  
Section 125 Cr.P.C.reads as follows:
125. Order for maintenance of wives, children and parents:(1) If any person
having sufficient means  neglects or  refuses to maintain-------
(a) his wife, unable to maintain herself; or
(b) his legitimate or illegitimate minor child, whether married or not, unable
to maintain itself; or
(c)  his legitimate or illegitimate child (not being a married daughter) who has
attained majority,  where such child is, by  reason of any physical or mental
abnormality or injury unable to maintain itself, or
(d) his father or mother, unable to maintain himself or herself,
a  Magistrate of the first class may, upon proof of such neglect or
refusal,order such person to make a monthly allowance for the maintenance  of
his wife or such child, father or mother, at such monthly rate note exceeding
five hundred rupees in the whole, as such Magistrate thinks fit, and to pay the
same to such person as the Magistrate may from time to time direct:
Provided that the Magistrate may order the father of a minor female child
referred,to in Cl.(b) to make such allowance, until she attains her majority, if
the Magistrate is satisfied  that the husband of such minor female child, if
married, is not possessed of sufficient means.
Explanation:---For the purposes of this Chapter:--
(a) 'minor' means a person who, under the provisions of the Indian Majority Act,
1875 (9 of 1875), is deemed  not to have attained his majority:
(b)'wife' includes a woman  who has been divorced by or has obtained a divorce
from, her husband and has not
remarried.......................................................................
..................................
................................................................................
.......................................
Section 127 of Cr.P.C. Reads as follows:
(1)On proof of a change in the circumstances of any person, receiving under
Sec.125 a monthly allowance, or ordered under the same section fo pay a monthly
allowance  to his wife, child, father or mother, as the case may be, the
Magistrate may make such alteration  in the allowance  as he thinks fit:
Provided that if he increases  the allowance, the monthly rate offive
-4-
hundred rupees in the whole shall not be exceeded.
(2)Where it appears to the Magistrate that, in consequence of any decision, of a
competent Civil Court,  any order made under Sec.125 should be cancelled or
varied, he shall cancel the order or, as the case may be,vary the same
accordingly.
(3)) Where any order has been made under Sec.125 in favour of a woman who has  
been divorced by, or has obtained a divorce from her husband, the Magistrate
shall, if he is satisfied that:----
(a)the woman has, after the date of such divorce, remarried, cancel such order
as from the date of her remarriage;
(b)the woman has been divorced by her husband and that she has received, whether 
before or after the date of the said order, the whole of the sum which, under
any customary or personal law applicable to the parties,was payable on such
divorce,cancel such order------
(i) in the case where such sum was paid before such order,from the date on which
such order was made,. 
(ii)in any other case,from the date of expiry of the period, if any, for which
maintenance has been actually paid by the husband to the woman.  
(c) the woman has obtained a divorce  from her husband and that she had
voluntarily surrendered her rights  to maintenance after her divorce,cancel the
order from the date there of.
(4)At the time of making any decree for the recovery of any maintenance or dowry
by any person, to whom a monthly allowance has been ordered to be paid under 
Sec. 125 the Civil Court  shall take in to account the sum which has been paid
to, or recovered by, such person as monthly allowance in pursuance of the said
order.
Under Section 125 of Criminal Procedure Code, who ever claims maintenance must  
allege and prove that a person has got sufficient means, and refuse to maintain
the other person who was unable to maintain. Section 125 Cr.P.C  makes it clear
that a person who is claiming maintenance must show that she was unable to 
maintain herself.  It is also necessary and prove that the other person has got
sufficient means to maintain and refuse to maintain.  Section 127 C.P.C. gives
power to modify the order of granting maintenance.
-5-
5) It is a case where payment of Rs.30,000/- is said to have been made to the
wife under compromise in lumpsum and the said amount has gone in to the hands of 
wife . Section 125 Cl(a) Cr.P.C. Contemplates of taking in to consideration of
the amount received while considering the wife's inability  to maintain her
self.  It is the duty of the Court to take in to consideration  of the lumpsum
amount received by wife while fixing the quantum of maintenance and while
considering  sufficient means to maintain herself.. This has not been done in
this case which lead to miscarriage of justice. Therefore, I agree with the
contention of the learned counsel for the revision petitioner. There is no
proper evaluation of evidence which requires reconsideration of the matter by
the court below. The order of granting maintenance of RS.500/- p.m. is liable to
be set aside and the matter needs to be reconsidered by the learned Judge of
Family Court, Secunderabad. 

6) In the light of the discussion made supra, the order granting maintenance of
Rs.500/-p.m. is set aside. The matter is sent back to the Family Court,
Secunderabad. The learned Judge is directed to reappraise the entire evidence
and fix the maintenance only after taking in to consideration  of the lump-sum
payment made by the revision petitioner which passed in to the hands of wife.

7) With the above observations, this Criminal Revision Case is disposed of..










                                                                

