

THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE T.CH.SURYA RAO         
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.220 OF 1998      

 23/08/2002

State of A.P. rep. by
Public Prosecutor.

petitioner

A.Madhav Reddy and another.  

respondent 

Counsel for the Appellant: The Public Prosecutor.

Counsel for the Respondents: Mr. Raja Reddy Konneti. 


:JUDGEMENT:    


The State through the Public Prosecutor has filed the present appeal assailing
the Order of acquittal passed by the learned Sessions Judge, Guntur, in Sessions
Case No.534 of 1993 by his Judgement dated 19.07.1994.  
The gravamen of the charge against the accused was that A.1 and A.2 being the
husband and mother-in-law of the deceased-Sydamma used to harass her for getting 
the land registered by her father in her name, transferred to A.1 towards dowry
and in consequence of that harassment, the deceased consumed insecticide at  
about 08.00 A.M. on 16.11.1992 and committed suicide within seven years of her
marriage thereby they committed the offence punishable under Section 304-B of
the Indian Penal Code.
In order to bring home the charge to the accused, the prosecution examined in
all 12 witnesses.  Of them, P.Ws.1 to 3 are the main witnesses to speak about
the harassment and cruelty.  P.Ws.5, 6, 7, and 8 have not supported the case of
the prosecution.  P.W.4 was examined to show that A-1 insisted to take his wife
on Friday when his father-in-law-P.W.1 objected to it.  P.W.9 is the Village
Administrative Officer of Macherla village and he is a panch witness for seizure
of M.O.1.  P.W.10 is a private Doctor who first saw the deceased when she was
brought by A.1 and declared her to be dead.  P.W.11 is Sub-Inspector of Police
who registered the crime under Section 174 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
P.W.12 is Inspector of Police and Investigating Officer.
Surprisingly, the Doctor who conducted autopsy has not been examined in this
case and the post mortem report was marked by consent as Ex.P.7.  In Criminal 
Jurisprudence, marking the documents by consent is totally alien except when the
documents are sought to be introduced in accordance with Section 294 of the Code
of Criminal Procedure and that too for the limited purpose of proving the
execution thereof.
Post mortem report is not a substantive piece of evidence and, therefore, cannot
be read in evidence in the absence of the examination of the Doctor who issued
the same.  If for any reason, the Doctor is not available either on account of
his death or cannot be examined for the reasons enjoined under Section 32 of the
Indian Evidence Act in which event the document can be read in evidence.
At any rate, there is no gainsaying that the deceased in this case died an
unnatural death by committing suicide by taking insecticide poison.  The
question, therefore, that crops up for consideration in this case is whether it
was on account of any demand for dowry soon before her death in which event the
presumption under Section 113-B of the Indian Evidence Act operates.  As
aforediscussed, the whole case revolves round the testimony of P.Ws.1 to 3.
P.W.1 no doubt did speak about the harassment meted out to the deceased from A.1  
and A.2.  His evidence being an interested witness is to be scrutinized
carefully.  A material part of his evidence has been omitted to have been
mentioned in the First Information Report-Ex.P.1.  P.W.2 is the second daughter
of P.W.1 and the younger sister of the deceased.  Her evidence shows that prior
to her marriage, the deceased informed her about the harassment and beating by
A.1.  She did not know anything about the subsequent state of affairs after her
marriage which admittedly took place 1 1/2 years after such information given by
the deceased.  Therefore, her evidence cannot help proving the case of the
prosecution that the deceased was subjected to harassment and cruelty in
connection with the demand for dowry soon before her death.  P.W.3 is the sister
of P.W.1.  Her evidence shows that on one day when P.W.1 and herself visited the
house of the accused, in their presence the deceased was beaten by A.1 and when 
P.W.1 intervened he too was kicked by A.1.  This was after the delivery of the
child by the deceased.  This falls far short of the requisite proof of
harassment and cruelty demanding dowry soon before the death of the deceased. 
Having regard to the material omissions in the evidence of P.W.1 which amount to
contradictions, it is not safe to place reliance upon the testimony of P.W.1.
As discussed by me herein above, the evidence of P.Ws.2 and 3 also will not help
proving the case of the prosecution.  Under those circumstances, there has been
no convincing evidence on the side of the prosecution to prove the grave charge
of dowry death.  The Court below has rightly, therefore, recorded a finding of
not guilty.
For the foregoing reasons, there is nothing to interfere with the order of
acquittal passed by the learned Sessions Judge, Guntur.  The Criminal Appeal,
therefore, fails and is dismissed.









