

THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE RAMESH MADHAV BAPAT            
CRIMINAL PETITION No.5214 OF 1998     

22-02-2002 


Syed Hyder Hussain.  



State of A.P., rep., by
Public Prosecutor.


Counsel for the Petitioner: Mr. E.V.Bhagirath Rao.

Counsel for the Respondent: The Public Prosecutor.


:ORAL ORDER:    


        The petitioners herein are A-1 to A-5 in C.C.No.210 of 1997.   The said
case is pending in the Court of the XXII Metropolitan Magistrate, Hyderabad.
The alleged offences are under section 498-A I.P.C. and sections 4  and 6 of the
Dowry Prohibition Act.

On the strength of the complaint filed by the defacto complainant in the Court
of the XXII Metropolitan Magistrate, Hyderabad, the learned Magistrate forwarded
the complaint to the Superintendent of Police, Women Protection Cell, CID.
Hyderabad.  It was finally investigated  by the Inspector of Police, Women
Police station. Hyderabad and the charge sheet was filed.

        The 1st Petitioner happened to be the husband of defacto complainant.  The
2nd petitioner is the father of 1st petitioner herein.  The 3rd petitioner is
the mother of 1st petitioner herein.  The 4th petitioner is the brother of the
1st petitioner herein.

        The learned counsel Mr. E.V.Bhagiratha Rao appearing on behalf of the
petitioners herein submitted at the Bar that there has been a little litigation
between the defacto complainant and the petitioners herein.  The first
petitioner herein was prosecuted earlier in C.C.No.210 of 1997 which was closed
as a mistake of fact.  The first petitioner herein divorced the defacto
complainant by pronouncing 'Talak' on 9-4-1997 and the same was communicated to  
the defacto complainant.  The Divorce Certificate was issued by the A.P. Wakf
Board.  The same was also communicated to the Station House Officer, Women   
Police Station, Hyderabad, which was received by them on 15-4-1997.  The defacto
complainant had knowledge that the 1st petitioner herein had pronounced 'Talak'
and therefore the averments made in the charge sheet on 28-4-1997 that the
petitioners demanded Rupees Three lakhs by way of dowry is totally false.
 It was further submitted by the learned counsel for the petitioners herein that
when the relations between the defacto complainant and the first petitioner
herein was severed by pronouncing 'Talak', then the provisions of section 498-A
I.P.C. and the provisions of sections 4 and 6 of the Dowry Prohibition Act are
not attracted and therefore submitted it was a fit case for quashing the
proceedings.

        While rebutting the aforesaid arguments, the learned counsel Mr. Mirza
Immamullah Baig submitted at the Bar that after the so-called divorce, the
parties were residing under the same roof as husband and wife and therefore it
must be held that they lived as husband and wife and therefore the provisions of
Section 498-A I.P.C. and the provisions of sections 4 and 6 of the Dowry
Prohibition Act  are attracted.

           The learned counsel Mr. E.V. Bhagiratha Rao appearing for the
petitioners herein submitted at the Bar that admittedly the parties are 'Shias'.
The learned counsel further submitted that the divorce was pronounced before the
witnesses and it was communicated to the wife.  The legal formalities have been
complied herewith.      It was further brought to my notice by the learned
counsel that section 336 (5) of the Principles of Mohammadan Law revised by Mr.
Justice M.Hidayatullah (as His Lordship then was) in which he stated "where the
husband has repudiated his wife by three pronouncements, it is not lawful for
him to marry her again until she had married another man and divorced him".  The
contention of the learned counsel Mr. E.V. Bhagiratha Rao is supported by a
ruling reported in A.I.R. 1932 P.C. 25.

        The learned counsel for the petitioners herein further brought to my
notice that the parties are 'Shias'.   Under Rule 64 (ii) of the Principles of
Mohammadan Law, 2nd Edition, 1998  by Dr.Nishi Purohit, it was stated that a
'Shia' male is permanently prohibited   to marry another woman whom he has   
divorced by triple 'Talak'.      With these legal positions on record, the learned
counsel Mr. E.V.Bhagiratha Rao submitted that even it is presumed for arguments
sake that the defacto complainant and the first petitioner herein were staying
together, they cannot be called as husband and wife.

        By considering the legal as well as the factual position, this Court is of
the considered view that the parties are covered by 'Shia Laws'.  The 1st
petitioner herein had divorced his wife.  Under the law the 1st petitioner
herein prohibited in marrying the woman to whom he has divorced by pronouncing
'Talak'.         Under these circumstances, this Court is of the considered view
that the provisions of Section 498-A  I.P.C.  and the provisions of sections 4
and 6 of the Dowry Prohibition Act are not applicable to the present set of
facts.  Therefore, C.C.No.210 of 1997 pending on the file of the XXII
Metropolitan Magistrate, Hyderabad  is hereby quashed against all the
petitioners herein.

        Hence, the Criminal Petition is allowed.




