

THE HONOURABLE SRI JUSTICE E.DHARMA RAO            
WRIT PETITION NO. 16954 OF 2000     

08-08-2002 

Smt. K. Uma Maheswari.  



Addl. Director General of Police, CID,
Saifabad, Hyderabad and 2 others.


Counsel for Petitioner:    Mr. CV Mohan Reddy, Advocate.

Counsel for Respondents : GP for Home, for Respondents 1 & 2    
                                  Mr. Y.Krishna Reddy, Advocate for R3

:ORDER:  

        Smt. K. Uma Maheswari, who is a Graduate in Computer Science and a holder   
of Post Graduate Diploma in Computer Applications, got married with one Sri
Y.Raghavardhan, a Software Engineer in Atlanta, USA, on 23.10.1999 at VMC  
Kalyana Mandapam, Tirupathi according to Hindu rites. It is averred that the
elders have arranged the marriage of the petitioner with the Y.Raghavardhan with
a fond hope that since he is well settled in life, he will protect the interest
of the petitioner's well being and her future and paid Rs.4.00 lakhs in cash as
dowry and gave gold and silver articles worth Rs.3.00 lakhs and household
articles worth Rs.1.00 lakh at the time of marriage. Thereafter a house that was
registered in the name of the petitioner was demanded by the Y.Raghavardhan and
his father to be transferred in the joint names of the petitioner and
Y.Ravhavardhan, and it was threatened that unless such transfer takes place, she
will not be taken to USA. After transfer of the said house in the joint names of
petitioner the said Raghavardhan that on 13.11.1999 the petitioner left for USA
alongwith the Y.Raghavardhan where she came to know that the respondent was   
already married  to one Geethika, who also attended the marriage, and they were
living together and when she questioned the Y.Raghavardhan with regard to his
earlier marriage with Geethika, he informed her that to satisfy his parents he
married the petitioner. He further demanded an amount of Rs.3.00 lakhs from the
parents of the petitioner to take her back and with the said demand, on
18.1.2000 she was sent back from USA. After return to India, she narrated the
story to her parents, who tried to negotiate the matter and all the negotiations
failed, she lodged complaint before the II Addl. Munsif Magistrate, Tirupathi on
21.3.2000, which was forwarded to Central Crime Station, Tirupathi, which was
registered as Crime No. 129 of 2000 for the offences under Ss. 420, 498A and
Sec. 506(2) of Indian Penal Code (for brevity Penal Code). After completion of
investigation, the police filed charge sheet which was registered as CC No. 489
of 2000.
        During the pendency of the said CC, the Addl. Director General of Police,
CID Hyderabad, the first respondent herein, in his memo dated 29.4.2000 directed
Inspector of Police, CID, Cuddapah, second respondent herein, to take over the
C.D. file in Cr. No. 129 of 2000 filed under S. 420, 498-A and 506 IPC referred
under Sec. 156 (3) of the Code from CCS, Tirupathi, for further investigation
immediately and submit PER within 15 days. In consequence of which he filed a
memo stating that on certain allegations the first respondent Addl. Director
General of Police, CID, Hyderabad, in his Memo dated 14.8.2000 directed him to
take over the C.D. file in the above case and conduct further investigation. In
obedience of the said orders, he obtained the C.D. file in the above case, on
19.8.2000 from the Inspector of Police, CCS, Tirupathi, and took up further
investigation. Therefore, prayed the Court to stop further proceedings in the
above case until further report is filed by the CID. It is this order which is
assailed in this writ petition on the ground that the respondent has no
jurisdiction or authority to issue such directions once the offence was already
investigated a final report was filed and the Court has taken cognizance of the
offence. It is further contended that when there is no further evidence oral or
documentary, there is no necessity to further investigate into the matter.
Therefore, the order passed by the first respondent on certain allegations dated
14.8.2000 directing the 2nd respondent to take C.D. file in Cr. No. 129 of 2000
for further investigation and submit a fresh report within 15 days, is liable to
be set aside on the ground of lack of power and contrary to Sec. 173 (8) of the
Code of Criminal Procedure (for brevity the Procedure Code).
        In response to the rule nisi issued buy this Court, respondents 1 and 2
filed counter affidavit trying to support the impugned action initiated by the
first respondent in pursuance of which the second respondent filed Memo dated
22.8.2000 before the Court, as legal and sustainable in law. The counter is
conspicuously silent as to under what circumstances the respondents have ordered
for further investigation into the matter. What all paragraph 3 of the counter
shows is that on the basis of the preliminary inquiry report submitted by the
Inspector, CID, Cuddapah, the first respondent directed the second respondent to
take over the C.D. file and to conduct further investigation. The counter
further shows that the petitioner in her complaint lodged before the learned
Magistrate prayed to forward the complaint to the SHO, CCS, Tirupathi,  where
one Sambashvaiah, Inspector of police who is related to the petitioner was
working, that the said Inspector of police has not properly conducted the
investigation and he has not examined the witnesses, that though the matter was
tried before the elders, as per the desire of the parents of the Y.Ravhavardhan
- husband, the said inspector, Sambasivaiah, has not referred the matter to the
Family Counselling so as to make efforts for the reunion of the separated
married couples, even though there was instructions given to the Investigating
Officer on 4.5.2000 i.e. before filing of charge sheet on 10.6.2000, for the
reasons best known to him. Therefore, all these acts and deeds warranted the
first respondent to pass the impugned order directing the 2nd respondent to
investigate into the matter. It is further stated that the petitioner arrived
India on 20.1.2000 and she never lodge complaint with the police either at Kodur
or Tirupathi, that the Judicial Magistrate of First Class, Rajampet is the
jurisdictional Court for Kodur and she has not approached the Court at Rajampet,
that the matter was settled before the elders and an undertaking was given by
the father of the petitioner on 9.3.2000 before Town elders and contrary to the
said undertaking given by her father, she filed the above said complaint against
her husband, father-in-law and mother-in-law.
        During the course of investigation, the 2nd respondent brought some new
facts into light, with regard to the alleged marriage of the said Raghavardhan
with one Geethika prior to the marriage of the petitioner with Raghavardhan. It
is stated that the said Geethika Ramini who is the daughter of one K.
Basaveswara Rao, Deputy Central Intelligence Officer, Hyderabad and he performed
her marriage with Sri P. Sekhar son of P. Uma Maheswara Rao, Viveknandanagar   
Colony, Hyderabad on 9.11.1995 at Bozai Kalyana Mandapam, near Shobhana Theatre,    
Balanagar, Hyderabad. The said Sekhar is a Civil Engineering Graduate, got
trained up in Computers and Smt. P. Geethika Ramani did her B.Sc., Computers and  
underwent training in APTECH, both of them got married and registered before the
Registrar of Marriage, Kukatpalli, Rangareddy District on 11.3.1997 and went to
USA during April, 1998 and are presently working there and living together in
America alongwith their son Akshay, 4 years. In token of his investigation, the
Investigating Officer has collected the wedding card of Smt. P. Geethika Ramani
and Sri P. Sekhar, evidencing their marriage on 9.11.1995 and the marriage
certificate date 11.3.97.
        Having regard to these pleadings of the parties, without going into the
merits or otherwise of the surmises, the only question that arises for
consideration and decision is whether the power exercised by the first
respondent, purported to be under Sec. 173(8) of the Code, in ordering further
investigation when once the offence has already been investigated into and the
Court has taken cognizance of the same, is valid in the eye of law or not.
        On the basis of the complaint filed by the petitioner herein alleging that
the Y.Raghavardhan married her suppressing the fact of his earlier marriage with
one Geethika, demanded dowry which was accordingly paid, subjected her to 
cruelty to pressurize her father to get the house transferred in the joint name
of herself and the Y.Raghavardhan and took Rs.3.00 from her parents to take her
to USA with him, the learned Magistrate referred the matter to Police Station,
CCS, Tirupathi, to investigate into and submit a report. Accordingly, the matter
was investigated into, gathered some material and filed charge sheet, which was
taken congnizance by the learned Magistrate and registered as CC No. 489 of
2000. Subsequently, the representation made by the father of Raghavardhan - the
3rd respondent herein addressed to the Director General of Police, CID,
Hyderabad, dated 20.4.2000, he directed the 2nd respondent to further
investigate into the matter. Thus the 2nd respondent in pursuance of the orders
of the first respondent took the C.D. file, the Inspector, CCS, Tirupathi
investigated into the matter. Before investigating into the matter, the impugned
memo was filed to stop further proceedings in the above case until further
report to be filed by the CID.
        It is the case of the respondents that the power is traceable under Sub-
Sec. (8) of Sec. 173 of the Code for issuance of the above said Memo.
        It is apposite here to refer to Sec. 173(8) of the Code for better
appreciation of the rival contentions:
"..173. Report of Police Officer on completion of investigation:
(1) to (7).............
(8)     Nothing in this section shall be deemed to preclude further investigation
in respect of an offence after a report under Sub-Section (2) has been forwarded
to the Magistrate and, where upon such investigation, the Officer in charge of
the Police Station obtains further evidence,  oral or documentary, he shall
forward to the Magistrate a further report or reports regarding such evidence in
the form prescribed; and the provisions of sub-Sec.(2) to (6) shall, as far as
may be, apply in relation to such report or reports as they apply in relation to
a report forwarded under Sub-Sec.(2)

        Section 173 of the Code contemplates that every investigation under
Chapter XII of the Code shall be completed without unnecessary delay, and as
soon as it is completed, the Officer in charge of the Police Station shall
forward to a Magistrate empowered to take cognizance of the offence on a police
report, a report in the form prescribed by the State Government.
        Sub-Section 8 of Sec. 173, which is relevant in dealing with the issue
involved in this writ petition, starts with a non-abstente clause that nothing
in Sec. 173 shall be deemed to preclude further investigation in respect of the
offence after a report under Sec.-Sec.(2) of Sec. 173 is forwarded to the
Magistrate and where upon such investigation, the officer in charge of the
police Station obtains further evidence, oral or documentary, he shall forward
to the Magistrate a further report or reports regarding such evidence in the
form prescribed and the provisions of Sub-Sec. (2) to (6) shall, as far as may
be, apply in relation to such report or reports as they apply in relation to a
report forwarded under Sub-Sec.(2). Thus power is conferred on the Police
Officers to further investigate into the matter and submit a report or reports
and forward further evidence, oral or documentary, in the prescribed form, even
after cognizance of the offence is taken by the jurisdictional Magistrate.
        There is no dispute with regard to the power of the Officer incharge of
the Police Station to further investigate into the matter, even after he has
submitted a report under Sub-Sec. (2) of Sec. 173 and the Magistrate has taken
cognizance of the offence. But the above said provision of law does not entitle
the officers incharge of the police station to file a memo and seek to stop of
all further proceedings in the case, until further report is filed in pursuance
of further investigation. What all Sub-Sec. (8) of Sec. 173 mandates is that the
Officer incharge of the police Station on obtaining further evidence, oral or
documentary, shall forward to the Magistrate in the form of a report or reports,
prescribed by the State Government, regarding such evidence.
At the outset, we shall deal with the word further investigation. The Supreme
Court in K.Chandrasekhar V. State of Kerala and others (1) which was a case
where in the State Government had consented for the entrustment of investigation
in a case involving offences punishable under Official Secrets Act to the CBI,
the CBI completed investigation and filed a final report, subsequently the State
Government withdrew the consent and sought further investigation in the case by
the State Police. In this context, Their Lordships quoting Dictionary meaning of
"further" as additional; more; supplement; has held that further investigation
therefore is the continuation of the earlier investigation and not a fresh
investigation or reinvestigation to be started ab initio wiping out the earlier
investigation altogether. Sub-Sec. (8) of Sec. 173 clearly envisages that on
completion of further investigation, the investigating agency has to forward to
the Magistrate a further report or reports and not fresh report or reports,
regarding the further evidence obtained during such investigation. Subsequent
withdrawal of consent by the State Government for further investigation of case
by State Police is impermissible.
The Apex Court in yet another decision Om Prakash Naranga and another Vs. State  
(Delhi Administration)(2) has held that notwithstanding that a Magistrate had
taken cognizance of the offence upon a police report submitted under Sec. 173 of
the Code, the right of the police to further investigation is not exhausted and
the police can exercise such right as often as necessary when the information
comes to light. It is further observed that there was no provision in the Code
of Criminal Procedure which, expressly or by necessary implication barred the
right of the police to further investigate after cognizance of the case had been
taken by the Magistrate. Neither Sec. 173 nor Sec. 190 of the Code lead to say
that the power of the police to further investigate was exhausted by the
Magistrate taking cognizance of the offence. Practice, convenience and
preponderance of authority, permits repeated investigations on discovery of
fresh facts. Their Lordships further observed that in the interest of
independence of the Magistracy and the judiciary, in the interest of purity of
the administration of criminal justice and in the interests of the comity of the
various agencies and institutions entrusted with different stages of such
administration, it would ordinarily be desirable that the police should inform
the Court and seek formal permission to make further investigation when fresh
facts come to light.
While reaffirming the above said principle, the Apex Court in a decision State
of Bihar and another V. JAC Saldanna and others (3) has observed that the Police
officers should refrain from addressing communications to the Court on pending
matters required to be determined judicially and Their Lordship disapproved
such conduct of the Police Officers.
The Jammu and Kashmir High Court in a decision Ghulam Mohiuddin Mir and another   
Vs. State of Jammu & Kashmir (4) has held that notwithstanding the submission of
its report under Sec. 173(2) of the Code and the fact that the Magistrate has
already taken cognizance, is its statutory right which cannot be interfered
within the exercise of the inherent powers of the High Court under Sec. 482 of
the Code. The use of expression re-investigation in the application of the
prosecuting officer would not change the position because it actually is the
prayer for further investigation for the reasons disclosed in the application
and therefore, dismissed the application confirming the order passed by the
Judicial Magistrate of First Class, Tangmarg.
In that case, F.I.R. No. 29 of 1985 was lodged in Police Station, Tangmarg on
2.7.1985. the police after investigation presented the challans before the
Judicial Magistrate of First Class, Tangmarg, while the case was pending before
the said Court, an application was filed by the Prosecuting Officer praying
inter alia for reinvestigation on the grounds contained therein, two of which
were that the previous investigating officer  had not effected the recoveries
and that certain other important and salient facts having vital bearing on the
case were not brought out. Reliance for these grounds was placed on the
statement of a prosecuting witness namely Mr. Baba. The learned Magistrate
noticed the provisions of Sub-Sec.(8) of Sec.173 of the Code and observed that
the investigating agency had the right to conduct further investigation in
respect of an offence, even after report under Sub-Sec. (2) of Sec. 173 has been
forwarded to the Magistrate. He observed that the investigating agency is at
liberty to go in for further investigation at their option. That order was
assailed before the High Court seeking to quash the same on the principal ground
that there is no right with the police to further investigate the case after the
Court has taken cognizance and that the Magistrate himself  can alter the charge
under Sec. 227 of the Code, if the material so satisfies.
Having regard to these facts and circumstances the Apex Court held that further
investigation by the police notwithstanding the submission of its report under
Sec. 173(2) of the Code, 1898 and the fact that the Magistrate has already taken
cognizance, is its statutory right under Sec. 173(8) which cannot be interfered
with.
The ratio laid down by the Supreme Court in the decision Union Public Service
Commission Vs. S. Papaiah and others (5)  having regard to the law laid down in
Bhagwant Singh V. Commissioner of Police ( AIR 1985 SC 1285) is to the effect
that issuance of notice by the Magistrate to the informant at the time of
consideration of the final report is a "must". It is further observed that this
is the binding precedent which is the law of the land, has not been followed by
the V Metropolitan Magistrate and was wrongly ignored by the revisional Court
also. In this context, the Apex Court has ruled that when the application was
filed before the Metropolitan Magistrate seeking reinvestigation, the learned
Magistrate rejected the petition by his order dated 4.11.1995 and observed that
rightly or wrongly that Court has passed an order and it was not reviewed
earlier. In that context, it was held by the Supreme Court that further
investigation in exercise of the powers under Sec. 173(8) of the Code directing
the CBI to further investigate the case and collect further evidence keeping in
view the objections raised by the appellant to the investigation and a new
report to be filed by the Investigating Officer would be covered by Sub-Sec. 2
to 6 of Sec. 173 of the Code, and thus the learned Magistrate therein failed to
exercise the jurisdiction vested in him by law and his order was set aside.
From the above decisions of the Apex Court and High Court of Jammu & Kashmir, it 
is clear further investigation is not either re-investigation or a fresh
investigation, but it is continuation of the investigation already made. The
contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner that the order of the first
respondent directing the Inspector, CID, to further investigate in to the matter
amounts to reinvestigation cannot be accepted particularly in view of the
decision of the Supreme Court in K.Chankrasekhar's case (supra), His next
contention that the first respondent has no jurisdiction or power to pass such
an order when the learned Magistrate has already taken cognizance of the offence
on the final report submitted by the Police, CCS, Tirupathi, more particularly
when no material is filed by the respondents to show that any fresh fact has
come to light requiring further investigation, is concerned, on perusal of
material on record, I am satisfied that no fresh facts came into light to order
for further investigation into the matter by the first respondent except the
representation made by the father of Smt. Geethika. Whatever evidence that is
gathered in pursuance of further investigation, can be brought on record during
the course of trial by way of defence evidence. Therefore, on this aspect, I
agree with the learned counsel for the petitioner.
Further more, the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner cannot be
conceded to, in view of express power provided to the police officers, who are
incharge of the Police Station, in Sub-Sec. (8) of Sec. 173 to further
investigate into the matter, when fresh facts came to light and also in view of
the proposition laid down by the Apex Court and other High Courts.
In this case, the subject matter relates to a matrimonial dispute between the
petitioner and her husband Y.Raghavardhan. There is nothing unusual in this
matter to order further investigation. This complaint is like one filed by any
ordinary citizen of the country, which attracts penal provisions and requires to
be proved by leading evidence.  It is the allegation of the petitioner that her
husband - Y.Raghavardhan has cheated her, that he has already married one 
Geethika before his marriage with her. Further he demanded and took dowry from
her parents by subjecting her to both physical and mental harassment. Therefore,
filed the criminal Case for the offence under section 420, 498-A and 506 read
with Sec. 34 of Indian Penal Code.  Thus, evidently, there is no element of
public interest involved in this matter, warranting the first respondent to pass
the impugned order. Therefore, on the complaint of the petitioner, under section
156(3) of the Code, the learned Magistrate referred the matter for investigation
and report and on submission of the final report, after investigation by the
Inspector of Police, CCS, Tirupathi, the learned Magistrate has taken
cognizance. The contention of the respondent that the said Inspector of Police,
Sri Sambashivaiah, who is related to the petitioner, has not examined certain
witnesses and failed to bring in evidence certain facts cannot be considered at
this stage. These are the issues which can only be decided after a full-fledged
trial. There is no semblance of any public interest to order for further
investigation, more particularly when the respondents have failed either to
bring on record as to what are the fresh facts that came to light after filing
the report and the Magistrate took cognizance of the case. Further they have not
obtained permission from the jurisdictional Magistrate to conduct further
investigation. The learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that except the
allegations made in his representation by the father of one Smt. Geethika, who
is working as Deputy Central Intelligence Officer, Hyderabad, no other material
is available to order further investigation in the above crime, which according
to him is unwarranted and do not attract Sec. 173(8) of the Code. That apart, it
is contended that the 2nd respondent, in an objectionable language, under the
garb of direction from the first respondent cannot address the Magistrate
seeking to stop the further proceedings until a report is filed, which
tantamount to obstructing delivery of justice. The Apex Court in JAC Saldanna's
case has observed that the Police officers should refrain from addressing
communications to the Court on pending matters required to be determined
judicially and Their Lordship disapproved such conduct of the Police Officers.
Having regard to the facts and circumstances of the case and the ruling of the
Supreme Court and other High Courts, firstly I hold that under Sub-Sec.(8) of
Sec. 173 of the Code, police officer incharge of the police station has a right
to further investigate into the offence and the Magistrate has taken cognizance
of the offence, when any fresh facts come to light and after such investigation,
he can request the learned Magistrate to take the evidence on record; secondly I
hold that when investigation is done and report is submitted as directed by the
Magistrate and the learned Magistrate has taken cognizance of the offence and if
fresh facts come to light which requires further investigation, the concerned
police officer incharge of the police station has to obtain permission from the
learned Magistrate before conducting further investigation into the offence.
Thirdly I hold that the power exercised by the first respondent under Sub-
Sec.(8) of Sec. 173 of the Code, in the absence of any fresh facts that came to
light, in ordering further investigation after the II Addl. Judicial Magistrate
of First Class, Tirupathi has taken cognizance, is unwarranted, illegal and
liable to be set aside; fourthly the memo filed by the second respondent on the
basis of the impugned proceedings of the first respondent seeking to stop
further proceedings in the case until further report is filed by the CID amounts
to obstructing delivery of justice, therefore, liable to be set aside. The
second respondent should not have filed the impugned memo before the Magistrate, 
he should have filed the said memo through the Prosecuting Officer, who is
Officer of the Court or any other counsel appearing for CID. This Court while
disapproving the conduct of the 2nd respondent, directs the Police Officers, who
are incharge of the Police Stations, shall not resort to filing such requests
directly before the Courts hereafter under section 173(8) of the Code  which
amounts to obstructing the delivery of justice.
I am fortified in my above view by the decision of the Supreme Court in
Saldanna's case (Supra) wherein when a serious objection was taken against the
Superintendent of Railway Police, Mohammad Sulaiman, directly addressing a 
letter to the learned Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate on February 15, 1979
informing him about the decision of the Government to continue the investigation
and, therefore, not to accept the final report, the Apex Court has held that it
is true that the police officers should refrain from addressing communications
to the Court on pending matters required to be determined judicially. Their
Lordships have expressed their disapproval of such a conduct. Finally I hold
that further investigation  contemplated under section 173(8) of the Code on
fresh facts by the Officer incharge of the Police Station after taking
cognizance by the Magistrate on the basis of investigation report dos not amount
to reinvestigation, but it is continuation of earlier investigation conducted by
the Officer incharge of the Police Station as per the direction of the
Magistrate.
Therefore, for all the above reasons, I hold that the impugned order passed by
the first respondent in C.No. 2534/C-13/WPC/2000 dated 14.8.2000 consequent to 
which the second respondent has filed the impugned memo dated 22.8.2000 before  
the II Addl. Judicial Magistrate of First Class, Tirupathi, in CC No. 489 of
2000 are liable to be set aside and are accordingly set aside.
The writ petition is accordingly disposed of. No order as to costs.




?1  AIR 1998 S.C. 2001 
2  AIR 1979 SC 1791 
3  AIR 1980 S.C. 326 
4  1989 (1) Crimes 608
5  AIR 1997 S.C. 3876 


