

THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE L.NARASIMHA REDDY          
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1689 of 2001     

 06/03/2003

MANIKYALA PRASAD      
AND OTHERS    

petitioner

THE STATE OF A.P.   
REP., BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR        

RESPONDENTS     

COUNSEL FOR APPELLANTS: Sri. K. M. SAXENA         

COUNSEL FOR RESPONDENTS:  PUBLIC PROSECUTOR               



:JUDGMENT:--  

This is an appeal preferred by the accused in S.C.No.177 of 2000 on the file of
the Assistant Sessions Judge, Nalgonda. The trial Court, through its judgment
dated 20th September 2001, convicted the appellants for the offence under
Section 304B IPC and sentenced them to undergo Rigorous Imprisonment (RI) for 10 
years and to pay a fine of Rs.500/- each; in default to undergo Simple
Imprisonment (SI) for 2 months.
The case of the prosecution was that the marriage of deceased Rama Devi,
daughter of P.Ws.1 and 2, was performed with A1, some time during March 1998.A2  
and A3 are the parents of A1.  At the time of marriage, P.Ws. 1 and 2 are said
to have given 1 acre of land towards dowry.  After the marriage, A1 and his wife
Rama Devi lived peacefully. About 6 months thereafter, the accused are said to
have asked the deceased to sell the land given at the time of marriage and bring
the sale proceeds thereof. The accused are alleged to have harassed Rama Devi
physically and mentally for selling the said piece of land. She was sent to her
parents place for that purpose.  P.Ws. 1 and 2 had consoled her and sent back to
the place of accused, stating that it would take some time for them to sell the
land.
Rama Devi was sent to her parents place once again for the same purpose. At that
time, Panchayat was held in the presence of P.W.3 and another person.The accused  
were asked not to indulge in harassing Rama Devi and ultimately she was sent to
the place of the accused. In our about July 1999, A1 to A3 are alleged to have
bet Rama Devi and asked her to leave the place, to bring the amount after
selling the land.Having been vexed with the harassment caused to her, Rama Devi
consumed poison on the midnight of 10-9-1999 and died instantly.
On receiving the information, P.Ws.1, 2 and 3 went to the place of the accused
and on seeing the dead body, reported the matter to the Police.The SHO of PS
Narayanapur took up the investigation and post-mortem was conducted on the body 
of the deceased, duly following the legal formalities.  The post mortem report
revealed that the death was on account of consumption of pesticide.
In support of its case, the prosecution has examined P.Ws. 1 to 13 and marked
Exs.P1 to P15.  No evidence was adduced on behalf of the accused. PW.1 is the 
mother and PW.2 is the father of the deceased Rama Devi.  PW.3 is an elder, who
participated in the Panchayat. P.Ws. 4 and 5 are the neighbours of the accused,
PW.6 is the Medical Practitioner who is said to have given first aid to the
deceased, PW.7 is the Medical Officer, who conducted the post mortem, P.Ws.8, 10  
and 11 are the panch witnesses, P.W.9 is the colleague of the deceased, PW.12 is
the Revenue Officer, who held the inquest and PW.13 is the Investigating
Officer.  Out of these witnesses, P.Ws.4 to 6, 8 and 9 were treated as hostile.
The learned counsel for the appellants submits that there did not exist any
material before the trial Court to establish the offence under Section 304B IPC.
He submits that P.Ws. 1 and 2 are interested witnesses and P.W.3 did not say any 
thing except his participation in the Panchayat.According to him, even if the
deposition of the material witnesses viz., P.Ws.1 to 3 is to be taken on its
face value, the same do not give any indication as to the cause of death, that
too, attributable to the accused herein.  He has also drawn the attention of the
Court to the inconsistencies in the evidence on several aspects.
The learned Public Prosecutor submits that the evidence of the material
witnesses P.Ws. 1 to 3 was consistent, supported by the medical evidence and the
oral evidence before the trial Court was adequate to sustain the conviction.
The accused were charged with the offence under Section 304B IPC. This Section 
and Section 498-A were inserted in the IPC witha view to curb the civil
harassment of married women by their spouses and relations for the purpose of
dowry.The circumstances for the invocation of these provisions are different,
though their object is common.
For invoking Section 304B of IPC, the prosecution has to establish certain
ingredients, such as:
(i) the death of a married woman taking place otherwise than under normal
circumstances; 
(ii) the death taking place within 7 years of the marriage; and
(iii) the deceased having been subjected to cruelty and harassment soon before
the death.
The nature and standard of proof of these ingredients differ from each other.
It is not difficult to prove the first ingredient.  It can easily be discerned
and established as to whether the death was otherwise than under normal
circumstances.  The 2nd ingredient is almost a matter of record, once the date
of marriage is established.  It is only the 3rd ingredient, which poses certain
problems. 
The Section provides for a presumption to be drawn once the basic factors are
established.  The death, referred to Section 304B is called  'dowry death',
entailing a minimum punishment of 7 years for the accused.  The terms
'harassment' and 'soon before' are not susceptible of any precise definition.
What constitutes 'harassment' and whether a particular incident can be said to
have occurred 'soon before' or not, would depend on the facts and circumstances
of the case. When a legal presumption is provided against the accused and the
punishment is too severe, the Court is required to be cautious in recording
findings on these aspects.
It is not in dispute that the death of the accused was on account of consumption
of poison.  There is no denial of the fact that the death of the deceased took
place within 7 years from the date of her marriage. The first two ingredients of
Section 304B can be said to have been established in this case.  As regards the
3rd requirement, viz., 'whether the deceased has been harassed by the accused
soon before her death and whether such harassment was the immediate cause of  
death' needs to be examined.
P.W.1 has stated in her chief-examination that the deceased and A1 lived
together happily for about 6 months and thereafter the deceased was sent to
P.Ws.1and 2 requiring her to sell the land and bring the sale proceeds. She has
also deposed that the deceased was sent back by persuading that it will take
some time to sell the land. She stated that one month thereafter, her daughter
came once again with the same complaint.  The matter was said to have been kept 
before the elders including P.W.3 and after discussing the matter, she was sent
back. About 20 days after the said Panchayat, P.W.2 was said to have gone to the
place of A1.   At that time, the deceased once again complained to PW.2 about
the continued harassment.  One month thereafter, they received the intimation
about the death of their daughter.
P.W.2, the father of the deceased, in his chief examination, deposed that after
the marriage, A1 looked after the deceased for about one year, and thereafter
sent her back with a demand to sell the land. He does not speak about the
Panchayat having been held or his visiting the place of the accused as spoken to
by PW.1. 
PW.3 hails from the village of P.Ws.1 and 2.  He is said to have participated in
the Panchayat that was held when the deceased was sent back by the accused.  His  
evidence is only to the effect that a Panchayat was held and the Accused 1 and 2
were convinced not to sell the land. He stated that himself and other
Panchayatdars went along with the deceased to drop her at the place of the
accused. P.Ws. 1 and 2 did not speak to this fact.
Even if the depositions of P.Ws.1 to 3 are taken on their face value, it is
evident that none of them have stated that the deceased had ever told them of
her intention to commit suicide, or as to the degree of harassment being of such
an extent, as would drive her to take the extreme step of suicide.
In this case, except P.Ws. 1 to 3, no other witness has spoken to about the
cause of the death of the deceased. Under Section 32 of the Evidence Act, the
statement of a dead person is relevant, in so far as it relates to the cause of
death.  Section 32 is an exception to the Rule as to inadmissibility of hearsay
evidence. The person, whose statement is treated as relevant, will not be
available for cross-examination.  The witness, who reproduces the statements of
the deceased, cannot vouch for the correctness or otherwise of the same.  It is
for this reason that the courts are required to be circumspect in appreciating
the evidence, which falls within the ambit of Section 32.
Under the English Law, the statement of a dead person would become relevant, if
only it is established that the deceased faced an imminent threat to his life or
likelihood of occurrence of his death, when such a statement came to be
made.Such a requirement is not provided under Section 32 of the Evidence Act. On
the other hand, Section 32(1) clearly stipulates that such statements are
relevant, whether or not the person making them was under expectation of death.
However, the statement of the dead person should be suggestive of cause of his
or her death, though, the death may not have been in immediate or proximate
contemplation.  If this much is not evident, any statement of a dead person can
be used as a substratum, to be carved out as the cause of his death. In the
process, the witness and in certain cases, the Courts may be tempted to make
their own legal projections or logical extensions to shape such statements as
the causes of death.  It is for this reason that the caution as regards
appreciation of such evidence, in the Indian context is much more.
P.Ws.1 to 3 did not even state that the deceased Rama Devi had ever informed
them of her intention to commit suicide, or to the effect that the harassment
being faced by her was so severe as would leave her with no alternative except
to commit suicide.  That being the situation, it is not at all safe to invoke
the principle underlying Section 32 of the Evidence Act and convict the accused
for the offence under Section 304B IPC. The same is accordingly set aside.
The evidence on record, however, discloses that A1 and A2 have harassed the
deceased for bringing money, after selling the land given to her at the time of
marriage.  It is true that the prosecution failed to prove the factum of the
deceased or A1 having been given 1 acre of land during marriage.  However, the
fact that the deceased was sent to her parents place more than once for bringing
the amount is proved, beyond doubt.  The evidence of P.W.3, who is an
independent witness, in so far as he deposed that Panchayat was held by himself
and several others and that A1 and A2 have participated therein, does not suffer
from any infirmity.  It is not disputed that A1 and A2 have participated in the
Panchayat held in the presence of PW.3 and others.  That pre-supposes the
deceased having been sent to her parents place by Accused 1 and 2.  Even as 
regards this, the accusation against the various accused differs. A1 and A2 are
said to have participated in the Panchayat and were persuaded not to insist on
selling the land.Through out the evidence of P.Ws.1 and 2, there is no reference
to A3, nor any specific act was attributed to her.  Therefore, she cannot be
accused of harassing the deceased. So far as A1 and A2 are concerned, both of
them are guilty of the offence under Section 498A IPC inasmuch it is established
that they have harassed the deceased for the purpose of dowry.  A1, being the
husband of the deceased, was much more to blame.   
 IN THE RESULT,  
(a) the conviction and sentence against A1 to A3 under Section 304-B is set
aside;
(b) A1 and A2 are convicted for the offence under Section 498-A IPC. A1 is
sentenced to undergo RI for 2 years and to pay fine ofRs.500/-; in default to
undergo SI for 2 months.  A2 is sentenced to undergo RI for 1 year 6 months and
to pay fine of Rs.500/-; in default to undergo SI for 2 months.
(c) A3 shall stand acquitted of the charge against her. If she had paid any
fine, the same shall be refunded to her;
(d) The appeal is partly allowed as indicated above.









