

THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE P.S.NARAYANA            
TRANSFER C.M.P.NO. 264 OF 2002      

3-2-2003

GORIPARTHI GAYATRI.                                     



GORIPATHI SRINIVASA RAO.                        

COUNSEL FOR THE PETITIONER:MR.V.CH.NAIDU.          

COUNSEL FOR THE RESPONDENT:MR.P.B.VIJAYA KUMAR.               

:ORDER:  
         The petitioner/wife filed this transfer C.M.P. for withdrawal of H.M.O.P.
5/2002 from the file of the learned Senior Civil Judge, Avanigadda, Krishna
District and transfer the same to the Court of learned Senior Civil Judge,
Tenali, Guntur District to be tried and disposed of in accordance with law.
        It is stated that the petitioner is the legally wedded wife of the
respondent, the marriage having been celebrated on 11.4.2001 as per Hindu
customs and rites at the house of the respondent and their marriage was
consummated.  It is further stated that the respondent has been harassing the
petitioner for dowry and instigating her to commit suicide.  The petitioner also
filed a maintenance case under Section 125 Cr.P.C. in M.C.No.15/2002 on the file
of learned II Additional  Munsif Magistrate, Repally, Guntur.  It is further
stated that the respondent filed H.M.O.P. 5/2002 on the file of learned Senior
Civil Judge, Avanigadda, Krishna District for grant of divorce.  It is further
stated that the petitioner, however, entered appearance through an advocate of
Repally, Guntur District and filed her counter in the said proceedings, whereas
the respondent has been avoiding to receive notice in M.C.No. 15/2002 filed by
her referred to supra.  It is further stated that since the respondent is a
practicing advocate at Avanigadda, the petitioner is unable to get the proper
legal assistance.  It is also further pleaded that there is a threat to her life
also and in such circumstances, the relief of transfer has been prayed for.
        Sri V.C.H. Naidu, the learned counsel representing the petitioner/wife had
taken me through the allegations made in the affidavit filed in support of the
transfer C.M.P. and had contended that the fact that the respondent is a
practicing advocate at Avainigadda is not in dispute.  The learned counsel also
had contended that the fact that the petitioner had engaged a counsel of
Repally, Guntur District also is not in dispute.  No doubt, the respondent had
controverted several other allegations, which had been made in the transfer CMP.
The fact that M.C.No. 15/2002 filed by the petitioner on the file of learned II
Additional Munsif Magistrate, Repally also is not in dispute.
        Per contra, Sri Koteshwar Rao, representing Vijay Kumar, the learned
counsel for the respondent had submitted that the respondent, no doubt, is a
practicing advocate, but the mere fact that the respondent is a practicing
advocate by itself cannot be a ground for ordering the transfer of HMOP from the
file of learned Senior Civil Judge's Court, Avanigadda to the Court of Senior
Civil Judge at Tenali.  The learned counsel also submitted that the allegation
that the petitioner is unable to get legal assistance at Avanigadda is not a
true allegation for the reason that there is no averment made relating to which
of the advocates the petitioner had approached at Avanigadda and who had refused
to take up the case.  These allegations are vague allegations just with a view
to harass the respondent who is a practicing advocate.  It was also further
contended that there is no question of threat to life at all and the said
allegation is coined only for the purpose of getting the matter transferred from
one court to another Court just to suit her convenience and with a view to put
the respondent into trouble who is a professional.
        Heard both the learned counsel.
        The facts had already been narrated above and the same need not be 
repeated again.  The present transfer CMP is filed by the petitioner/wife
against the respondent/husband praying for transfer of HMOP 5/2002 from the file
of the learned Senior Civil Judge, Avanigadda, to the file of learned Senior
Civil Judge's Court, Tenali.  It is not in dispute that the petitioner already
had filed a maintenance case under Section 125 Cr.P.C. in M.C. No. 15/2002 on
the file of learned              II Additional Munsif Magistrate, Reaplly.  It
is also not in dispute that the respondent is a practicing advocate at
Avanigadda and no doubt there is some controversy between the parties relating
to the averment that no advocate at Avanigadda is inclined to take up the
petitioner's case.  However, the fact remains that the petitioner engaged an
advocate of Repally in this regard.  The other factual details relating to this
aspect need not be further gone into for the purpose of deciding the present
transfer CMP.
        In view of the allegations made by the petitioner and taking into
consideration the facts explained in paras E, F & G of the transfer CMP, I am of
the considered opinion that the petitioner had made out a case for ordering
transfer and accordingly HMOP No. 5/2002 pending on the file of Senior Civil
Judge, Avanigadda, Krishna District is hereby withdrawn and transferred to the
Court of learned Senior Civil Judge, Tenali, Guntur to be tried and disposed of
in accordance with law.
        Accordingly, this transfer CMP is ordered.  No order as to costs.


