

THE HONOURABLE SRI JUSTICE K.C. BHANU          
Criminal Revision Case No.940 OF 2000  

09.1.2003 

BOMMA ILAIAH    


THE STATE OF A.P. REP.BY     
PUBLIC PROSECUTOR      

Counsel for the Petitioner       :      Mr. Y. Krishna Reddy 

Counsel for the Respondent      :       Public Prosecutor.


:JUDGMENT:   

        The revision is directed against the judgment in Crl. A. No. 123/1996,
dated 10.8.2000, on the file of the learned Sessions Judge, Medak at Sangareddy,
whereunder while the order of conviction and sentence passed by the learned
Judicial I Class Magistrate, Gajwel in C.C. No. 4/1993, dated 5.12.1996, against
A2 and A3 under Section 498-A of the Indian Penal Code was set aside, the order
of sentence passed by the trial Court against A1 to undergo simple imprisonment
for one year and to pay a fine of Rs.500/-, in default to suffer simple
imprisonment for one month for the offence under Section 498-A I.P.C. was
confirmed and the order of sentence passed by the trial Court against A1 to
undergo simple imprisonment for 2 years and to pay a fine of Rs.500/-, in
default to suffer simple imprisonment for one month under Section 325 I.P.C.,
was modified and A1 was sentenced to suffer simple imprisonment for one year and
to pay a fine of Rs.5,000/-, in default to suffer simple imprisonment for six
months for the charge under Section 325 I.P.C.
        The brief facts that are necessary for the disposal of the present
revision cas
e are that Bomma Kanakamma (P.W.1) was married to A1 in the month of February 19    
92, that at the time of the marriage, the parents of P.W.1 gave one cycle, one w
rist watch and some household articles to A1, that two months after the marriage
 A1 started harassing his wife with a view to get rid of her and to marry anothe
r girl, that on coming to know about the same, in the month of April 1992, the p
arents of P.W.1 took her to Guntupally and stayed there for about 20 days and la
ter on the advice of elders P.W. 1 returned to the house of her husband, that on
 13.8.1992, A1 forced his wife to have sexual intercourse with him, relieved her
clothes, inserted his fingers and a stick in her vagina, and caused severe pains
and bleeding and she became unconscious, that for about four days thereafter she
was not allowed to come out of the house, that the parents of P.W.1 and other
relatives held a Panchayat, that then she was shifted to a private hospital at
Gajwel where she was referred to Gandhi Hospital, Secunderabad, that she
underwent treatment till 23.11.1992, and that thereafter she gave a report to
police and the police registered the case and investigated into.        On behalf of
the Prosecution, P.Ws. 1 to 10 were examined and Exs.P1 to P6, besides M.Os. 1  
to 5, were marked.      The trial Court after considering the evidence on record
came to the conclusion that the Prosecution proved its case beyond all
reasonable doubt for the charge under Section 498-A I.P.C. against A1 to A3, and
accordingly sentenced them to suffer simple imprisonment for one year each and
to pay a fine of Rs.500/- each, in default to suffer simple imprisonment for one
month each.  The trial Court further convicted and sentenced A1 under Section
325 I.P.C. to undergo simple imprisonment for two years and to pay a fine of
Rs.500/-, in default to suffer simple imprisonment for one month.  Accused No.4
in the case was acquitted by the trial Court for the offence under Section 498-A
I.P.C. In the appeal preferred by A1 to A3, the learned Sessions Judge acquitted
A2 and A3 for the charge under Section 498-A I.P.C., but confirmed the sentence
under Section 498-A I.P.C., imposed against A1 and modified the sentence under
Section 325 I.P.C. to simple imprisonment for one year and to pay a fine of
Rs.5,000/-, in default to suffer simple imprisonment for six months.  The
substantive sentences imposed on A1 were directed to run concurrently.
Aggrieved by the said judgment, A1 preferred the present revision petition,
questioning the legality and correctness thereof.
        Learned counsel for the petitioner contended that the necessary
ingredients for the offence under Section 498-A I.P.C. were not made out against
the revision petitioner, that there was delay in reporting the matter to the
police, that it was not a case of demand for additional dowry, that P.W.8 was
not the medical officer who treated P.W.1 and failure to examine the Doctor who
treated P.W.1 was fatal to the case of the Prosecution, and that the stick
alleged to have been inserted into the vagina of P.W.1 was not seized.
Therefore, he prays to set aside the order of conviction and sentence recorded
against the petitioner.
        On the other hand, the learned Additional Public Prosecutor contended that
the evidence of P.W.1 is very clear that she was being harassed by A1 and her
version with regard to the harassment was consistent through out, that there is
absolutely no reason for P.W. 1 to speak false against her husband on this
aspect, that P.W.8 was the Doctor who treated P.W.1 and was a competent person   
to depose about the nature of the injuries and their severity, and that the non-
seizure of the stick does not in any way affect the case of the Prosecution.    
Hence, he prays to dismiss the revision petition.
        There is no dispute that the revision petitioner is the husband of P.W.1.
Their marriage took place in the month of February 1992.  For about three months
after the marriage, they led marital life happily.      Thereafter, A1 started
harassing his wife at the instance of A3.  Therefore, P.W.1 came to her parents'
house and stayed for about eight days.  Later, the mother of A1 went to the
house of the parents of P.W.1 and assured them that they would not cause
harassment to P.W.1 and would look after her well.       On that assurance, P.W.1 
went back to the house of her husband.  On 13.8.1992 A1 forced his wife for
intercourse, relieved her of her clothes, inserted his fingers in her vagina and
also a stick causing severe bleeding injuries.  She was not allowed to move out
of the house till a Panchayat was held on 17.8.1992.  After the Panchayat only,
P.W.1 was taken to the hospital for treatment.
        The first charge against the accused was under Section 498-A I.P.C.  Under
clause (a) of Explanation to Section 498-A I.P.C., cruelty, for the purpose of
that Section, means any willful conduct of the husband or the relative of the
husband of a woman which is of such a nature as is likely to drive the woman to
commit suicide or to cause grave injury or danger to life, limb or health
(whether mental or physical of the woman).
        Therefore, in order to constitute cruelty under clause (a), it is not
enough that the conduct of the accused is willful and is offensively unjust to a
woman, but it is further necessary that the degree of intensity of such unjust
conduct on the part of the accused is such as is likely to drive the woman to
commit suicide or such conduct is likely to cause grave injury or danger to her
life or limb, or to her mental or physical health.
        Under clause (b) of Explanation to Section 498-A I.P.C., cruelty means the
harassment of the woman where such harassment is with a view to coercing her or
any person related to her to meet any unlawful demand for any property or
valuable security or is on account of failure by her or any person related to
her to meet such demand. 
        Now I will examine whether the evidence on record satisfies the
ingredients of either clause (a) or clause (b) of Explanation to Section 498-A
I.P.C.
        So far as clause (a) is concerned, the evidence of P.Ws. 1 to 3 is
relevant.  They simply stated that at the instance of A3, A1 used to beat P.W.1.
This statement is only omnibus in nature.       P.W.1 did not state as to the reasons
for A1 beating her or causing harassment to her.        P.W.2 stated that he was
informed by P.W.1 that A1 to A3 used to abuse her on the ground that she was not
doing household work properly.  He did not say that the accused demanded any 
dowry.  P.W.1 did not say that she informed her father that she was abused by A1
to A3 on the ground that she was not doing the work properly.  The evidence of
P.Ws. 2 to 3 does not disclose any cruel treatment or harassment by the accused
to P.W.1.  On the other hand, their evidence is contrary to the evidence of
P.W.1. 
P.W.4 is the daughter of younger sister of P.W.1.  She stated that A1 beat P.W.1
and in that connection a Panchayat was held.  But P.Ws. 1 to 3 did not state
that a Panchayat was held in connection with the ill-treatment or harassment by
the accused.  So, the evidence of P.W. 4 does not in any way help the case of
the Prosecution. P.W.6 stated that he came to know that P.W. 1 was being 
harassed by A1.  It is only hear-say evidence.
Thus, the evidence on record does not disclose that there was cruelty on the
part of the accused which was of such a nature as was likely to drive P.W.1 to
commit suicide or cause grave injury or danger to her life or limb, or mental or
physical health.
In so far as clause (b) is concerned, the evidence of P.Ws. 1 to 3 does not
disclose that P.W. 1 was harassed by A1 with regard to any demand for additional
dowry.  On the other hand, the evidence on record discloses that there was no
demand of dowry by A1 or his parents.  Perhaps that was the reason why the lower
Court gave a finding that there was no demand for dowry by the accused.
The above discussion clearly shows that either clause (a) or clause (b) of the
Explanation to Section 498-A does not attract in this case.
Coming to the charge under Section 325 I.P.C. is concerned, it was the case of
the Prosecution that on 13.8.1992, A1 inserted his fingers and a stick in the
vagina of P.W.1 as a result of which she sustained heavy bleeding injury.
        P.W.8 is the Doctor who examined P.W.1 on 20.8.1992.  He found motions   
coming through the vagina of P.W.1 and faecal matter (motions) present in the
vagina and therefore he referred P.W. 1 to a Lady Medical Officer.       He
issued Ex.P3-medical certificate.  He opined that the injuries were grievous in
nature and might have been caused by a sharp weapon like a stick being pushed 
through vagina down to rectum causing the injuries.  The evidence of P.W.8 and
the recitals in Ex.P6 would clearly go to show that P.W.1 sustained grievous
injuries.        For the injury to her vagina, P.W.1 took treatment for about four
months at Gandhi Hospital, Secunderabad.  So, the medical evidence establishes 
that the vagina of P.W.1 was damaged.    The ocular testimony of P.W.1 is
completely in corroboration with the medical evidence.  There is absolutely no
reason for P.W.1 to foist a false case against her husband on this aspect.
The incident in question took place on 13.8.1992. The police recorded the
statement of P.W.1 on 22.8.1992 and thereafter the case was registered.  Though
there was delay in giving the F.I.R. to police, the Prosecution had explained
the delay.  According to P.W.1, some time after the incident, she regained
consciousness, but she was not allowed to go out of the house till 18.8.1992.
When the parents of P.W. 1 came to know about the incident, they went to the
house of the accused, but they were not allowed to see P.W. 1.  Then a Panchayat
was held on 17.8.1992.  Thereafter, on the next date of morning, P.W. 1 was
taken to a hospital at Gajwel.  On the advice of the Doctor at Gajwel, P.W. 1
was taken to Gandhi Hospital, Secunderabad.  After admission of P.W.1 in the
hospital, P.W.9 recorded her statement on 22.8.1992 and registered the case.
P.W.10 took up further investigation.  There was no possibility for P.W.1 to
rush to the police station after sustaining grievous injury to her vagina, as
she was not allowed to go out of the house.  Ultimately after persuasion by the
Panchayat, P.W. 1 was taken to the hospital and in the hospital her statement
was recorded by the police.  There is absolutely no unexplained delay in giving
the F.I.R. to the police after the incident.  The delay in lodging the F.I.R.
was properly explained and the explanation is quite convincing.  When the fact
that P.W. 1 sustained severe injury to her vagina is established, the delay, if
any, cannot affect the main substratum of the Prosecution case.
The non-seizure of the stick alleged to have been inserted in the vagina of
P.W.1 must be a mistake or an error committed by the police at the time of the
investigation. Some technical error committed by the Investigating Officer
during the course of investigation does not in any way affect the case of the
Prosecution, if otherwise the evidence of P.W. 1 is found to be trustworthy and
reliable.  The evidence of P.W.1 is convincing and trustworthy and there are
absolutely no reasons for her to implicate the accused who is no other than her
husband. 
Dr. Indumathi, who treated P.W.1 and gave opinion, was admittedly not examined.
         But, it is the evidence of P.W.8 that he was the person who examined
P.W.1 in the first instance and referred her for expert treatment to Dr.
Indumathi.  P.W.8 issued Ex.P3-medical certificate.  The Prosecution ought to
have examined Dr. Indumathi, but the non-examination of Dr. Indumathi would not
affect the case of the Prosecution, especially in view of the fact that the
Doctor who treated who treated P.W.1 at the earlier point of time was examined
and a would certificate was issued by him.  The evidence of P.W.8 is practically
unchallenged with regard to the nature and cause of the injuries sustained by
P.W.1. 
Considering the above aspects, the lower Court, after proper appreciation of the
evidence on record, convicted the accused.  There are absolutely no grounds to
interfere with the order of conviction and sentence under Section 325 I.P.C.
In the result, the conviction and sentence imposed against the petitioner under
Section 498-A I.P.C. are set aside, but the conviction and sentence imposed by
the appellate Court under Section 325 I.P.C. are confirmed.  The revision case
is accordingly disposed of.


