

THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE L.NARASIMHA REDDY          
CRL.R.C.No.53 of 2003  

 11/02/2003

BANDAKURI PARVATHI      

petitioner

BANDAKURI VIJAYAKUMAR        
AND ANOTHER     

respondent 

FOR THE PETITIONER:  MR. T.S.N.MURTHY       

FOR THE RESPONDENT: PUBLIC PROSECUTOR             


:ORDER:  
This is a revision filed by the de facto complainant in C.C.No.692 of 1999 on
the file of the III Metropolitan Magistrate at Vishakapatnam, challenging the
order dated 30-12-2000 acquitting the accused therein.
The petitioner herein submitted a complaint Ex.P-1 alleging that her marriage
with the accused took place on 31-05-1997.  They were blessed with a female
child.  She alleged that after the birth of the female child, the accused
started demanding dowry and was harassing her.  She was taken to her parents'
house in the year 1999 on account of ill health.  On 13-07-1999 the mother of
the accused came to the house of the parents of PW-1 and asked her to accompany   
to their house. PW-1 could not accompany her mother-in-law on account of her
continued ill health.  It is alleged that after her mother-in-law left, the
accused together with three others came there and insisted that PW-1 should
accompany him to his house.  On her refusal, he raised a dispute and during the
course of the same, he held the tuft of PW-1.  Due to intervention of neighbours
the accused and his followers left the place.
With these allegations the prosecution filed a charge-sheet alleging offence
under Section 498-A I.P.C. against the accused.  PWs 1 to 5 were examined and 
Exs.P-1 to P-3 were marked.PW-1 is the petitioner herein and PW-2 is her mother.
PWs 3 and 4 are outsiders said to have witnessed the incident.
Sri T.S.N.Murthy, learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the
prosecution has established that the accused caught hold of the tuft of the
petitioner herein and that is sufficient to hold that the accused has committed
offence punishable under Section 498-A I.P.C. It is also his case that the trial
Court ought to have convicted the petitioner on the basis of the evidence on
record.
In Ex.P-1 the petitioner herein has narrated the factum as to her marriage with
the accused and the various developments that have taken place thereafter.  The
gravamen of the complaint is as to the incident that is said to have taken place
on 13-07-1999. Even if the contents of Ex.P-1 in this regard are taken on their
face value, they are only to the effect that the accused and her mother have
come to the residence of the parents of the petitioner and insisted on her to
follow her to go to their residence.  While the mother of the accused is said to
have gone, the accused together with three others have come after some time and
raised a dispute in which the accused is said to have caught hold of the tuft of
the petitioner.Even according to the contents of Ex.P-1, the whole incident took
place in the course of either persuading or insisting or compelling the
petitioner to return to the house of the accused.  It was not even alleged that
the accused had resorted to harassment of the petitioner, with a view to compel
her to bring dowry.  The trial Court found that the evidence of PWs 1 and 2 was
a substantial improvement over the contents of Ex.P-1.  It further recorded a
finding that the depositions of PWs 3 and 4 are at variance with those of PWs 1
and 2. Every act that may have resulted on account of differences between the
wife and husband cannot be branded as cruelty as defined in explanation to
Section 498-A I.P.C. It is only when the acts complained of are willful in
nature and accentuated with the object of coercing the wife or any person
related to her to meet the unlawful demand for any property or valuable
security; that an offence under section 4978-A can be said to have been
committed.  None of these ingredients are even alleged, much less proved the
present case.
At any rate, no procedural irregularity said to have been committed by the trial
Court is pointed out.The scope of interference under Section 401 Cr.P.C.,
against an order of acquittal is very limited.  Even where two views are
possible and the trial Court has taken one such view, this Court cannot
interfere with the judgment of the trial Court.  It is only where any procedural
irregularity is committed or where the order of the trial Court cannot be
sustained either on facts or in law that this Court can consider the feasibility
of ordering retrial of rehearing of the matter.  The order of acquittal cannot
be converted to the one of conviction, in a revision.
The Crl.R.C. is accordingly dismissed.








