

THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE DALAVA SUBRAHMANYAM             
Criminal Revision Case No. 96 OF 2001 

 27/02/2003

Neelam Venkata Rami Reddy    
petitioner

State of A.P.

respondent 

Counsel for the petitioner: Sri C.Praveen Kumar.

Counsel for the respondents: Public Prosecutor


:ORDER:  
The revision petitioner-A1 filed the revision against the judgement of
conviction and sentence in C.C.No. 365 of 1997 on the file of the Addl. Judicial
Magistrate of First Class, Kadiri dated 14.8.2000 in convicting the revision
petitioner-A1 for an offence under Section 417 IPC and sentencing him to suffer
R.I for a period of six months which was confirmed in Crl.Appeal No. 234 of 2000
on the file of the Addl. Dist. & Sessions Judge, Hindupur.
2.The brief facts leading to the filing of the revision are as follows:
About two years prior to the filing of the charge sheet A1, A3 and A4 came to
the house of Saralamma, the de facto complainant, for marriage alliance. Since
then Saralamma developed love with A1 who promised her that he would marry. A1  
developed closeness with the victim Saralamma and used to visit her house
frequently and the parents of the victim allowed A1 to move freely with the
victim as they were under the impression that A1 would marry their daughter. A1
promised the victim that he would marry her and requested for sexual intercourse
with dishonest intention. The victim accepted and allowed A1 to have sexual
intercourse under the impression that he would marry her. A1 convinced her that
he would marry after completion of the Health Visitor course at Anantapur. After
few days, the victim became pregnant and she was carrying three months 
pregnancy. On coming to know the said fact, A2 requested the victim that it is
not proper to marry her with pregnancy and that she would perform marriage after
two months and requested the victim to get her aborted. Believing the promise
the victim went to Kadiri along with A2 and her pregnancy was terminated. After
few days, A1 began to visit her house and when the victim went to the house of
A1, a photographer took their photos and A1 promised that he would marry in the
presence of elders after getting the job. Believing the representation of A1,
the victim again allowed him to have sexual intercourse and subsequently she
became pregnant. When the parents of the victim requested A1 for the marriage,
A1 abused them and there was a panchayath and the marriage could not be  
performed since the parents of A1 did not accept the proposal. When the victim
was carrying one month pregnancy, she gave a report to the police and a case was
registered and after investigation the charge sheet was filed against A1 to A4.
3.When all the accused appeared before the Addl. Judicial First Class
Magistrate, Kadiri charges under Sections 419 and 420 IPC against A1 to A4,
under Section 493 IPC against A1 and under Section 493 r/w 34 IPC against A2 to
A4 were framed and all of them denied the offences. On behalf of the prosecution
Pws 1 to 6 were examined and Ex.P1 to P5 were marked. After appreciating the 
entire evidence, the learned Magistrate came to the conclusion that the offence
under Section 417 IPC was proved against A1 alone and the other accused were 
found not guilty of the charges framed against them and they were acquitted.
Aggrieved against the judgement of conviction and sentence, A1 filed Crl. Appeal
No. 234 of 2000 on the file of the Addl. District & Sessions Judge, Hindupur and
the learned Sessions Judge after hearing confirmed the conviction and sentence
and dismissed the appeal.
4.Aggrieved against the judgement of conviction and sentence the revision
petitioner/A1 filed the revision contending that the Courts below erred in
convicting the revision petitioner for an offence under Section 417 IPC. The
Courts below failed to appreciate that the prosecution failed to prove the
ingredients of the offence under Section 417 IPC. The Courts below erred in
relying on the interested testimony of Pws 1 to 5. The Courts below failed to
appreciate that the victim had sexual intercourse with the accused with full
consent and they were moving freely in the village to the knowledge of everyone.
The Courts below failed to appreciate that the prosecution failed to prove the
dishonest intention or deceitful means against the accused. For the above said
reasons, the judgement of conviction and sentence may be set aside by allowing
the revision.
5.Now the point for consideration is whether the Courts below erred in
convicting the revision petitioner for an offence under Section 417 IPC and if
so whether the revision is liable to be allowed?
6.The revision petitioner/A1 is convicted for an offence under Section 417 IPC.
It is the case of the prosecution that A1 and his parents went to the house of
the victim, who is the de facto complainant, for marriage alliance. After some
time, the accused came in contact with the victim and he promised her that he
would marry after the training was completed. He promised to marry her and
solicited her for sexual intercourse for which the victim accepted and they had
sexual intercourse. When she became pregnant the mother of A1 came to know of  
this fact and she promised that she would perform the marriage of the victim
with A1 and on that premise the mother of A1 took her to Kadiri under the
pretext of going to a movie and got her aborted. Subsequently, when the victim
went to the house of the accused photos were taken and the victim was assured
that the A1 would marry her. On that promise, again they had sexual intercourse
and when she became pregnant for the second time, the accused refused to marry 
her on the ground that his parents did not agree for the alliance. The de facto
complainant Saralamma  is examined as Pw1. She presented a report to the police, 
which is marked as Ex.P1. Balasubrahmanyam Reddy, who is examined as Pw6, is the     
Investigating Officer and he registered Ex.P1 in Cr.No. 11 of 1996 and issued
FIR to all concerned and Ex.P4 is the FIR. He took up investigation and after
investigation laid the charge sheet. Pws 2 and 3 are the mother and father of
the victim. Pw4 is the Medical Officer who examined the victim and issued wound
certificate Ex.P2. Pw5 is the mediator. The Additional Judicial Magistrate of
First Class after appreciating the entire evidence came to the conclusion that
the offence under Section 417 IPC was proved against the accused. On appeal, the
learned Sessions Judge confirmed the said conviction and sentence.
7.The learned Advocate appearing for the revision petitioner contended that the
prosecution failed to prove the ingredients of Section 417 IPC. It is argued
that the victim/Pw1 voluntarily submitted herself for sexual intercourse and the
petitioner-A1 had no dishonest intention to deceive her. There is absolutely no
evidence that the petitioner-A1 made any false representation so as to attract
the ingredients of Section 417 IPC. The learned Advocate relied on a decision in
Hari Majhi v. The State (1990 Crl. L.J 650) wherein it was held that unless the
Court can be assured that from the very inception the accused never really
intended to marry her, conviction is not maintainable. The learned Advocate also
relied on a decision in Jayanthi Rani Panda v. State of West Bengal (1984
Crl.L.J 1535) wherein it was held "if a fully grown girl consents to the act of
sexual intercourse on a promise of marriage and continues to indulge in such
activity until she becomes pregnant, it is an act of promiscuity on her part and
not an act induced by misconception of fact. Section 90 IPC cannot be called in
aid in such a case to pardon the act of the girl and fasten criminal liability
on the other, unless the Court can be assured that from the very inception the
accused never really intended to marry her". The learned Advocate also relied on
a decision in S.N.Palnitkar v.State of Bihar (AIR 2001 Supreme Court 2960)
wherein it was held that intention to deceive should be in existence at the time
when inducement was made. Mere failure to keep up promise subsequently cannot be   
presumed as leading to cheating. The learned Advocate appearing for A1 further
argued that in the present case there is absolutely no evidence that A1 had a
dishonest intention at the very inception when he made the promise to marry her
and therefore the petitioner-A1 is entitled for acquittal.
8.The learned Public Prosecutor appearing for the State contended that the
entire evidence and the surrounding circumstances of the case have to be
appreciated to find out whether A1 had dishonest intention or employed deceitful
means to achieve his object. A1 and his parents went to the house of the victim
for marriage alliance and alliance was not settled. However, A1 came in contact
with the victim and promised that he would marry her and on that belief the
victim submitted to the request of A1 to have sexual intercourse. The
surrounding circumstances of the case would prove that A1 had dishonest
intention at the inception and thereby cheated the victim and he had sexual
intercourse with her which resulted in her pregnancy on two occasions. The
learned Public Prosecutor relied on a decision in Mailsami v. State (1994
Crl.L.J 2238) wherein it was held that the accused promised to marry the victim
girl and induced her to have sexual intercourse with him and later refused to
marry after she became pregnant and putting impossible condition to terminate
the pregnancy, showed his dishonest intention and the offence of cheating was
made out. He also relied on a decision in Maran Chandra Paul v. State of Tripura
(1997 Crl.L.J 715) wherein it was held that when the accused induced the
prosecutrix to have sexual intercourse with him by promising to marry her and in
view of the promise of marriage given by him he was liable to be convicted for
an offence of cheating. The learned Public Prosecutor further contended that the
evidence of the victim, her parents and other independent witnesses would prove
that the petitioner-A1 had dishonest intention even at the inception and on
account of his mis-representation, the victim subjected to have sexual
intercourse with him and when she became pregnant on two occasions, the  
petitioner-A1 refused to marry her on flimsy grounds. Thus, the prosecution
proved the ingredients of the offence.
9.The revision petitioner-A1 is convicted for an offence under Section 417 IPC.
Cheating is defined under Section 415 IPC as follows:
415.Cheating: Whoever, by deceiving any person, fraudulently or dishonestly
induces the person so deceived to deliver any property to any person, or to
consent that any person shall retain any property, or intentionally induces the
person so deceived to do or omit to do anything which he would not do or omit if
he were not so deceived, and which act of omission causes or is likely to cause
damage or harm to that person in body, mind, reputation or property, is said to
"cheat".
Explanation:- A dishonest concealment of facts is a deception within the meaning
of this section.
In order to prove the offence of cheating, the prosecution must prove that A1 by
deceitful means fraudulently or dishonestly induced the victim girl to have
sexual intercourse with him and he never intended to marry her from the
beginning. To prove the offence, the prosecution examined Pws 1 to 3 and 5. Pw1
is the victim. Pws 2 and 3 are the parents and Pw5 is one of the mediators who
held panchayath between the parties at Jonna lodge, Kadiri. The surrounding
circumstances and the conduct of A1 have to be appreciated so as to arrive
whether A1 had dishonest intention or fraudulent intention and that by deceitful
means cheated the victim. A1 and his parents came to the house of the victim for
marriage alliance and after some time A1 developed sexual intimacy with the
victim even though they were not married. A1 promised the victim that he would
marry her after the Health Visitor training was completed and on one occasion
with a glass of milk in his hand he made the promise in the presence of Pw2 who
is the mother of the victim. Pws 2 and 3 were under the impression that A1 was
in any way going to marry the victim and therefore they allowed A1 to move
freely with the victim/Pw1. Pw1 was not an educated girl but on the
representation made by A1 and his mother that after completing the Health
Visitor training course the marriage will be performed, she believed them.
Somehow, Pw1 became pregnant and the matter was known to the mother of A1. The    
mother of A1 promised Pw1 that she would perform the marriage with A1 after
completing the training and so promising requested Pw1 to get the pregnancy
aborted. Without the knowledge of Pw2, Pw1 was taken to Kadiri under the pretext
of seeing cinema and her pregnancy was terminated. After abortion Pw1 informed
Pw2 and when Pw2 went to the mother of A1 and questioned, she again assured that  
her son would definitely marry her daughter and she would perform their
marriage. Photos of A1 and victim were also taken and were given to the victim.
On seeing the photos and on the assurance given by A1 and his mother, Pws 1 to 3 
were convinced and again allowed A1 to move with Pw1 and on the second occasion  
also she became pregnant. When Pws 1 and 2 insisted for the marriage A1 informed 
Pws 1 and 2 that his parents did not agree for the alliance since they would get
more dowry if he married another girl. If really A1 and his parents were
expecting dowry, they would have talked to the victim and her parents at the
time of marriage alliance. They kept quiet but gave assurance that they would
definitely perform the marriage between the victim and A1. With that assurance,
the victim moved closely with A1, which landed her in pregnancy. The conduct of
A1 and his parents and the assurance given by A1 would only prove the deceitful
and dishonest means of A1 to have sexual intercourse with the victim and
ultimately when she became pregnant A1 refused to marry her on the ground that
his parents did not like the alliance. Both the Courts appreciated the entire
evidence and considered the decisions relied on by the Advocate appearing for
A1. The facts and circumstances of the cases relied on by the Advocate for A1
are different and in the instant case, the prosecution proved the deceitful and
fraudulent means of A1 who promised the victim to marry and on that promise she
developed love and had sexual intercourse with him which resulted in her
pregnancy. The evidence of Pws 1 to 3 and Pw5 corroborated with the evidence of
Pw4, the surrounding circumstances and broad outlines of the case would amply 
prove the deceitful and fraudulent intention of A1. Both the Courts relying on
the evidence of the prosecution witnesses rightly came to the conclusion that
the prosecution proved the offence under Section 415 IPC and thereby convicted
the revision petitioner under Section 417 IPC. For the above said reasons, the
Courts below have not committed any error in arriving at the conclusion and
there are no tenable grounds to interfere with the findings recorded by the
Courts below and hence the revision is liable to be dismissed.
10.In the result, the revision is dismissed confirming the conviction and
sentence imposed by the Courts below. 











