

THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE N.V. RAMANA        
W.P. No. 705 of 2003 

02/05/2003 

Yalla Satyanarayana and others. 



Government of A.P., rep. by its
Secretary, Irrigation Department,
Secretariat, Hyderabad and others.

Counsel for the Petitioners: Mr. V.V.L.N.Sarma, Advocate.

Counsel for the Respondent: Govt. Pleader for Irrigation.

:Oral order:

The petitioners invoked the extraordinary jurisdiction of this Court praying for
a writ of mandamus declaring the action of the respondents in taking away the
Handle and Oil Supply Pipe of the Oil Engine used by the petitioners for drawing
water from Sluice No. 11 of Kazuluru No. 2 Channel for irrigating their lands in
an extent of Ac. 12-04 cents, situated in Sy. Nos. 562/1 & 2, 563/3 & 4, and
564/1 & 3 of Kazuluru Village and Mandal, East Godavari District, as illegal and
arbitrary.
The petitioners claim that their lands are located on an upper level, and that
they are irrigating them by drawing water from Kazuluru No. 2 Channel, which
flows from Vella North, by the use of Oil Engines.      About Ac. 80-00 of land
belonging to different ryots is being irrigated through the water drawn from
Sluice No. 11. According to the petitioners, about 30 years back, they got dug a
small tank in Sy. No. 564/3 in an extent of Ac.0-50 cents and drawing water into
it through a bodi from Sluice No. 11 by the use of Oil Engine.  That there are
about 40 sluices are connected to Kazuluru Channel Nos. 1 and 2 and all the
ryots whose lands are located on a higher level are drawing water with the help
of Oil Engines.  The release of water into the channels, according to the
petitioners, takes place under the supervision of the respective Mandal Revenue
Officers and that near about Ac.386-00 cents of land is irrigated through the
sluices attached to Kazuluru Channels.  While so, it is the case of the
petitioners that on 22-12-2002, the 6th respondent-Mandal Revenue Officer
objected to the use of Oil Engine for drawing water from the sluice.  That
though the father of the petitioners submitted a representation to the 4th
respondent-District Collector requesting him to direct the respondent-
authorities not to interfere with their right of drawing water, the same was
forwarded to the 5th respondent-Revenue Divisional Officer.  While the matter is
pending before the 5th respondent, the 6th respondent visited the lands of the
petitioner on 22-3-2002 and forcible took away the Handle and Oil Supply Pipe of
the Oil Engine. Assailing this action of the 6th respondent, the petitioners
have filed this writ petition.
On behalf of the respondents, the 3rd respondent-Assistant Engineer, Irrigation
Department, filed counter-affidavit stating that the lands of the petitioners
fall within the ayacut of Sluice No. 11 Kazuluru              No. 2 Channel.  The
petitioners are draw water from the said sluice for raising the second crop.    As
there is severe scarcity of water, the respondents have taken action to
regularize supply of water for the second crop and notified the extent of ayacut
that would be supplied water.  The respondents have no objection to the
petitioners drawing water for the second crop, but they cannot be permitted to
use Oil Engines to draw water for by use of such Oil Engines, the petitioners
are drawing more water than they are entitled to, depriving water to those whose
lands are located on the lower level.    Though the petitioners claim that
they are drawing water from the tank dug by them, they in fact, are feeding the
said tank from out of the water sluices.  The act of the petitioners drawing
water by the use of Oil Engines without the permission violates the provisions
of Section 20 of the A.P. Irrigation Utilization and Command Area Development
Act, 1984, and therefore, illegal.       The other ryots residing in the village
made a representation on 20-12-2002 complaining about the illegal drawing of
water by the petitioners.        Acting on the said representation, the 5th
respondent directed the 6th respondent to take necessary against the
petitioners.  As the oral instructions to the petitioners not to use Oil Engine
to draw water, evoked no results, the 6th respondent removed the Handle and Oil
Supply Pipe of the Oil Engine to arrest the illegal drawing of water.
        Therefore, the action of the respondents, cannot be said to be illegal or
arbitrary.
Heard the learned counsel for the petitioners and the learned Government Pleader
for Irrigation for the respondents.
The only question that arises for consideration is whether by the use of Oil
Engine the petitioners are drawing water in excess than what they are entitled
to, and if so, whether the 6th respondent is well within his powers to remove
the Handle and Oil Supply Pipe of the Oil Engine for making use of it in the
drawing of water?
Water is a precious commodity, and a property belonging to all living being in
the world, be it flora and fauna, and each of them is entitled to its due share.
         The respondents do not dispute the fact that the lands of the petitioners
are located on a higher level and that they are drawing water from the Sluice
No. 11 of Kazuluru No. 2 Channel for irrigating their lands, and that they are
entitled to supply of water for the second crop.
The respondents having regard to failure of monsoon, with a view to protect the
interests of all the ryots of the village and to ensure that each of the farmers
get his due share of water, they have taken a decision to regulate the supply of
water for the second crop, and accordingly notified the ayacut which would be
supplied water.   As the supply of water was being regulated, it is the case
of the respondents that they received a complained from some of the villagers
whose lands are located at a far end that because of the illegal drawing of
water by the petitioners by the use of Oil Engine, they are being deprived their
due share of water.      Inasmuch as the interests of other ryots was being
adversely affected by the illegal drawing of water by the petitioners by the use
of Oil Engine, the 6th respondent visited the lands of the petitioners and
having found the petitioners indulging in such drawing of water, administered
them an oral warning not to use Oil Engine for drawing of water, but when the
petitioners ignored the warning and continued with their illegal drawing of
water by the use of Oil Engine, the 6th respondent removed the Handle and Oil
Supply Pipe of the Oil Engine of the petitioners, disabling them from drawing
water.
The contention of the petitioners that they are making use of the Oil Engine
only to pump out water from out of the tank, which they have dug and constructed
for storing the water from the sluice, cannot be accepted for the reason that
the petitioners have themselves admitted in the affidavit filed in support of
the writ petition that their lands are located on a higher level and they have
dug and constructed a tank to store water into it.  When according to the
petitioners themselves their lands are located on a higher level, it is
difficult to presume how without making use of an Oil Engine they can fill the
tank constructed by them for storing water.  The very purpose of the petitioners
digging and constructing a tank in their land for storing water, indicates that
they intended to enjoy more water than what they are entitled to.  Therefore,
there cannot be any doubt and no difficulty to hold that the petitioners are
making use of the Oil Engine for drawing water from the sluice and not just to
pump out water from the tank into their fields.
Now, it is to be noticed whether the 6th respondent is justified in seizing the
Handle and Oil Supply Pipe of the Oil Engine of the petitioners.  It is the case
of the respondents that despite administering warning to the petitioners not to
make use of the Oil Engine for drawing of water from the sluice, they continued
to draw the water illegally.    Though the respondents to support their action of
seizing the Handle and Oil Supply Pipe of the Oil Engine, trace their power to
Section 20 of the Andhra Pradesh Irrigation Utilisation and Command Area
Development Act, 1984, having perused the same, I am of the considered opinion,
that the respondents have no power to seize any of the implements used in the
drawing of water from the sluice.   What all the said section states if any
person or persons makes unauthorized or unlawful use of water supplied from an
irrigation system, he or they shall be jointly and severally liable for
imposition of such charge as may be levied by the competent authority and such
levy or charge does not bar launching of prosecution for any offence connected
therewith.   If according to the respondents, the drawing of water by the
petitioners from the sluice by use of Oil Pump, was illegal and violative of the
provisions of the Andhra Pradesh Irrigation Utilization and Command Area
Development Act, 1984, they should have levied charges as prescribed under the
Act or launched prosecution against the petitioners for such violations, but
certainly they are not entitled to seize any of the implements used for the
drawing of water from the sluice or irrigation channel.  Therefore, the action
of the 6th respondent is seizing Handle and Oil Supply Pipe of the Oil Engine of
the petitioners, is held to be illegal and arbitrary.
In the above view of the matter, the writ petition is allowed.  A direction
shall flow to the 6th respondent to immediately return the Handle and Oil Supply
Pipe of the Engine to the petitioners.  This order, however, does not preclude
the respondents from taking any action against the petitioners, as is available
to them under law and the Andhra Pradesh Irrigation Utilisation and Command Area
Development Act, 1984.  No costs.*THE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE BILAL NAZKI       

THE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE E. DHARMA RAO         

+Crl.A. No. 361 of 2003
Crl.A.No. 362 of 2003 and
R.T.No. 1 of 2003

%18-07-2003  

#Keesari Venkata Reddy and another.  



$The State of Andhra Pradesh, 
rep. by Public Prosecutor.

!Counsel for the Appellant: Sri Lakshmi Narayana

^Counsel for the Respondent: The Public Prosecutor.

:COMMON JUDGMENT:       
(per Hon'ble Mr. Justice Bilal Nazki)
                                ..

        Criminal Appeals No. 361 of 2003 and 362 of 2003 arise out of Sessions
Case No.711 of 2000 tried and decided by III Additional Sessions Judge,
Warangal. Since one of the accused has been sentenced to death by the learned 
Sessions Judge in the same case a reference has been received by this Court
being R.T.No. 1 of 2003. All the three matters pertain to the same judgment
therefore they are disposed of together.
        Criminal Appeal No. 361/2003 is filed by A1 and Criminal Appeal No.
362/2003 is filed by A2 and A3. All the three accused were tried by the learned
Additional Sessions Judge for the offences under section 498-A, 304-B and 302 of
IPC and sections 3,4 and 6 of Dowry Prohibition Act. They pleaded not guilty and
claimed to be tried. Prosecution examined 19 witnesses and marked 11 exhibits.
No evidence was led in defence.  A1 to A3 were convicted under section 302 IPC.
A1 was sentenced to death. He was also fined Rs.5,000/- in default of payment of
fine he has to undergo simple imprisonment for two years. A2 and A3 were
sentenced to life imprisonment under section 302 IPC. They were also fined
Rs.5,000/- in default they have to undergo simple imprisonment for two years.   
All the three accused were also convicted under section 304-B IPC but no
separate sentence was given. All the accused were also convicted under section
498-A IPC and all of them were sentenced to rigorous imprisonment for three
years. They were also fined with Rs.1000/- each, in default each one of them
have to undergo simple imprisonment of six months. All the three were also
convicted under section 3 of the Dowry Prohibition Act with sentence of R.I for
five years and fine of Rs.40,000/- collectively. This amount is payable to
P.W.1. In default of payment of money the accused shall have to undergo simple
imprisonment for one year. They were also convicted under section 4 of Dowry
Prohibition Act and each of them were sentenced to undergo R.I for 2 years and
have to pay a fine of Rs.1000/- each, in default simple imprisonment for six
months. Under section 6 of the Dowry Prohibition Act also they were convicted
with sentence of R.I of 2 years each and a fine of Rs.5,000/- each in default
simple imprisonment for six months. The sentences of imprisonment were directed
to run concurrently.
        The allegations on the basis of which the charge sheet was filed were that
the accused on 20th April,2000 at 8.00am poured kerosene over one Kesari 
Kalavathi and put her on fire. She died on the evening of 21st April,2000 at
M.G.M. Hospital, Warangal. The deceased Kalavathi was wife of A1.  A2 and A3 are 
parents of A1.
        P.W.1 is the father of the deceased. He stated that the deceased was
married to A1 three years before. His eldest son-in-law Peddireddy had settled
the marriage. He had agreed to pay cash dowry of Rs.80,000/- but paid
Rs.40,000/- to A2 and A3. A1 had taken his wife to his house at Uppugal and
lived with her for one month. After a month the witness took his daughter to his
house at Sholapur. After two months thereafter he along with his daughter
visited Kondur and paid Rs.2,000/- and clothes to A1 on the occasion of
Deepavali. He sent his youngest daughter to her husband A1 to stay with him. A1
took her to his house for one month, but started beating her for non-payment of
dowry of Rs.40,000/-. The witness told the accused No.1 that due to his
financial incapacity he was unable to pay the balance of Rs.40,000/-. He took
his daughter back to Kondur. After one month again A1 took his wife back to his
house. In the meantime A1 got ill and had to be operated for appendicitis. The
witness paid Rs.4000/- to A1 for undergoing the operation. The operation was
conducted by Dr. Ravinder Reddy. After the operation A1 returned to his house
along with his wife. Again after one month the witness took his daughter back to
his house. Thereafter the accused did not visit the witness's house to get back
his wife for 7 or 8 months. After some time the witness took his daughter to
Sholapur. When he returned to Kondur he came to know about some function in A1's  
house. He had visited A1's house. Ladies had also gone to A1's house. A1 made a 
demand to the witness's wife about the payment of balance of dowry. His wife
told A1 that it would be settled by her husband. On the next day morning he was
called by elders who talked to him about the unpaid dowry. He told the elders
that he refuse to pay the amount to A1 because his daughter was being beaten and
A1 was not doing any work and was wandering here and there. The witness however  
expressed his willingness to keep the amount in a Bank in his daughter's name.
The elders told him that he should pay the dowry amount as A1 was in debt to the
tune of Rs.10,000/-. The witness refused to pay the amount. A1 wanted him to pay
the entire amount of  Rs.40,000/- so that A1 could settle his debts and also
open an Electric winding shop, but the elders advised A1 not to open Winding
shop as there were many shops in the village. Elders finally advised him to pay
Rs.10,000/- so that A1 clears his debts. They also advised A1 to accompany him
to Sholapur. Thereafter A1 and the daughter of the witness visited the witness
at Kondur. He paid cash of Rs.10,000/- to A1. A1 in turn paid cash of
Rs.10,000/- to the eldest son-in-law of the witness so that he could pay it to
the creditors of A1. He took A1 and his daughter to Sholapur. He got him a job
in Sholapur where he was receiving Rs.1000/- to Rs.1500/-. He was keeping this
money to himself. The witness was maintaining him and his wife for about a
month. Even at Sholapur A1 beat his wife and he complained that he had been
brought to Sholapur in order to evade the payment of balance of dowry.
Eventually he left Sholapur and returned back to his village. By that time his
daughter was living separately along with A1. She visited him and told him that
A1 had left her. The witness searched for A1 at bus station, Railway station
etc., upto 12 O' clock then his wife brother-in-law and son-in-law visited A1's
house at Uppugal and enquired about him. After 10 months the witness returned
back to Kondur. A1 brought 10 elders to his house and asked him to send his wife
along with him to his house. The witness also gave names of some of those
elders. A1 told them that he was going to Hyderabad to work in a Brandy shop on
a salary of Rs.2000/- per month. A2 accompanied A1. Elders convinced him that A1 
would not behave as he behaved at Sholapur and maintain his wife properly at
Hyderabad. He took his daughter to the house of A1 to A3 on Monday and then he 
visited his elder son-in-law's house. On Wednesday the deceased visited her
elder sister's house and told her that she was beaten and was not even given
food. The witness reported the matter to elders at whose instance he had sent
his daughter to the house of A1. Elders called A1, A2 and A3 and A1 accepted
that he had beaten his wife and continue to beat her till he gets the unpaid
dowry amount. He made an immediate demand of Rs.2000/- so that he could purchase    
a table fan. The witness promised to buy a table fan when he visited Hyderabad.
This meeting took place on Thursday and the witness went to his village to
arrange for money for purchasing a table fan for A1. On Friday morning he came
to know at about 8.00am through Bethi Taramma (PW12) that his daughter Kalavathi 
was burnt. He and his wife visited A1's house. They were followed by his another
daughter and son-in-law. His daughter Kalavathi was lying in front of A1's house
with a petticoat. His another son-in-law shifted Kalavathi in an auto to Ghanpur
to Dr. Jogu Kistaiah's hospital. The doctor refused to treat her. On enquiry the
deceased told the witness that A3 poured kerosene on her A1 lit matchstick and
burnt her and A2 was watching. He stated that this statement was made by the
deceased four times. He shifted his daughter to MGM hospital, Warangal in a
jeep. Till then A1 to A3 did not visit the deceased. Magistrate recorded the
statement of Kalavathi. He reported the matter to police which is marked as
Ex.P1. Even after she had been burnt she continued to say that she was not even
given food. She again repeated that A3 poured kerosene A1 lit fire and A2 was
watching. He admitted Kalavathi in MGM hospital on Thursday morning and she died 
on Friday evening by 5.00pm. The death occurred within 3 years of her marriage.
His statement was recorded by the police. By the time of death of Kalavathi he
was in the police station reporting the matter to the police. On telephonic call
made by S.I of police he was told that his daughter died in the hospital. S.I
visited the hospital. On Saturday postmortem examination was conducted on dead 
body. She was cremated and he spent about Rs.20,000/- and nobody came forward.   
A1 to A3 did not come even for cremation.
        This witness is father of the deceased who spoke about the harassment of
the deceased, about the demand and non-payment of dowry. He also spoke about the   
statement allegedly having been made by the deceased before her death to him. He
also stated that at the time of death of Kalavathi he was in the police station
reporting the matter to the police. He came to know about the death of the
deceased through S.I of police who had made a telephone call to the hospital.
        P.W.2 is the wife of P.W.1. She also narrated almost the same story about
the demand of dowry and the treatment given to her daughter by A1. She also said
that the deceased had spoken to her while the deceased was being shifted to
hospital. She stated, "On enquiry Kalavathi told me that A1 to A3 burnt her by
pouring kerosene and setting her a fire. She was alive in MGM hospital for two
days, on Friday evening 5 pm she died while undergoing treatment. She was
married to A1 two years prior to her date of death." Her statement was recorded
by police.
 There was a suggestion put by the defence to both the witnesses i.e., PW1 and
PW2 that in the hospital itself an agreement was executed by the accused in
favour of the witnesses that the accused party would pay Rs.80,000/- and since
this amount was not immediately paid therefore FIR was lodged belatedly and the
agreement was in possession of P.W.1. Both the witnesses rejected this
suggestion.
        P.W.3 is the sister of the deceased. She also narrated almost the same
story as narrated by other two witnesses with regard to demand of dowry. She
also added that, Kalavathi had visited her house at Uppugal at one point of time
and complained that she was not being given food and A1 and A3 were abusing her 
for non-payment of dowry. She also said that she was told by Taramma that
Kalavathi was burnt, so she rushed to Kalavathi and found her burnt, fire having
been extinguished. On enquiry Kalavathi told her that she was thirsty and hungry
and that A3 poured kerosene and A1 lit fire to her. The deceased was shifted to
Ghanpur and on refusal by Dr. Kistaiah she was shifted to MGM hospital and got
her admitted. At MGM hospital also the deceased told her that A3 poured kerosene
on her and A1 set fire on her.
        P.W.4 is the husband of P.W.3.  He also spoke of the demands of dowry 
and also corroborated to the statement made by his wife that Kalavathi had come
to their house and told them that she was not being given food. He also denied
the suggestion that some agreement had been executed between accused party and    
the complainant party. He also denied the suggestion that Kalavathi was
unconscious. 
        P.W.5 is father-in-law of P.W.3. Taramma informed him that Kalavathi was
burning. He rushed to the house of Kalavathi and made enquiries from her.
Kalavathi told him that, A3 poured kerosene and A1 set fire. They shifted
Kalavathi in an auto to Ghanpur and on refusal by Doctor they shifted her to
Warangal in a jeep. She died on Friday at 5.30pm.
        P.W.6 is a neighbour. He had seen Kalavathi coming out of her house
burning. He brought a blanket from his house and covered her. Other neighbours
had rushed and changed the clothes of Kalavathi. In cross-examination this
witness stated that when he covered her with a blanket the condition of the
deceased was hopelessly bad and she was unable to speak.   
        P.W.7 is a resident of Uppugal. He had settled the marriage of A1 with the
deceased. He came to know that A3 poured kerosene and A1 lit fire to her. She
died on 20-4-2000. He also stated that on 19-4-2000 one Poreddy Rajireddy (PW 9)
came to him and informed him that A2 and A3 were not giving food to Kalavathi
and they should call A1 to A3 to a panchayat. They called A1 and A3 to a
panchayat and made enquiries from them. They refuted the allegations and
returned back to their house. On 20th April,2000 he saw villagers running in
front of his house. On enquiry he was told that Kalavathi was burnt by pouring
kerosene by somebody. He visited Kalavathi's house. They shifted Kalavathi in a
jeep to MGM hospital. Elders were saying that A3 poured kerosene and A1 lit fire
to her.
        P.W.8 is also a witness to certain panchayats where the allegations were
levelled that Kalavathi was not being offered food. P.W.9 is resident of
Uppugal. He stated that on 20th April,2000 at about 9.00am villagers were
running here and there and on enquiry from them he was told that Kalavathi was
burnt. He informed P.W.4 accordingly. On instructions from P.W.4 he brought an
auto, Kalavathi was shifted to hospital. She died in MGM hospital on next day.
People were talking that A1 and A3 poured kerosene and burnt Kalavathi. The
distance between his house and the house of PW 4 was about 2 furlongs. P.W.7 was  
neighbour of P.W.4. P.W.8 was also neighbour of P.W.4 and 7. The distance 
between the house of P.W.1 and A1 is less than a kilometer.
        P.W.10 is also a witness to the fact that P.W.1 was persuaded to send his
daughter to A1 to join her husband. After 4 days he came to know that Kalavathi
was burnt by somebody. He did not know when Kalavathi died. 
        P.W.11 is another witness. The house of A1 to A3 was separated by a 
pathway from the house of this witness. While he was sitting in front of his
house at about 8 or 8.30am Kalavathi took Kandiporuka inside her house for
cooking, at that time A1 to A3 were not there in the house. Within a minute she
came outside the house with burns. P.W.6 covered Kalavathi with a blanket.
Chandramouli and his wife extinguished fire. A1 and others rushed to see
Kalavathi. A1 and P.W.1 were talking at a bunk away from Kalavathi. Kalavathi
died after she was shifted to hospital. This witness was declared hostile.
        P.W.12 is another witness who informed P.W.1 on hearing that Kalavathi was 
burnt. P.W.13 was mediator to inquest. P.W.14 is an Executive Magistrate who 
conducted inquest. P.W.15 is the Magistrate who recorded the dying declaration.
He got requisition from the police station at 1.10pm, reached hospital and
started recording the dying declaration at 1.30pm in presence of duty doctor Dr.
Karunakar Reddy. He stated that he put some general questions to know the state
of mind of the declarant. He was satisfied with the answers given by the
declarant that she was in fit state of mind to give statement. He denied the
suggestion that parents of Kalavathi were present at the time of recording the
statement.
        P.W.16 is the panch witness to the seizure. He stated that, at the house
of A1 to A3 police had seized burnt blanket, burnt saree, burnt blouse etc under
panchanama Ex.P8. He did not remember how many days after the occurrence the    
seizure was conducted. 
        P.W.17 is the Doctor who conducted the postmortem. He saw antemortem    
superficial unhealed burn injuries over the neck, front of chest, back of chest,
both upper limbs, perineum, both lower limbs, front of abdomen. The surface
layers of skin lost at places sparing upper back of chest lateral objects of
both arms and both soles. The cause of death, according to him, was due to
burns. He did not record percentage of burns suffered by the deceased. According
to him, normally even 30 to 40% burns could cause death depending upon the parts
of the body which are affected by the burns and also depending upon the
facilities which are available at a particular place.
        P.W.18 is S.I of police. He received complaint Ex.P1 on        22-4-
2000 at about 10 hours from P.W.1.      On the basis of this complaint he registered
case in Cr.No. 26/2000 and issued express FIR to all concerned. He informed C.I
of police about the FIR as he was on VIP duty. He proceeded to MGM hospital and 
gave requisition to Executive Magistrate to conduct inquest. He seized the burnt
saree pieces, blanket, petticoat M.Os 1 to 3 under Ex.P3 in presence of
mediators. He then handed over the file to C.I of police for further
investigation. Ex.P11 was rough sketch prepared by him at the scene of offence.
In cross-examination he stated that he had received the complaint Ex.P1 on 22-4-
2000 at 10 am. On the complaint the date was written as 23-4-2000. On 22-4-2000
he sent express FIR through PC 2443 to the Court. He did not mention the time
when he handed over the express FIR to PC 2443. On the same day he proceeded to   
MGM hospital at 11.45am. He did not examine the doctor who had admitted the  
deceased with burn injuries in the MGM hospital. He did not mention the name of
the doctor on duty in the memo of evidence. He did not examine the doctor who
had given requisition for recording the dying declaration by the Magistrate. He
did not examine the doctor who was present at the time of recording the dying
declaration by the Magistrate. He did not even mention the name of the doctor in
the memo of evidence. On the same day at about 4 pm he went to Uppugal village.
He did not visit the house where the deceased received burns as it was found
locked up. He did not mention in his diary that, when he went to the house of
the deceased the house was locked. He did not seize kerosene tin or the match
box from the house where the deceased received burn injuries. It is true that in
Ex.P1 date 20 has been altered to 22 and there is no signature beneath the
altered date. He denied the suggestion that he had drafted Ex.P8 after
collecting M.Os at police station.
        P.W.19 is the C.I of police. He verified the investigation done by P.W.18,
examined other witnesses. After completion of investigation and arrest of the
accused who had surrendered before him, he filed charge sheet.
        Now coming to the offence under section 302 IPC, the main evidence is of
dying declaration on which the learned Sessions Judge has also relied. The
learned senior counsel for the appellant Mr. Padmanabha Reddy submitted that
there are four dying declarations and atleast two versions with regard to the
incident have been pressed into service. He submits that P.Ws 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5
all claim that the deceased made an oral dying declaration before them and they
consistently stated that the deceased had told them that A1 lit the match stick
A2 was watching whereas A3 poured kerosene, but in the dying declaration which 
was recorded by the Magistrate (Ex.P5) the deceased stated to the Magistrate,
"My marriage took place 3 months ago. Always my husband, my father-in-law and  
mother-in-law used to abuse me. Since three days I am suffering with fever,
nobody bothered about me. Today my husband morning time at 8.00 hours he set   
fire to my saree, hence I received burn injuries to my body. My husband always
used to abuse me." There is no mention of accused No. 2 and 3 except that they
used to abuse her. With respect to death or cause of death the deceased did not
attribute anything to accused 2 and 3. She did not even state that accused 2 and
3 were present at the scene of occurrence. She only stated that her husband set
fire to her saree therefore she received burn injuries. Obviously, it appears
that, this theory of putting kerosene and setting fire has been invented
afterwards. The Police officer (PW 18) who investigated the case had not even
opened the house of A1 to A3. If kerosene was poured over the body of the
deceased atleast one could find a container. Even in postmortem report there is
no mention of even  smell of kerosene. No doctor has even stated that kerosene
was found on the body. Therefore, it appears that this theory of pouring
kerosene over the body of the deceased was invented much after. It becomes more 
suspicious because of the conduct of P.W.1 and other relatives of the deceased
and also the investigation that had been conducted in the matter. Admittedly
intimation was given to the police on 20th April,2000 from the hospital which is
contained in Ex.P7 which is titled as 'INTIMATION TO ACCIDENT & INJURIES TO    
POLICE'. This gives the name and address of the deceased. It also gives the
description of the person who brought the injured to the hospital. This was
dispatched on 20th April,2000 at 10.35am and was sent to police and the
Magistrate. Police did not act on this. They did not even register a case till
22nd April,2000 when P.W.1 gave a report after the death of the deceased. The
Magistrate received the intimation by 1.10pm through a police constable and
proceeded to record the dying declaration on 20th itself but the police did not
know till 22nd. This is surprising. Under the column of 'Nature of injury or
accident' in Ex.P7 it is stated to be 'Grievous', under column of 'Alleged
cause' it is stated as 'suicidal attempt .. Burns". When Ex.P7 was drafted the
father of the deceased was in the hospital and he had admitted the deceased in
the hospital. The information that the injuries suffered were due to suicidal
attempt must have either been given by the injured (deceased) or by the father
himself. This is the first version available on record about the occurrence.
Now coming to the report filed by the P.W.1, he stated in his examination in
chief that when his statement was recorded by the police he was in the police
station and he was reporting the matter to the police and in fact at the time of
death of Kalavathi he was in police station and the S.I of Police had informed
him that his daughter had died in hospital. The deceased died at 5.30pm on 21-4-
2000, report was given on 22-4-2000 at 10.00am i.e., about 17 hours after the
death of the deceased. The whole thing shrouds in mystery and the suggestions
put forth by the defence that there had been an agreement between the parties of
paying some money to the complainant so that he will not proceed in the matter
gives more room for suspicion. On 20th incident occurred, on 20th the deceased
was admitted in the hospital, on 20th police knew that the incident had taken
place, the father, the sister, the mother and brother-in-law of the deceased did
not report to the police but police come to know about it through information
from the hospital, still they do not act in the matter. The deceased dies on
21st, but thereafter also report was not given for another 17 hours to the
police station which is nearby and P.W.1 who is the star witness submits that he
gave the report at the time when the deceased was dying in the hospital and in
fact he came to know about the death of the deceased through S.I in the police
station. The whole thing is shrouded in mystery and it appears that true picture
of the events has been suppressed from the Court. Therefore, the oral dying
declarations become suspicious. The dying declaration recorded by the Magistrate
does not, as has been pointed out, implicate accused 2 and 3. In all, two
versions of dying declarations are available where before the Magistrate the
deceased blamed A1 only for burning her and whereas in oral dying declarations
she blamed all the three. Therefore, on the basis of these dying declarations
one cannot convict accused 2 and 3 for the murder of the deceased. The
conviction of A2 and A3 under section 302 IPC has to be set aside.
Coming to the conviction of A1 under section 302 IPC, there is again a
difficulty that there are two versions. One version was that, kerosene was
poured but there is no evidence to show that kerosene was at all used. There was
no seizure of any container of kerosene. There was no smell on the body of the
deceased and the deceased in the dying declaration recorded by Magistrate did
not speak of kerosene. The deceased only stated that A1 set fire to her saree
and she received injuries.  When two versions of dying declarations are
available then it becomes difficult to believe either of them. There is an
additional ground also not to believe such a dying declaration. P.W.6 has not
been even declared hostile and the prosecution has not objected even to his
statement. He is an independent witness and a neighbour and admittedly he was 
the person who brought a blanket from his house and covered the deceased when he 
saw her burning outside her house. He must be one of those who had seen the 
deceased first admittedly much before her relations like P.Ws 1,2,3 and 4 came
to the place of occurrence. He stated that his house was a pathway away from the
house of the accused persons. When he saw the injured Kalavathi and put a
blanket over her he noted that her condition was hopelessly bad and she was
unable to speak. It is possible that after some treatment temporarily she might
have gained conscience and capacity to speak because the Doctor had certified on
20th April,2000 at 1.30pm that the patient was conscious, coherent and fit, but
still it may not be safe to rely on this dying declaration as well i.e, Ex.P5.
The deceased had emphatically stated that her marriage had taken place three
months before whereas admittedly her marriage had taken place three years
before. We are not holding that since she answered a question wrongly which she
was supposed to know definitely that her marriage had taken place three years
before therefore she was not in a fit state of mind, but we are only pointing
out the fact that there are two versions mentioned in two sets of dying
declarations. Then, one of the witnesses who had occasion to first see the
deceased after she got burn injuries had stated that she was not able to speak.
Therefore we do not consider it safe to rely on Ex.P5 to convict A1 under
section 302 IPC. Since there are two versions which cannot be reconciled because
in the first set of versions the deceased blamed all the three whereas in the
second version she blamed only one, it would be dangerous to rely on either of
the versions. We are fortified in our view by the judgment of Supreme Court in
Kishan Lal v. State of Rajasthan1.
Coming to the other offences, the evidence has been discussed herein above. We
have no doubt in our mind that offence under section 498-A IPC has been proved
against A1 and there have been demands for dowry. All the witnesses including
the relatives of the deceased and the panch witnesses have accused only A1 of
demanding the dowry. There is not sufficient evidence to show that A2 and A3
subjected the deceased to cruelty in order to receive any additional dowry, but
going by the evidence of the panchas and also the conduct of the accused
throughout, as narrated by the witnesses, we are convinced that a demand had
been made and the deceased was put to cruelty and an offence under section 498-A 
is proved against A1. Accordingly we uphold his conviction under section 498-A
of IPC and set aside the conviction of A2 and A3 on this count also.
Since we have upheld the conviction of A1 under section 498-A of I.P.C., we also
uphold his conviction under section 3, 4 and 6 of the Dowry Prohibition Act. The
conviction of A2 and A3 is set aside on this count also.
Since the conviction of A1 under section 498-A has been upheld and it has also
been proved by the prosecution that the death of the deceased occurred within 7
years of the marriage and the death was a dowry death, therefore we are also
upholding the conviction of A1 under section 304-B IPC. The conviction of A2 and
A3 under section 304-B is set aside. The trial Court has not awarded any
sentence for this offence. We sentence A1 to undergo 10 years' Rigorous
imprisonment for the offence under Section 304-B of IPC. In view of this
sentence, we are not awarding separate sentence to A1 for offences under section
3,4 and 6 of Dowry Prohibition Act and also under section 498-A IPC.
In result, the conviction and sentence against A1 to A3 for the offence under
Section 302 of IPC is set aside and they are acquitted of the charge. The
conviction and sentence against A2 and A3 under Sections 498-A IPC and Sections  
3, 4 and 6 of the Dowry Prohibition Act is set side and they are acquitted of
the same. The conviction of A1 under section 304-B IPC is upheld and he is
sentenced to undergo 10 years' Rigorous imprisonment. The conviction of A1 under
section 498-A IPC, section 3,4 and 6 of Dowry Prohibition Act is also upheld,
but no separate sentence is awarded. A2 and A3 shall be released from custody
forthwith, if not involved in any other case. The fine amount paid, if any, be
refunded. Accordingly, RT No. 1 of 2003 is dismissed, Crl.A.No. 362 of 2003 is
allowed and Crl.A.No. 361 of 2003 is partly allowed.
Before parting with the case, we would like to remind the Judicial Officers
that, before awarding death sentence they must ensure themselves that a case is
made out first under section 302 IPC and secondly after conviction under section
302 IPC the case is 'rarest of the rare' as defined by the Supreme Court in
various judgments. The learned Sessions Judges should go through the judgment of
Supreme Court reported in Bachan Singh v. State of Punjab2 which was a judgment 
of Constitution Bench wherein the validity of provision of death sentence was
challenged on the ground that it was violative of fundamental rights. This
judgment has recently been again emphasized and interpreted by the Supreme Court  
in Krishna Mochi v. State of Bihar3. The Supreme Court in para-41 stated;
"In the case of Bachan Singh v. State of Punjab (AIR 1980 SC 898) before a
Constitution Bench of this Court validity of the provision for death penalty was
challenged on the ground that the same was violative of Articles 19 and 21 of
the Constitution and while repelling the contention, the Court laid down the
scope of exercise of power to award death sentence and the meaning of the
expression "rarest of the rare" so as to justify extreme penalty of death and
considered that Article 6 clauses (1) and (2) of the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights to which India has acceded in 1979 do not abolish or
prohibit the imposition of death penalty in all circumstances. All that they
required is that, firstly, death penalty shall not be arbitrarily inflicted;
secondly, it shall be imposed only for the most serious crimes in accordance
with a law, which shall not be an ex post facto legislation. The Penal Code
prescribes death penalty as an alternative punishment only for the heinous
crimes which are not more than seven I number. Section 354(3) of the Criminal
Procedure Code, 1973 in keeping with the spirit of the International Covenant,
has further restricted the area of death penalty. Now according to this changed
legislative policy, which is patent on the face of Section 354(3), the normal
punishment for murder and six other capital offences under the Penal Code, is
imprisonment for life (or imprisonment for a term of years) and death penalty is
an exception. The present legislative policy discernible from section 235(2)
read with section 354(3) is that in fixing the degree of punishment or making
the choice of sentence for various offences, including one under Section 302 of
the Penal Code, the court should not confine its consideration "principally" or
merely to the circumstances connected with the particular crime, but also give
due consideration to the circumstances of the criminal. In many case, the
extremely cruel or beastly manner of the commission of murder is itself a
demonstrated index of the depraved character of the perpetrator. And it is only
when the culpability assumes the proportion of extreme depravity that "special
reasons" can legitimately be said to exist. Judges should never be bloodthirsty.
It is, therefore, imperative to voice the concern that courts, aided by the
broad illustrative guidelines indicated, will discharge the onerous function
with evermore scrupulous care and humane concern, directed along the highroad of
legislative policy outlined in section 354(3) viz., that for persons convicted
of murder, life imprisonment is the rule and death sentence an exception."

In para-42 they quoted Machhi Singh v. State of Punjab4 which was a judgment
following Bachan Singh's case wherein it had been observed that the 'rarest of
the rare' case would be a case where the collective conscience of the community
is so shocked that it will expect the holders of the judicial power to inflict
death penalty irrespective of their personal opinion as regards desirability or
otherwise of retaining death penalty.

?1 AIR 1999 SC 3062  
2 AIR 1980 SC 898  
3 2002(6) SCC 81 
4 1983(3) SCC 470 


