

THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE V.V.S. RAO       
W.P.NO. 32343 OF 1998   

4-4-2003

ANIREDDY SURENDER REDDY         
AND OTHERS.    



C.I. OF POLICE, 
KGODAVARIKHANI P.S.II TOWN,      
KARIMNAGAR DISTRICT AND ANOTHER.         

Counsel for Petitioners  :MR.M.A.BARI.  

Counsel for Respondents :MR.V.RAMACHANDRA RAO.         

:ORDER:  

        The petitioners seek a Writ of Certiorari to quash First Information
Report (FIR) in Crime No.65 of 1998 of Godavarikhani II Town Police Station,
Khammam District pending on the file of Judicial Magistrate of First Class,
Mandhani/Godavarikhani.  Petitioners 2 and 3 are father and mother of first
petitioner.  Petitioners 4 and 5 are sister and brother-in-law of first
petitioner, and petitioners 6 and 7 are his uncle and aunt..    The 
petitioners filed the writ petition in the facts and circumstances as noticed
below.
        The first petitioner married one Manjula on 10.3.1993.  She is
daughter of second respondent herein.  She died on 3.6.1997 allegedly committing
suicide by hanging to fan at Quarter No.ST2-2802 situated at 8th Incline colony,
Godavarikhani where she was residing along with first petitioner. The second
respondent on the same day lodged a complaint with II Town Police Station,
Godavarikhani and the same was registered as Crime No.90 of 1997.  In the
complaint he alleged that his daughter committed suicide due to dowry harassment
made by the first petitioner herein.  The first petitioner was arrested and sent
to judicial remand on 12-6-1997.  A charge sheet was also filed before the Court
of Judicial Magistrate of First Class, Manthani on 18.7.1997 under Sections 304-
B of IPC and Sections 3 and 4 of the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1977. The learned
Magistrate took up committal proceedings and committed the case to the Court of
Assistant Sessions Judge, Peddapalli.  The said case being S.C.No.14 of 1998 is
pending before the Assistant Sessions Judge, Peddapally.
The second respondent filed another complaint on 13.4.1998 alleging that
Investigating Officer of II Town Police Station, Godavarikhani did not
investigate the case properly, that petitioners 1 to 7 herein on many occasions,
demanded dowry from Manjula and harassed her.   Therefore, he requested to       
register the crime against all the petitioners.  On 13.4.1998 he filed a private
complaint before the Court of Judicial Magistrate of First Class, Manthani.     
It is not necessary to refer to the details of the complaint dt.13.4.1998.
Suffice to notice, in the said complaint the second respondent gave various
details of harassment and also alleged that the petitioners encashed Fixed
Deposit of Rs.50,000/- from State Bank of Hyderabad, No.8 Incline,
Godavarikhani.  The learned Magistrate, Jagityal returned the complaint with an
endorsement observing that the Judicial Magistrate of First Class, Manthani is
only competent to take cognizance of the case as earler crime was registered by
II Town Police Station, Godavarikhani.  The second respondent submitted the
complaint before the Court of Judicial Magistrate of First Class, Manthani, who
by order dt.16.4.1998 forwarded the same to II Town Police Station,
Godavarikhani for investigation and filing report.  Subsequent thereto, on
25.4.1998 the said Police Station registered Crime No.65 of 1998 under Sections
304-B, 498-A of Indian Penal Code (IPC) and Sections 3 and 4 of the Dowry
Prohibition Act.  First respondent took up investigation under Section 156(3) of
the Code of Criminal      Procedure, 1973 ('Cr.P.C') and arrested petitioners 2,
4, 5, 6 and 7 and they were remanded to judicial custody.
        A writ petition being W.P.No.2621 of 1998 was filed for Writ of Habeas
Corpus to release petitioners 2, 4, 5 and 7 alleging that their arrest and
detention is illegal and amounts to wrongful detention.  This Court directed
release of the petitioners.  The petitioners contend that pursuant to the first
complaint given by the second respondent, Crime No.90 of 1997 was registered and
after following procedure the matter was sent to Sessions Court and therefore,
the learned Mgistrate, Manthani has no jurisdiction to order investigation again
either under Section 156(3) or under Section 202(2) of Cr.P.C.
        First and second respondents filed two separate counter affidavits
opposing the writ petition.     It is the case of the second respondent that the
first respondent without conducting proper investigation has shown the first
petitioner as accused and did not rope in petitioners 2 to 7.  He also justifies
the complaint against the petitioners.
        Learned counsel for the petitioners, Sri M.A.Bari, submits that when the
complaint filed by the second respondent being Crime No.90 of 1997 was already
enquired into and charge sheet was already filed, whereupon the learned Judicial
Magistrate of I Class, committed the matter to the sessions being S.C.No.14 of
1998, the private complaint filed by the second respondent under Section 200
Cr.P.C. within a period of one year, cannot be referred by the Magistrate under
             Section 210 or Section 202 of the Cr.P.C. for further investigation.
The complaint filed by the second respondent discloses an offence under Section
304-B IPC.  The offence is triable only by the Court of Sessions, in which event
proviso to Section 202 of the Cr.P.C. prohibits Judicial Magistrate to direct
investigation by the police officer.    The Magistrate has acted without
jurisdiction in directing investigation under Section 156(3) of Cr.P.C.
whereupon Crime No.65 of 1998 was registered.   He further contends that as the
case is triable by Sessions Court, the Magistrate has no power to refer the
matter to police under Section 156(3) of Cr.P.C.
        Learned counsel for the second respondent,                           Sri
V.Ramachandra Rao, submits that even where cognizance is taken by the  
Magistrate, the law does not prohibit the Magistrate to order investigation
under Section 156(3) of Cr.P.C. when a private complaint is made.  Reliance is
placed on Sections 190, 200, 202, 204 and 299 Cr.P.C.     The victim, learned
counsel submits, is entitled to prosecute his own case by filing a private
complaint and filing of charge sheet by the police in a related case is not a
bar for exercising private complaint and ordering investigation by the
Magistrate under Section 156 (3) Cr.P.C.        Learned counsel placed reliance on a
number of decisions of this Court as well as the Supreme Court in support of the
submission that the orders passed by the Magistrate ordering investigation are
not invalid.
It is the submission of the learned counsel for the petitioners that power does
not inher in the Magistrate to order investigation under Section 156(3) of
Cr.P.C. when the case is triable by Sessions Court, especially when in relation
to the same set of facts, a complaint has already been registered as a crime and
the same has been committed to the sessions by the learned Magistrate.  This
submission cannot be accepted.   The second respondent gave a complaint         
initially at P.S., Godavarikhani and the same was registered as crime and after
due process of law, the same is now pending before the Court of the Assistant
Sessions Judge, Manthani being Sessions Case No.14 of 1998.  When the second    
respondent filed a private complaint on   13-4-1998 alleging that the
investigation at P.S., Godavarikhani into Crime No.90 of 1997 (earlier
complaint) was not proper and that petitioners 2 to 7 also harassed late
Manjula, in effect the case is not in relation to Crime No.90 of 1997 and it is
altogether a different case though it might be a second complaint in relation to
petitioner No.1 who was sole accused in Crime No.90 of 1997 (S.C.No.2 of 1995).
        Insofar as petitioners 2 to 7 are concerned, it is not a second complaint,
but it is a fresh complaint directly filed under Sections 199 and 200 Cr.P.C.
Therefore, it was always competent for the Magistrate to refer the present
complaint of the second respondent under Section 156(3) Cr.P.C. to the Sessions
Judge having       cognizance to take the offence on file.  Even where the
Magistrate has power under Section 190 Cr.P.C. to take cognizance, he is not
precluded of his power under Section 200 Cr.P.C. A reference may be made to 
D.Lakshminarayana v. V.Narayana1 wherein it was laid down as under. 
        In the instant case the Magistrate did not apply his mind to the complaint
for deciding whether or not there is sufficient ground for proceeding; but only
for ordering an investigation under Section 156 (3).     He did not bring into
motion the machinery of Chapter XV.  He did not examine the complainant or his
witnesses under Section 200, Cr.P.C., which is the first step in the procedure
prescribed under that Chapter.  The question of taking the next step of that
procedure envisaged in Section 202 did not arise instead of taking cognizance of
the offence, he has, in the exercise of his discretion, sent the complaint for
investigation by police under S.156.......This being the position, Section
202(1), 1st Proviso was not attracted.  Indeed, it is not necessary for the
decision of this case to express any final opinion on the ambit and scope of the
1st Proviso to Section 202(1) of the Code of 1973.  Suffice it to say, the stage
at which               Section 202 could become operative was never reached in this
case.  We have therefore in keeping with the well established practice of the
Court, decided only that much which was essential for the disposal of this
appeal, and no more.


The principles in D.Lakshminarayana v. V.Narayana (supra) were reiterated in
Tula Ram v. Kishore Singh2, M/s.India Carat Pvt. Ltd. v. State of Karnataka3,
Madhu Bala v. Suresh Kumar4     and Suresh Chand Jain v. State of Madhya Pradesh5.  
In Tula Ram v. Kishore Singh (supra), the Supreme Court, after referring to the
earlier case law, held thus:
............Thus on a careful consideration of the facts and circumstances of
the case the following legal propositions emerge:
1. That a Magistrate can order investigation under S.156(3) only at the pre-
cognizance stage, that is to say, before taking cognizance under Sections 190,
200 and 204 and where a Magistrate decides to take cognizance under the 
provisions of Chapter 14 he is not entitled in law to order any investigation
under Section 156 (3) though in cases not falling within the proviso to Section
202 he can order an investigation by the police  which would be in the nature of
an enquiry as contemplated by Sec.202 of the Code. 
2. Where a Magistrate chooses to take cognizance he can adopt any of the 
following alternatives:
(a) He can peruse the complaint and if satisfied that there are sufficient
grounds for proceeding he can straightaway issue process to the accused but
before he does so he must comply with the requirements of Section 200 and record
the evidence of the complainant or his witnesses.
(b) The Magistrate can postpone the issue of process and direct an enquiry by
himself.
(c) The Magistrate can postpone the issue of process and direct an enquiry by
any other person or an investigation by the police.
3.  In case the Magistrate after considering the statement of the
complainant and the witnesses or as a result of the investigation and the
enquiry ordered is not satisfied that there are sufficient grounds for
proceeding he can dismiss the complaint.
4. Where the Magistrate orders investigation by the police before taking
cognizance under S.156(3) of the Code and receives the report thereupon he can
act on the report and discharge the accused or straightaway issue process
against the accused or apply his mind to the complaint filed before him and take
action under Section 190 as described above.

In M/s.India Carat Pvt. Ltd. V. State of Karnataka (supra), the Supreme Court
dealt with the procedure to be followed by a Magistrate under Sections 173(2),
190, 200 and 202 Cr.P.C. and held thus:
The position is, therefore, now well settled that upon receipt of a police
report under Section 173(2) a Magistrate is entitled to take cognizance of an
offence under Section 190(1)(b) of the Code even if the police report is to the
effect that no case is made out against the accused.  The Magistrate can take
into account the statements of the witnesses examined by the police during the
investigation and take cognizance of the offence complained of and order the
issue of process to the accused.                     Section 190(1)(b) does not lay
down that Magistrate can take cognizance of an offence only if the investigating
officer gives an opinion that the investigation has made out a case against the
accused. The Magistrate can ignore the conclusion arrived at by the
investigating officer and independently apply his mind to the facts emerging
from the investigation and take cognizance of the case, if he thinks fit, in
exercise of his powers under Section 190(1)(b) and direct the issue of process
to the accused.  The Magistrate is not bound in such a situation to follow the
procedure laid down in Sections 200 and 202 of the Code for taking cognizance of
a case under Section 190(1) (a) though it is open to him to act under Section
200 or Section 202 also.................

In Suresh Chand Jain v. State of Madhya Pradesh (supra), the Supreme Court 
observed that before taking cognizance of the offence, the Magistrate can order
investigation under Section 156(3) Cr.P.C.  It was also observed that it is open
to the Magistrate to direct the police to register an FIR for the purpose of
enabling them to start investigation.
As observed by the Supreme Court, Section 202 Cr.P.C. comes into operation only 
when the police file a report under       Section 173(2) Cr.P.C. and based on such
report the Magistrate is required to take cognizance of the offence.     At the
stage of taking cognizance, if it is a case triable by Sessions Court, Section
202 Cr.P.C. bars the Magistrate from ordering further investigation.  Therefore,
the submission of the learned counsel for the petitioners must be rejected.

        This Court in a number of decisions, following the earlier decisions of
the Supreme Court, has taken a view that even where the case is triable by a
Sessions Court, it is competent to the Magistrate of I Class to direct the
police under Section 156(3) Cr,P.C. to investigate the case and that after
taking cognizance of the case, before issuing any process, the Magistrate can
still order investigation in which event it will be in relation to the power
vested in the Magistrate under Section 156(3) Cr.P.C. and not under Section 202
(1) Cr.P.C.  If the Magistrate takes cognizance of the offence and issues
process, the taking of cognizance is complete and by reason of clause (a) of the
proviso to sub-section (1) of Section 202 Cr.P.C., the Magistrate cannot order
further investigation by a police officer.  A reference may be made to the
decisions reported in T.K.Kodandaram v. State of A.P.6, Kedarmal Agarwal v.
State of A.P.7, Annie Koshy v. State of A.P.8 and Rokkala Saimanraju v. State
and others9.
        In Rokkala Saimanraju v. State of A.P (supra), this Court held that it
would be illegal for a Judicial Magistrate to dismiss the private complaint only
on the ground that the police case filed in respect of the same incident has
already been committed to the Court of Sessions.  The principle of law was laid
down as under. 
........It is no doubt true that the police case has been committed to the Court
of Sessions long back and it is now pending before the learned Assistant
Sessions Judge, Tadepalligudem and it is said to be the oldest sessions case on
his file. The question is whether the complainant is entitled to file a private
complaint even though the police case is pending in respect of the same
incident.  It is needless to emphasise that a victim is entitled to prosecute
his own case by filing a private complaint.  Even in a police case the de facto
complainant is entitled to engage his own counsel and to have an effective say
in the matter though the prosecution is conducted by a Public Prosecutor.

                In a recent judgment in Mahesh Chand v. B.Janardhan Reddy10, a  
three-Judge Bench of the Supreme Court considered the question as to when a 
second complaint in respect of the same incident would be maintainable under
criminal law.  After referring to its earlier decisions in Pramatha Nath
Talukdar v. Saroj Ranjan Sarkar11 and Bindeshwari Prasad Singh v. Kali Singh12
         the Supreme Court laid down as under.
............It is settled law that there is no statutory bar in filing a second
complaint on the same facts.  In a case where a previous complaint is dismissed
without assigning any reasons, the Magistrate under Section 204 Cr.P.C. may take
cognizance of an offence and issue process if theer is sufficient ground for
proceeding.  As held in Pramatha Nath Talukdar case (supra) second complaint 
could be dismissed after a decision has been given against the complainant in
previous matter upon a full consideration of his case.   Further, second
complaint on the same facts could be entertained only in exceptional
circumstances, namely, where the previous order was passed on an incomplete  
record or on a misunderstanding of the nature of complaint or it was manifestly
absurd, unjust or where new facts which could not, with reasonable diligence,
have been brought on record in the previous proceedings, have been adduced.  In
the facts and circumstances of this case, the matter, therefore, should have
been remitted back to the learned Magistrate for the purpose of arriving at a
finding as to whether any case for cognizance of the alleged offence had been
made out or not.

        Learned counsel for the petitioners, Sri M.A.Bari, placed strong reliance
on the judgment of the Supreme Court in T.T.Antony etc.etc. v. State of Kerala
and others, etc.13.  In paragraph 21 of the judgment, the Supreme Court
summarised the law as under. 
............Under the scheme of the provisions of Sections 154,  155, 156,
157, 162, 169, 170 and 173 of Cr.P.C. only the earliest or the first information
in regard to the commission of a cognizable offence satisfies the requirements
of Section 154 Cr.P.C. Thus there can be no second FIR and consequently there 
can be no fresh investigation on receipt of the same cognizable offence or the
same occurrence or incident giving rise to one or more cognizable offences.  On
receipt of information about a cognizable offence or an incident giving rise to
a cognizable offence or offences and on entering the FIR in the station house
diary, the officer in-charge of a Police Station has to investigate not merely
the cognizable offence reported in the FIR but also other connected offences
found to have been committed in the course of the same transaction or the same
occurrence and file one or more reports as provided in Section 173 of the
Cr.P.C.

The case on hand is altogether different.  The second respondent filed a private
complaint before the Judicial Magistrate of I Class, Jagityal and the same was
reported for being presented to the Judicial Magistrate  for investigation
under Section 156(3), Cr.P.C.  It is not a case where the second respondent gave
a second complaint in relation to the same incident against petitioners 2 to 7
or for that matter petitioner No.1 as well. A reading of the private complaint
filed before the learned Judicial Magistrate would show that the incidents of
harassment imputed to petitioners 2 to 7 prima facie have been brought out
presumably based on subsequent information.     An allegation was also made that
investigation into Crime No.90 of 1997 was not proper. Therefore, the authority
in T.T. Antony etc. etc. v. State of Kerala and others etc. (supra) is of little
assistance to the learned counsel for the petitioners.
Learned counsel for second respondent, Sri Ramachandra Rao, placing reliance on 
various decisions of this Court as well as Supreme Court contends that at the
stage of investigation the power under Article 226 of the Constitution cannot be
exercised.  It is not necessary to refer to all the judgments.  Suffice to refer
to State of Karnataka v. M.Devendrappa & Anr.14, wherein the apex Court, after
referring to the earlier case law, laid down as under.
As noticed above, the powers possessed by the High Court under Section 482 of 
the Code are very wide and the very plenitude of the power requires great
caution in its exercise.  Court must be careful to see that its decision in
exercise of this power is based on sound principles.  The inherent power should
not be exercised to stifle a legitimate prosecution.  High Court being the
highest Court of a State should normally refrain from giving a prima facie
decision in a case where the entire facts are incomplete and hazy, more so when
the evidence has not been collected and produced before the Court and the issues
involved, whether factual or legal, are of magnitude and cannot be seen in their
true perspective without sufficient material.  Of course, no hard and fast rule
can be laid down in regard to cases in which the High Court will exercise its
extraordinary jurisdiction of quashing the proceeding at any
stage...............

A reading of the relevant provisions of the Cr.P.C. especially Sections 156(3),
190 and 202 as well as the decisions relied on by both the counsel would show
that at the stage of investigation, the questions raised by the learned counsel
for the petitioners are irrelevant.  At the time of taking cognizance after
filing of the report by the police under Section 173(2), Cr.P.C., the Magistrate
has to apply his mind and decide as to whether or not to take cognizance of the
case keeping in mind S.C.No.14 of 1998.  As observed by the Supreme Court in 
Mahesh Chand v. B.Janardhan Reddyd (supra), the second complaint would be   
dismissed after a decision has been given against the complainant in the
previous matter after due consideration of his case.     But at the stage of
taking cognizance, the complaint cannot be rejected only on the ground that the
case is taken cognizance of on a police complaint.
In the result, for the above reasons, the writ petition is devoid of merits and
is accordingly dismissed.  There shall be no order as to costs.  Any 
observations made in this order are prima facie observations and the criminal
court or the investigating officer shall act independently without in any manner
being influenced by the observations made hereinabove. There shall be no order
as to costs.

1 AIR 1976 SC 1672 : 1976 Crl.LJ 1361 
2 AIR 1977 SC 2401 : 1978 Crl.LJ 8
3 AIR 1989 SC 885  
4 AIR 1997 SC 3104  
5 AIR 2001 SC 571  
6 1993 Crl.LJ 1926 (AP)
7 1997 Crl.LJ 4670 (AP)(DB)
8 1998 Crl.LJ 2565 (AP)
9 1997 (2) ALD (Crl.) 768 (AP)
10 (2003) 1 SCC 734 
11 AIR 1962 SC 876  
12 (1977) 1 SCC 57 
13 2001 (2) ALD (Crl.)276 (SC)
14 2002 (1) Supreme 192 


