

THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE P.S. NARAYANA        
Criminal Appeal No.1315 of 1999 

25-11-2004 

Paindeker Kishan Rao  
s/o. Gurucharan 

State of A.P. represented by
Public Prosecutor

Counsel for appellant : Sri C.Praveen Kumar

Counsel for respondent : Additional Public Prosecutor

:JUDGMENT:   
        A-1 in S.C.No.332/97 on the file of Sessions Judge, Adilabad preferred the
present Criminal Appeal as against the Judgment dated     6-7-1999 wherein A-1
was found guilty under Section 304-B IPC, but however A-2 was found not guilty
for the said offence.
        Charge sheet was filed against A-1 and A-2 for an offence under Section
304-B IPC in Cr.No.38/96 of Tanur Police Station.  The case of the prosecution
is that on the intervening night of 28/29-10-1996 at Tanur village, the victim
Kalavathi @ Deepika died due to dowry harassment by A-1/husband and A-2/mother-   
in-law within six months after her marriage at the house of her in-laws.  It is
also the version of the prosecution that on 29-10-1996 at about 10 a.m. PW-1,
the father of the deceased Kalavathi, lodged Ex.P-1 complaint stating that the
deceased Kalavathi married A-1 on 20-5-1996.  Rs.51,000/- cash, two tolas of
gold, one chetak scooter along with other household articles were given towards
dowry to the accused persons as per their demand.  The deceased joined the
company of A-1 and subsequently on             26-10-1996 A-1 and the deceased
Kalavathi came to their house at Nizamabad.  At the instance of A-1 the deceased
asked for payment of additional dowry of Rs.50,000/- as her husband wants to
purchase jeep and the defacto complainant expressed inability to meet the
demand.  On the next day A-1 and the deceased returned to their house at Tanur.
On 29-10-1996 the defacto complainant received information through PW-4 that her
daughter died on the intervening night of 28/29-10-1996 and therefore suspected
some foul play for the death of Kalavathi.  The complaint was registered in the
first instance under Section 174 Cr.P.C. in Cr.No.38/96.  During the course of
investigation, inquest was conducted over the dead body of the deceased by PW-6
Mandal Revenue Officer and prepared Ex.P-3 in which an opinion was given by the
panchayatdars and the death is due to harassment for additional dowry. The
Medical Officer PW-7 conducted autopsy over the dead body of the deceased and  
gave Ex.P-5 post mortem report in which an opinion was given that the death is
due to administering poison.  PW-8 the concerned Sub-Inspector of Police partly
examined some of the witnesses and subsequently PW-9, the Inspector of Police, 
verified the investigation, examined the witnesses and filed the charge sheet
against the accused under Section 304-B IPC after altering the section of law.
        Judicial Magistrate of First Class, Bhainsa had registered the crime as
P.R.C.No.17/97 and the same was committed to the Court of Session and the  
learned Sessions Judge recorded the evidence of PW-1 to PW-9, marked Exs.P-1 to  
P-7 and ultimately recorded acquittal of A-2 and convicted A-1.  Hence, the
present Criminal Appeal.
        Sri Praveen Kumar, the learned Counsel representing the appellant/A-1
would contend that having recorded an acquittal as against A-2 in the absence of
acceptable evidence convicting A-1 cannot be sustained.  The learned Counsel
also would submit that the prosecution failed to examine independent witnesses
to show that the deceased died due to harassment for additional dowry.  The
learned Counsel also would contend that the facts deposed before the Court by
PW-1 to PW-3 are improved versions not found in the earlier statements.  The
learned Counsel also had taken this Court through the evidence available on
record and would contend that on such insufficient evidence recording conviction
as against A-1 for dowry death definitely cannot be sustained.  Reliance had
been placed on YUDHISHTIR:RAJKUMAR Vs. STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH 1, VIMAL SURESH                  
KAMBLE Vs. CHALUVERAPINAKE APAL S.P. 2 and OM PRAKASH RAJA Vs. STATE OF                  
UTTARANCHAL 3.    
        Per contra, the learned Additional Public Prosecutor would submit that the
evidence on record is clear and categorical and the ingredients of Section 304-B
IPC are satisfied and when the death is within 7 years of marriage and inasmuch
as prosecution was able to establish the harassment by husband and the relatives
it would fall under dowry death.  The mere fact that the witnesses are
interested witnesses would not alter the situation in any way and hence the
conviction may have to be sustained.
        Heard both the Counsel.
        PW-1, the father of the deceased, deposed that the deceased Kalavathi @ 
Deepika is his third daughter and she was given in marriage to A-1 on 20-5-1996.
A-2 is the mother of A-1 and mother-in-law of the deceased.  He further deposed
that at the time of marriage, Rs.51,000/- cash, gold worth Rs.11,000/- and
clothes worth Rs.6000/-, one chetak scooter and household utensils were given to
A-1.  This witness also deposed that the deceased informed that the accused were
not treating her properly and harassing her for providing additional dowry of
Rs.50,000/-.  This witness/PW-1, his son and his wife went to the maternal uncle
of A-1 by name Ramdas and informed that the deceased was being harassed by the   
accused.  Then the mother of Ramdas took the deceased after convincing her to
the house of the accused and later on 26-10-1996 the sister of A-1 and the
deceased were in his house while he returned to the house at 9 p.m. and he did
not notice A-1.  It was further deposed that the deceased wept again before PW-1
and stated that A-1 is in need of Rs.50,000/- for purchasing a jeep and she
asked him to pay the amount and he told that he will look after the same and
asked her not to make any nuisance.  On the next day morning A-1 came to the 
house and took the deceased to their house in his absence.  On 29-10-1996 the
maternal uncle of A-1 Ramdas and brother-in-law of A-1 Sudhakar came to PW-1's 
house and informed that the deceased was affected with brain disease and then
they rushed out of the house to go to Tanur where the accused were staying and
at that time some body informed that Deepika died while she was in the house of
accused at Tanur.  PW-1 and his wife rushed to Tanur and went to the house of
the accused and found the dead body of the deceased at the house of the accused 
and the deceased was emitting froth from her nostrils and mouth with smell of a
pesticide.  PW-1 gave complaint Ex.P-1 to police at Tanur suspecting some foul
play for the death of the deceased.  Police conducted inquest over the dead body
and this witness also deposed that he suspected that the accused administered
poison and were responsible for the death of the deceased as dowry was not paid
as demanded by the accused.  This witness/PW-1 was cross-examined at length.   
        It would be appropriate to have a look at Ex.P-1 at this juncture.  Ex.P-1
reads as hereunder :
        "I submit that my third daughter Deepika (Kalavathi), 19 years was given
in marriage to one Pedakari Kishan Rao s/o.Gurudass of Tanur village.  Their
marriage was solemnized on 20-5-1996.  In marriage Rs.51,000/- cash, two tolas
gold and one chetak scooter were given.  After marriage she was sent for her in-
laws house at Tanur to lead happy married life.  On 26-190-1996 my daughter and
son-in-law came to our house at Nizamabad and asked Rs.50,000/- for the purpose 
of job. We informed them that we cannot afford so much.  Then on 27-10-96 they
returned to Tanur.  Today i.e., on 29-10-96 at 8.30 hours maternal uncle of my
son-in-law namely Ramdass came and informed that my daughter expired.  I suspect  
that this death is not a normal death.  I request you to take action according
to law."

It is pertinent to note that in Ex.P-1 it is mentioned that on 26-10-1996 his
daughter and son-in-law asked for Rs.50,000/- for the purpose of job.  PW-2 had
supported the version of PW-1.  PW-2 deposed that they gave cash and other items 
at the time of marriage to A-1 voluntarily and she did not state before Police
at the time of examination that three days after the marriage her daughter
returned to the house and informed that the accused were abusing her as she was
stout and uneducated and that he will get more dowry in case he marries another
girl.  She also deposed that she did not depose before the Police that she found
bleeding injuries on the thighs of the deceased.  Police did not examine her in
this case, but she gave a statement before M.R.O. (witness adds) and she denied
certain suggestions.
        PW-3 is the brother of the deceased.  No doubt PW-3 after deposing all
other particulars also specifically deposed that A-1 asked him to provide
Rs.50,000/- for purchasing jeep.  He requested that they could not pay the
amount as the marriage was celebrated just before five months and the demand
will be considered later on.  In all other particulars PW-3 had deposed on the
same lines as PW-1. 
        PW-4 Ramdas was declared hostile and in cross-examination this witness  
deposed that it is not correct to suggest that he gave statement before Police
that PW-1 came to his house and complained that A-1 was demanding Rs.50,000/-   
for purchasing a jeep as additional dowry and for that reason the deceased was
being harassed.  The relevant contradiction was marked as Ex.P-2. PW-5 was 
examined in relation to Ex.P-3 inquest report.  PW-6 is the M.R.O. who deposed
about that the conducting of inquest in the presence of mediators and recording
the statements of  PW-1, PW-2, PW-3, LW-6 and LW-4 at the time of inquest.  This 
witness also deposed that they observed the dead body of the deceased and found 
foam emanating from the nostrils and also mouth and he had not noticed any
injuries on the body of the deceased.  The panchayatdars opined that the accused
ill-treated and harassed for additional dowry and hence she died.  He drafted
inquest report marked as Ex.P-3.  In cross-examination this witness deposed that
Ex.P-3 report is silent whether the death is due to suicide or homicide.  PW-7
is the Doctor who conducted autopsy. The report received from Forensic Science
Laboratory, Hyderabad is Ex.P-4.  Ex.P-4 reveals that there was
orgonophosphorous insecticide poison in vicera and basing on the F.S.L. report
he gave final opinion in the post mortem certificate that the cause of death was
due to cardio-respiratory arrest due to Orgonophosphate poisonous substance.
The post-mortem certificate issued by him is Ex.P-5.
        PW-8 is the S.I. of Police.  PW-9 is the C.I. of Police.  PW-8 deposed
about the details of investigation and PW-9 also deposed about other details of
investigation and filing of the charge sheet.
On the strength of this evidence, findings at length had been recorded and
acquittal had been recorded as against A-2 and A-1 was convicted.  Except the
evidence of PW-3 relating to the demand of Rs.50,000/- by A-1, all the other
evidence available on record appears to be more in the nature of hear-say.
Apart from this aspect of the matter, the version of PW-1 is something different
from what had been stated in Ex.P-1.  PW-4 was declared hostile.  There is no
other independent evidence forthcoming relating to the alleged harassment in
relation to the demand of additional dowry.  In the absence of any other
evidence, on the strength of the interested testimony of PW-1 to PW-3,
especially when most part of the evidence appears to be more in the nature of
hear-say, the conviction recorded as against A-1 under Section 304-B IPC, in the
considered opinion of this Court, cannot be sustained.  Hence the findings
recorded by the learned Judge in relation to A-1 are hereby set-aside and
accordingly acquittal is hereby recorded.
        The Criminal Appeal is allowed.  The bail bonds of the appellant shall
stand cancelled.

?1 1971 SCC (Crl) 684 
2 2003 SCC (Crl) 596 
3 2003 Crl.L.J. 483 (SC)


