

THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE P.S. NARAYANA        
Criminal Appeal No.1556 OF 1998  

23-09-2004 

Mygapula Satyanarayana   

State of A.P: rep. by Public Prosecutor

Counsel for Appellant: MR. C. Praveen Kumar 

Counsel for Respondent: Public Prosecutor 

:JUDGMENT:   

Mygapula Satyanarayana, Accused No.1, who is the sole appellant, filed the
present Criminal Appeal, aggrieved by the conviction and sentence imposed by the
learned II Additional Sessions Judge, West Godavari, Eluru, in Sessions Case
No.348 of 1997, dated 25-09-1998,

2. The case of the prosecution is that one Venkata Satyavathi, aged 19 years, is
the daughter of Borra Nageswara Rao and Borra Seetharatnam.  A-1 is the son of
A-2 and A-3.  A-4 is the daughter of A-2 and A-3 and sister of A-1.  A-1 is the
husband of the deceased.  A-2 and A-3 are father-in-law and mother-in-law of the
deceased respectively.  The marriage between Mygapula Satyavathi and A-1 was  
celebrated on 25-01-1996 at the temple of Lord Venkateswaraswamy situated at 
Annavarappadu village of Peravali Mandal.  At the time of marriage, Borra
Nageswara Rao agreed to pay Rs.20,000/- as dowry to the accused, as per the 
demand of the accused.  But due to insufficient funds, he gave Rs.10,000/-, at
the time of the marriage as dowry amount, besides paying necessary lanchanams to 
A-1 and requested him that he will pay the balance amount in due course.  After
that, A-1 along with A-2 and A-4 brought the deceased to Duvva village, where A-
1 and the deceased continued their marital life peacefully for three months in
A-2's house at Duvva.  After three months, A-1 started harassment and tortured
the deceased, both mentally and physically, and started beating her for bringing
the balance dowry amount of Rs.10,000/-.  A-2 to A-4 strongly supported A-1 and
for this object they used criminal force and physical harassment over the
deceased for dowry. The parents of the deceased convinced the deceased that they
will pay the balance dowry amount soon and asked to go to Duvva on several
occasions, whenever the deceased used to visit Malleswaram to the house of her
parents.  A-1 developed illicit intimacy with one Lakshmi of Duvva village, and
went away with her for one month and returned to Duvva 15 days prior to the date
of present offence.  After his return, the accused started harassing the
deceased abnormally, for that promised amount and for getting more dowry from
her parents.  A-3 and A-4 who are mother-in-law and sister-in-law of the
deceased used to harass the deceased for petty matters, as well as for more
dowry.  A-2 started the acts of A-3 and A-4.  A-1 warned the deceased to bring
Rs.10,000/- from her parents, otherwise he will go in marriage with another lady
for more dowry.  The deceased disgusted over her life and decided to put an end
to her life.  On the night of 29-04-1997, the deceased consumed some pesticide
poison at the house of her in-laws in Duvva village and fell down on the floor,
and while struggling for life, A-1 to A-3 took her to the local private doctor
and he refused to give treatment and advised them to go to Government Hospital.
Then, A-1 to A-3 took the deceased to the hospital of Dr.Bharathi Devi at
Tanuku.  By that time, the deceased took her last breath.

3. The evidence of P.Ws.1 to 18 had been recorded.  Exs.P-1 to P-29 and M.Os.1 
to 11 were marked and Exs.D-1 to D-3 were marked.  

4. Heard Sri C.Praveen Kumar, the learned counsel representing the appellant and
the learned Additional Public Prosecutor.

5. The learned counsel for the appellant would submit that as per the material
available on record, even prior to P.W.1 giving report, there was a report given
by the then President, and the same was suppressed, and hence, the very First
Information Report is suspicious.  The learned counsel further submitted that
the version of the prosecution is that the appellant-accused No.1 went away with
one Lakshmi, but absolutely there is no evidence in this regard.  In relation to
harassment, except the evidence of P.Ws.1 and 2, which is more in the nature of
hear say, there is no other acceptable evidence available on record.  The
learned counsel also would submit that just on the strength of presumption,
conviction cannot be sustained, especially in the light of the fact that an
acquittal has been recorded on the self-same evidence as against A-2 to A-4.

6. Reliance also was placed by the learned counsel for the appellant on the
following decisions in relation to suppression of the First report:
1) Sevi   v.  State of Tamil Nadu1
2) Marudanal Augusti  v.  State of Kerala2
3) Bandi Mallaiah and others  v.  State of Andhra Pradesh3
7.  The learned counsel for the appellant also placed reliance on the following
decisions in relation to proof of the charge under Section 304-B I.P.C:
1) Public Prosecutor, High Court of A.P.,   v.   A.Madhava Reddy4
2) Sunil Bajaj    v.  State of M.P.5
3) Hira Lal and others  v.  State (Government of NCT) Delhi6
4) Penchala Sadaiah and othes   v.  State of A.P.,7

8. Per contra, the learned Additional Public Prosecutor had taken this Court
through the evidence available on record and would contend that there is clear
evidence of P.Ws.1 and 2 and the age of the deceased may also have to be taken 
into consideration, and in view of the young age, there is no other reason for
the deceased to commit suicide, except for the dowry harassment, which had been 
established by the prosecution.
 9. P.W.1, no doubt deposed about the agreement to give Rs.10,000/- at the time
of marriage to A-1 to A-3 and also agreed to deposit the remaining Rs.10,000/-
within one year of the marriage in the name of his daughter, and he failed to
deposit the amount and his deceased daughter used to report stating that A-1 to
A-4 were harassing her to bring the remaining dowry, and this witness also
deposed about demanding Sunglass Cot and also deposed that he gave Rs.1,500/- to  
purchase cycle, one cot and one box.  He also promised her that he will send the
remaining amount soon, and this witness also deposed that A-1 eloped with
another girl by name Lakshmi belonging to Duvva and A-1 set up family with
Lakshmi in Kovvur and he is working at Rajahmundry and he had deposed about the  
other details how he received the information that his daughter consumed
pesticides, and went along with his wife and brother-in-law and the mouth of the
corpus was opened.  A-1 to A-4 poured the pesticide into the mouth of his
daughter forcibly.  This witness was supported by the evidence of P.W.2, the
wife of P.W.1.
10. In substance, this is the evidence, which is available on record in relation
to harassment.  No doubt, P.W.3 also deposed that at the time of alliance, P.W.1
agreed to pay Rs.10,000/- to A-1 to A-3 and also agreed to deposit Rs.10,000/-
in the name of the deceased and they failed to deposit the amount.  P.W.4 also
had deposed to the same effect as deposed by P.W.3.  

11. P.W.5 is the Police Constable and he deposed that P.W.2 is his elder sister
and P.W.3 is his younger sister and P.W.1 is his brother-in-law and this witness
also deposed about these details and also deposed that when he met the deceased  
Satyavathi at his sister's house, she told that A-1 was harassing her on the
ground that she became obese and failed to get sufficient dowry.

12. P.W.6 was declared hostile.  Likewise, P.W.7 also was declared hostile.

13. P.W.8 is the photographer, who deposed about Exs.P-4 to P-7 photos and 
Exs.P-8 to P-11 negatives. P.W.9 is the V.A.O., who deposed about the recovery
of M.Os.11,10, 5, 6, 4, 7, 8, 3, 2, 1, and his drafting observation report Ex.P-
12 and Satyanarayana attesting Ex.P-12, and drafting inquest report-Ex.P-13.
P.W.10 is the M.R.O., who conducted the inquest.  The inquestdars opined that
due to harassment for additional dowry by the husband and in-laws, the deceased
consumed the pesticide and died.  Panchayatdars also attested Ex.P-13 and he 
also signed Ex.P-12 and he sent dead body for postmortem examination. 

14. P.W.11 is the Junior Civil Judge, who recorded the statements under Section
164 Cr.P.C.  P.W.12 is the Deputy Civil Surgeon, who had deposed about the 
injuries and issuing Ex.P-24- postmortem certificate and Ex.P-25-the final
opinion.  P.W.13 is the Executive Officer of the Venkateswara Swamy Temple, who 
deposed about the marriage and issuance of Ex.P-26-certificate to the father of
the deceased.  P.W.14 is the Constable.  P.W.15 is another Constable.  P.W.16 is
the S.I. of Police, who deposed that he had conducted investigation and the
further investigation was handed over to the in-charge D.S.P.  P.W.17 is the
Civil Assistant Surgeon, who deposed that he was present along with P.W.12 and 
conducted postmortem examination over the dead body and he signed Ex.P-29 along   
with P.W.12.  P.W.18 is the Sub-Divisional Officer, who filed the charge sheet.
This is evidence available on record.

15. The learned Judge, on appreciation of evidence of P.Ws.1 to 18 and Exs.P-1
to P-29 and Exs.D-1 to D-3 and M.Os.1 to 11, acquitted A-2 to A-4, but convicted
A-1 under Section 235(2) Cr.P.C. for the offence under Section 304-B I.P.C. and
sentenced him to undergo rigorous imprisonment for ten years.

16. It is pertinent to note that P.Ws.6 and 7 were declared hostile.  The other
witnesses P.Ws.1 to 5 are close relatives.  P.W.1 is the father of the deceased
and P.W.2 is the mother of the deceased and even otherwise the nature of
evidence, which has been let in by the prosecution is more in the nature of
hear-say, as to what these witnesses were communicated relating to harassment. 
This evidence let in by the prosecution in relation to A-2 to A-4 had been
disbelieved and acquittal had been recorded, but A-1 alone was convicted by the
learned Judge.  If any acceptable evidence is there relating to harassment,
inclusive of the version of the prosecution that this man had illicit intimacy
with Lakshmi and had been living elsewhere for some time, there could have been
some material to make out a case against appellant/A-1.  Except the vague
statements, absolutely there is no cogent evidence placed on record in this
direction and even in relation to harassment, the consistent evidence is that
some amount had been paid and the rest of the amount could not be deposited. 
None of the independent witnesses had been examined in relation this harassment.
Unless there is some legally acceptable evidence, on the strength of taking aid
of presumption alone, conviction under Section 304-B and Section 498-A I.P.C.
cannot be sustained.

17. On a careful scrutiny of the findings recorded by the learned Judge, this
Court is thoroughly satisfied that the findings recorded in relation to A-2 to
A-4 also would ensure to the benefit of    A-1, since he also stands on the same
footing.  Except the additional dowry factor and living away by having illicit
intimacy with one Lakshmi, there is no acceptable evidence before the Court.
Hence, in the light of the evidence recorded by the learned Judge, especially
not placing reliance on these witnesses in relation to harassment by A-2 to A-4,
the same stand has to be applied even in the case of     A-1. The episode of
demand for the additional dowry and the incident of taking away Lakshmi had not
established by acceptable evidence.  Hence, this Court is of the considered
opinion that the findings recorded by the learned Judge in this regard, placing
reliance on the presumption and convicting A-1 alone, definitely cannot be
sustained and accordingly, the conviction and sentence against A-1 are liable to
be set aside.

18. In the result the Criminal Appeal is allowed.  The conviction and sentence
imposed against A-1 by the learned II Additional Sessions Judge, West Godavari,
Eluru are hereby set aside.  Accordingly, A-1 is acquitted for the offence under
Section 304-B I.P.C.  The bail bonds shall stand cancelled.

?1 AIR 1981 SC 1230  
2 AIR 1980 SC 638  
3 1980 Crl.L.J. 914 (SC)
4 2002(2) ALD (Crl) 590 (AP)
5 2001(2) ALD (Crl) 711 (SC)
6 2003(2) ALD (Crl) 184 (SC)
7 2003(2) ALD (Crl) 332 (AP)

