

THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE P.S. NARAYANA        
Criminal Appeal No.1595 of 1999 

03-12-2004 

Ravula Ramesh  

The State of A.P.,
represented y Public Prosecutor,
High Court of A.P.

Counsel for appellant   : Sri T.Mahender Rao 

Counsel for respondent : Sri Mohd.Osman Shaheed, Addl.P.P.  

:JUDGMENT:   
        Ravula Ramesh, sole accused in S.C.No.125/98 on the file of Sessions
Judge, Karimnagar, though acquitted of the charge under Section 302 IPC, being
aggrieved of the conviction and sentence imposed on him under Sections 498-A and 
201 IPC, had preferred the present Criminal Appeal.
        The Circle Inspector of Police, Huzurabad filed charge sheet against the
appellant/accused under Sections 498-A, 302 and 201 IPC before Judicial First
Class Magistrate, Huzurabad which was taken on file as P.R.C.No.125/97 and the 
same was committed to the Court of Session being exclusively triable by the
Court of Session and the learned Sessions Judge had taken the above case on file
as S.C.No.125/98.  On appreciation of the evidence of PW-1 to PW-16 and also 
Exs.P-1 to P-18 and M.Os.1 to 4, the learned Judge recorded acquittal as far as
the charge under Section 302 IPC is concerned but however convicted the
appellant/accused under Sections 498-A and 201 IPC. 
        The facts in brief are as hereunder :
        On the intervening night of 1/2-7-1997 at about 00.30 hours, the accused
Ravula Ramesh killed his wife Swaroopa by strangulating her with a saree after
constantly harassing her, suspecting her fidelity and later informed LW-4 and
others with an intention to conceal the evidence of murder committed by him and
to misguide the investigating agency that his wife committed suicide by hanging
and he untied the saree and made her to sleep on the cot and she died within few
minutes thereafter.  This incident took place at Rangaiahpalli H/o. Vangara
village which is within the limits of Vangara police station.  On             2-
7-1997 at 10.00 hours the complainant lodged a complaint at Vangara Police
Station stating that he is the resident of Vangara village and his younger
daughter Swaroopa (hereinafter referred to as "deceased") was given in marriage
to the accused Ravula Ramesh about 18 months prior to this incident and he is a
resident of Rangaiahpalli.  At the time of the marriage, he gave an amount of
Rs.5,000/- as per the demand of the accused.  The accused was in the habit of
drinking and was suspecting the character of the deceased.  Therefore, he did
not allow the deceased to do any farming work or any other works and was not
even allowing her to talk with others and was beating her under the influence of
intoxication.  Due to this harassment, the deceased visited his house atleast 5
times.  About 11 days prior to this incident, the accused got separated from his
parents and was living in a rented house in the same village and was residing in
the house of one Mamidala Ellaiah along with the deceased.  On the early morning
of 2-7-1997 one Sandi Sailu, resident of Rangaiahpalli village came to him and
informed that on        1-7-1997, the accused picked up a quarrel in a drunken
condition with the deceased by using filthy language and on that the deceased
committed suicide by hanging in the house.  Immediately, the complainant along
with his wife and relatives went to Rangaiahpalli village and found the deceased
dead due to constant harassment meted out to her by the accused.  He further
stated in the complaint that the deceased must have either committed suicide by
hanging or the accused must have killed her and he requested the police to take
necessary action.
        On the strength of the report given by PW-1 Cr.No.6/97 was registered by
the Vangara Police Station under Sections 498-A and 306 IPC and the same was  
registered by PW-15 who had taken up the investigation and filed requisition
before PW-16 for holding inquest who in turn conducted inquest before PW-12 and
others.  PW-11 had photographed the dead body and PW-15 also had drawn the rough   
sketch of the scene of offence and recorded certain statements.  Subsequent to
the conduct of autopsy PW-15 altered the Section of law from Sections 498-A and
306 IPC to Sections 498-A and 302 IPC and submitted express memos to all the  
concerned authorities.  The Circle Inspector of Police had taken up further
investigation, verified the investigation and filed charge sheet.
Submissions of Sri T. Mahender Rao: 
        Sri T.Mahender Rao, the learned Counsel representing the appellant/accused
would submit that having recorded an acquittal in relation to the charge under
Section 302 IPC, conviction recorded under Sections 201 and 498-A IPC cannot be 
sustained.  The learned Counsel also had taken this Court through the evidence
of PW-3 in detail and also had pointed out to Section 161 Cr.P.C. statements of
the said witnesses and had submitted that the findings recorded by the learned
Judge to the effect that the information how the incident happened was not
furnished to PW-3 by the accused had been taken as a ground which definitely
cannot be sustained.  The learned Counsel also had taken this Court through the
other evidence available on record and had pointed out that PW-1 and PW-2 are
interested witnesses.  The Counsel also would further submit that the Circle
Inspector of Police was not examined and PW-15 had deposed about PW-9 and PW-10     
stating before the Circle Inspector of Police as in Exs.P-4 and P-5.  The
learned Counsel concluded that on the strength of such evidence, just on
suspicion conviction had been recorded and hence the said findings are liable to
be set aside in the Appeal.
Submissions by Sri Mohd.Osman Shaheed, Additional Public Prosecutor :   

        The learned Additional Public Prosecutor had pointed out that the evidence
of PW-1 and PW-2 is clear, cogent and convincing well supported even by
panchayatdars relating to harassment.  The acquittal as far as the charge under
Section 302 IPC is concerned had been recorded by giving benefit of doubt and
that does not mean automatically the appellant/accused is entitled for acquittal
relating to other charges.  The learned Additional Public Prosecutor placed
strong reliance on DHIAN SINGH Vs. STATE OF PUNJAB 1.  The learned Additional    
Public Prosecutor also would contend that the mere non-examination of the
Investigating Officer may not be fatal in all cases.  Reliance was placed on
STATE OF KARNATAKA Vs. BHASKAR KUSHALI KOTHARKAR 2.               
        Heard both the Counsel.
Findings recorded by the learned Sessions Judge :
        The learned Sessions Judge at para-9 had discussed the evidence of PW-1, 
PW-2, PW-7, PW-8, PW-15 and PW-16 and had recorded a finding that the charge    
under Section 498-A IPC, that the accused was harassing the deceased and was  
ill-treating the deceased with cruelty with a view to coercing her not to talk
to anybody and also by suspecting her character, has been proved by the
prosecution beyond reasonable doubt.  The learned Sessions Judge at paras 10 and 
11 had recorded findings on appreciation of evidence of PW-1 to PW-4, PW-8, PW- 
11, PW-12, PW-14 to PW-16 and ultimately came to the conclusion that though the  
evidence placed by the prosecution regarding the above charge leads to grave
suspicion that the accused alone must have been responsible for the death of the
deceased, but however grave the suspicion may be, it cannot replace the legal
proof and hence the prosecution is not able to prove the charge under Section
302 IPC beyond reasonable doubt and hence the accused is acquitted of the charge 
for an offence under Section 302 IPC by giving benefit of doubt.  The learned
Sessions Judge also appreciated the evidence of PW-3,   PW-4, PW-8, PW-12, PW-14    
and PW-15 in relation to the third charge under Section 201 IPC and after
discussing the same in detail at para-12, the learned Judge came to the
conclusion that the ingredients of Section 201 IPC have been satisfied in this
case from the evidence which the learned Judge discussed above thoroughly and 
the prosecution had been able to prove beyond reasonable doubt against the
accused an offence punishable under Section 201 IPC though acquitted of the main
offence under Section 302 IPC and there is no legal impediment to impose
conviction under Section 201 IPC in view of the decision of the Supreme Court in
KALAVATHI Vs. STATE 3.    
Evidence of PW-1 and PW-2 :  
        PW-1 is the father of the deceased.  PW-2 is the brother of the deceased.
PW-1 deposed about the marriage and out of Rs.50,000/- dowry agreed he paid 
Rs.30,000/- at the time of the marriage and he gave gold jewellery worth 11/2
tola and gave household articles, a wrist watch and a cycle.  For one year the
accused and the deceased lived amicably and thereafter the accused was beating 
the deceased and she was being suspected by the accused for every action, 
whenever she talked to anybody or goes anywhere.  PW-1 deposed that the deceased   
was also attending to agricultural work along with the accused.  The accused was
living separately from his parents and the deceased died in a rented house
belonging to a weaver.  He observed some injury on the neck of the deceased and
he gave complaint to the police.  One person by name Sailu (PW-3) came to inform
about the death of the deceased and he went and saw the dead body of the
deceased. On the same day he gave complaint to the police regarding the death of
the deceased to Vangara Police Station. Ex.P-1 is the complaint and it was
scribed to his dictation.  At the time of inquest over the dead body all the
family members were present.  PW-1 further deposed that whenever the deceased  
used to come to his house after her marriage she used to inform that her husband
was beating her and he (PW-1) used to console the deceased and was sending her  
to her husband's house.  PW-1 was cross-examined.  In cross-examination PW-1   
deposed that he got written in Ex.P-1 that he gave a cash of Rs.30,000/- to his
son-in-law/accused at the time of marriage.  He stated the same fact in his
statement under Section 161 Cr.P.C. also.  He further deposed that it is not
true to suggest that he did not give any dowry either of cash or gold jewellery
and he cannot say on what dates or months the deceased came to his house and   
informed about the harassment.  He had not informed to the police regarding any
panchayat held in connection with the affair of the deceased with the accused or
his family members.  PW-1 denied the suggestion that the deceased was suffering
from stomach ache and she was unable to bear the pain and that unable to bear
the stomach pain the deceased committed suicide by hanging herself. 
        PW-2 is the brother of the deceased who had supported the version of PW-1.
In cross-examination this witness deposed that there were four or five
panchayats within six months.  PW-2 did not inform the police that there were
panchayats for four or five times within a span of six times.  The deceased did
not come to their house during her stay of 11 days in a rented house and he used
to go to the deceased once in five or six days after the accused and the
deceased were separated from the parents of the accused and they were informed 
of the said fact by the deceased.  After separation from the parents the accused
and the deceased were alright for two or three days.  This witness also denied
the suggestions relating to the stomach pain of the deceased and demand of
dowry.
Evidence of PW-4, PW-7 and PW-8:   
        PW-4 deposed that the deceased died about two years back in a rented 
house.  The distance between his house and the rented house of the accused is
about 20 yards.  The deceased and the accused were living amicably in the rented
house during their stay and he learnt about the death of the deceased when the
parents of the deceased were weeping.  PW-7 deposed about panchayat and the   
deceased informing the elders that the accused was beating her as she was not
going for any work.  PW-8 also deposed about the panchayat and the caste elders
advising the accused and the deceased to live amicably.
Evidence of PW-5, PW-6, PW-9 and PW-10:    
        These witnesses were declared hostile.
Evidence of PW-11, PW-12 and PW-16:    
        PW-11 is the photographer.  PW-12 was one of the inquest panchayatdars in 
relation to Ex.P-14.  PW-16 is the M.R.O. who deposed about the conduct of
inquest Ex.P-14 and this witness also deposed as per the opinion of the panchas
and blood relatives of the deceased, the deceased died due to harassment of her
husband/accused who was always beating her.  He further deposed that as per the 
opinion of the panchas the death of the deceased might also be due to suicidal
cause by hanging. 
Medical evidence :
        PW-14 is the Civil Assistant Surgeon who had conducted post mortem  
examination over the dead body of the deceased and the post mortem certificate
is Ex.P-15.  The cause of death was due to asphyxia due to strangulation and the
time of death of the deceased prior to post mortem examination is 36 to 48
hours.  PW-13 and PW-15 are the Investigating Officers. PW-13 is the Police
Constable who had escorted the dead body of the deceased for the purpose of post
mortem examination. PW-15 is the Sub-Inspector at the relevant point of time who
had registered the case.  Ex.P-1 is the altered F.I.R.  This witness deposed
about all the details of investigation and also deposed that PW-5 and PW-6
stated before him as in Exs.P-2 and P-3.  This witness further deposed that PW-9
and PW-10 stated before the C.I. of Police as in Exs.P-4 and P-5.  But however,
it is pertinent to note that the C.I. of Police was not examined.
Evidence of PW-3: 
        PW-3 deposed that he is one of the caste elders of Gowda caste.  He
deposed that at about 1'O clock on the date of the death of the deceased, in the
night, he was informed by the accused that his wife died in his house and he did
not give the particulars as to how she met her death.  In the house of the
accused, only the accused and the deceased were residing.  The accused came to  
his house and informed about the death of the deceased and requested him to
inform to the parents of the deceased about her death.  He did not notice any
injuries on the deceased and he cannot say definitely whether the deceased
herself died or she was murdered by the accused.
PW-1 deposed that he observed some injury on the neck of the deceased.  PW-4  
deposed that he did not observe any injury on the person of the deceased.  PW-8
no doubt deposed that he observed a black scar on the neck of the deceased when 
he saw the dead body of the deceased.  Apart from this aspect of the matter,
certain findings had been recorded by the learned Judge while giving benefit of
doubt as far as the charge under Section 302 IPC is concerned. On appreciation
of the evidence referred to supra, the findings which had been specified above
were recorded by the learned Sessions Judge.   It is needless to say that
benefit of doubt had been given and acquittal had been recorded as far as the
charge under Section 302 IPC is concerned. 
The other charge under Section 498-A IPC reads as hereunder :
"That you on the intervening night of 1/2nd day of July, 1997 at about 0030
hours and prior thereto at Rangaiahpalli h/o.Vangara village being the husband
of Swarupa, aged about 18 years, subjected her to harassment, ill-treatment and
cruelty with a view to coercing her not to talk to anybody and not to attend
farm work and beat her constantly suspecting her fidelity and that you thereby
committed an offence punishable under Section 498-A of the Indian Penal Code and
within my cognizance."

Likewise, the charge under Section 201 IPC reads as hereunder :
        "That you on the date, at the same time and place as mentioned in charge
No.1 supra and during the course of same transaction as mentioned in charges 1
and 2, knowing or having reason to believe that an offence of murder of your
wife by you punishable with death or imprisonment for life has been committed,
did certain evidence connected with the said offence to disappear by hanging the
dead body of your wife to a beam in your house with the intention of screening
yourselves from legal punishment and that you thereby committed an offence
punishable under Section 201 of the Indian Penal Code and within my cognizance."

The evidence of PW-1, PW-2, PW-7, PW-8, PW-15 and PW-16 and PW-3, PW-4, PW-8,         
PW-12, PW-14 and PW-15 had been taken into consideration by the learned Judge   
while recording conviction in relation to the aforesaid charges.  It is
pertinent to note that PW-1 and PW-2 are the relative witnesses of the deceased.
The evidence of PW-7 and PW-8 in relation to the panchayatys also is not clear.
Apart from this aspect of the matter, there is variation in between the evidence
of PW-1 and PW-2 in this regard.  The evidence on record is that the accused was
suspecting every action of the deceased and was harassing her.  Except this
evidence there is no other evidence available on record to prove harassment so
as to attract the ingredients of Section 498-A IPC.  Section 498-A IPC reads as
hereunder :
        Husband or relative of husband of a woman subjecting her to cruelty :-
        Whoever, being the husband or the relative of the husband of a woman,
subjects such woman, to cruelty, shall be punished with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to three years and shall also be liable to fine.
        Explanation :- For the purposes of this section "cruelty" means -

(a) any wilful conduct which is of such a nature as is likely to drive the woman
to commit suicide or to cause grave injury or danger to life, limb or health
(whether mental or physical of the woman; or
(b) harassment of the woman, where such harassment is with view to coercing her
or any person related to her to meet any unlawful demand for any property or
valuable security or is on account of failure by her or any person related to
her to meet such demand. 

It is no doubt true that the Investigating Officer i.e., C.I. of Police was not
examined and in the light of the fact that benefit of doubt had been given in
relation to charge under Section 302 IPC, Exs.P-4 and P-5 in relation to PW-9
and PW-10 may not assume much importance. In the decision referred (2) supra it
was held that non-examination of Investigating Officer is not fatal when no
serious contradictions had been pointed out in respect of the evidence of
important eye witnesses.  While dealing with this aspect the Apex Court observed
:
        "It is true that as a part of fair trial the Investigating Officer should
be examined in the trial cases especially when a serious sessions trial was
being held against the accused.  If any of the prosecution witnesses give any
evidence contrary to their previous statement recorded under Section 161 Cr.P.C.
or if there is any omission of certain material particulars, the previous
statement of these witnesses could be proved only by examining the Investigating
Officer who must have recorded the statement of these witnesses under Section
161 Cr.P.C.  In the present case, no such serious contradiction is pointed out
in respect of the evidence of the important eye-witnesses.  So also, the non-
examination of Head Constable who recorded F.I. statement is not of serious
consequence as PW-1 was examined to prove the fact that she had given the 
statement before the police."

Even if it is held that the non-examination of the Investigating Officer, the
C.I. of Police, is not fatal in the facts and circumstances of the case, there
must be legally acceptable evidence to prove the ingredients of offences with
which the accused had been charged with.  Section 201 IPC reads as hereunder : 
Causing disappearance of evidence of offence, or giving false information to
screen offender :
        Whoever, knowing or having reason to believe that an offence has been
committed, causes any evidence of the commission of that offence to disappear,
with the intention of screening the offender from legal punishment, or with
intention gives any information respecting the offence which he knows or
believes to be false.
If a capital offence - shall, if the offence which he knows or believes to have
been committed is punishable with death, be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable
to fine;
If punishable with imprisonment for life - and if the offence is punishable with
imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment which may extend to ten years, shall
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend
to three years, and shall also be liable to fine;
If punishable with less than ten years' imprisonment - and if the offence is
punishable with imprisonment for any term not extending to ten years, shall be
punished with imprisonment of the description provided for the offence, for a
term which may extend to one-fourth part of the longest term of the imprisonment
provided for the offence, or with fine, or with both."

Strong reliance was placed on the decision referred (1) supra wherein the Apex
Court while dealing with Section 201 IPC held at para-10 as hereunder :
        "Reliance was placed on Palvinder Kaur v. State of Punjab (AIR 1952 SC 354
: 1953 Crl.L.J. 154) where the Court held that there was no direct evidence to
show that the appellant therein was aware that an offence had been committed and
there was no direct circumstantial evidence which was essential to prove the
ingredients of the offence.  In the instant case the glaring facts are to be
noticed, Shinder Kaur sustained burn injuries.  In his examination under Section
313 Cr.P.C. he had taken the injured Shinder Kaur to the hospital.  But the
defence witness examined in the case deposed that Shinder Kaur was taken  
initially to a private doctor and as per his instructions she was taken to
another government hospital but on the way she died.  The first appellant did
not inform the matter to the police and the body was cremated without any
information being given to the police.  The second appellant was residing near
the residence of the first appellant.  It is also pertinent to note that PW-2,
the father of the deceased gave evidence to the effect that he was not informed
of the death of his daughter at all and he came to know of her death through PW-
6 Mukhtiar Singh.  The first appellant contended that there were about 50
persons at the cremation place including PW-2 and his relatives. There is
absolutely no evidence to show that the cremation was done in the presence of
PW-2 or any close relative of the deceased.  The failure to inform PW-2 and the
police about the incident and the fact that the injured was not admitted in any
hospital shows that everything was done in a clandestine and secret manner and
circumstances of the case would show that the second appellant was party to the
secret disposal of the dead body.  Hence, knowledge can be attributed to him
that he knew well that an offence had been committed and he caused disappearance 
of the evidence.  We do not find any illegality in the conviction of the second
appellant under Section 201 IPC".

In the present case except the evidence of PW-3 there is no other evidence
available and it is no doubt true that PW-3 had deposed that reason had not been
given by the accused but however the same was informed to PW-3 in all promptness 
by the accused to carry the information to the parents of the deceased.  It is
no doubt true that PW-3 was not cross-examined in relation to Section 161
Cr.P.C. statement wherein it is stated that the reason of the death of the
deceased also had been furnished to PW-3.  In the absence of cross-examination
of PW-3 in relation to Section 161 Cr.P.C. statement, what had been said to have
been said by PW-3 before police and recorded under Section 161 Cr.P.C. statement 
cannot be taken into consideration.  It is no doubt a lapse on the part of the
Counsel in not putting such questions to PW-3.  At the best this can be said to
be a suspicious circumstance but definitely cannot be said to be a circumstance
of such a nature which would point out the guilt of the accused and the guilt of
the accused alone so as to attract the charge under Section 201 IPC.  On a
careful scrutiny of the findings recorded by the learned Judge and also the
evidence available on record, in view of the fact that the evidence of PW-1, PW-
2 and the other alleged panchayatdars who deposed about the harassment not being 
sufficient so as to attract the guilt of the accused under Section 498-A IPC and
also in view of the fact that the only circumstance explained by PW-3 may not be
sufficient so as to sustain the conviction under Section 201 IPC and in the
absence of any other evidence pointing out the guilt of the accused, this Court
is of the considered opinion that on such evidence, having recorded benefit of
doubt relating to the offence under Section 302 IPC, convicting the
appellant/accused under charges of offences under Sections 498-A and 201 IPC, 
definitely cannot be said to be in accordance with law.  Mere suspicion cannot
be a substitute to proof and in the absence of proof in accordance with law, it
would be unsafe to convict the accused on the strength of such evidence.  Hence,
the said findings recorded by the learned Judge are hereby set aside and
acquittal is recorded.
        The Criminal Appeal is allowed.  The bail bonds of the appellant shall
stand cancelled.

?1 2004 SCC (Crl) 2077 
2 AIR 2004 S.C. 4333 
3 AIR 1953 S.C. 131 


