

THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE P.S.NARAYANA         
Criminal Appeal No. 1613 of 1998

24-09-2004 

Taghatghar Hanmanth Rao   
s/o Dayanand Ra, aged 23 years  

State of Andhra Pradesh, Rep. By the 
Public Prosecutor, High Court of A.P.,
Hyderabad 

Counsel for Appellant:Mr.C.Praveen Kumar,Advocate  

Counsel for Respondent:The Public Prosecutor 

:JUDGMENT:   
A1 in Sessions Case No. 511 of 1995 on the file of I Additional Sessions Judge,
Ranga Reddy District, Hyderabad is the appellant. A.1 stands convicted under
Section 498A IPC only and acquittal had been recorded as against A2 and A3 on 
all the charges and acquittal was recorded as against A1 also, so far as it
relates to an offence under Section 306 IPC is concerned.
2.Sri C. PraveenKumar, learned Counsel representing appellant-A1 would contend 
that the learned Judge erred for conviction A1 under Section 498-A IPC having
acquitted him under Section 306 IPC on the self-same evidence.  The learned
counsel would also contend that the demand of articles TV, Godrej Almirah etc.
had not been specified at the earliest point of time and this is an improvement
in the evidence of PW1 and except the interested testimony, there is no
independent evidence in this regard and hence on the strength of such evidence
conviction cannot be sustained.  The learned counsel also placed reliance on
certain decisions.
3.On the contrary, the learned Additional Public Prosecutor relied upon the
evidence of PW1 and would contend that PW-1 deposed about the demand made by the     
son-in-law and hence, this evidence would be sufficient.  There is no necessity
for the young girl to take such an extreme step unless there is harassment.  The
object of introducing these provisions also may have to be kept in view. The
learned Additional Public Prosecutor also placed reliance on GURUBACHAN SINGH V.    
SATPAL SINGH AND OTHERS1 .       
4.Heard the learned counsel.
5.The case of the prosecution is that the deceased Smt T. Sarojadevi was the
daughter of PW-1 and PW2, who was married to appellant-A1.  It is also the case
of the prosecution that at the time of marriage half tula of gold, clothes,
sewing machine and other household articles were presented and she joined the
accused and was living with them happily.  One month thereafter, accused started
harassing the deceased to get gold, colour TV, Godrej Almirah, but PW-1 could
not provide the same.  After about two months, they approached PW-1 and a demand  
was made and a panchayat was held in the presence of PWs.5 and 6.  The accused   
also informed PW-1 that if their demand was not fulfilled, the deceased will not
be sent to their house.  Since PW1 did not provide the articles demanded by the
accused she was put in harassment and on 9.5.1994 at about 13.20 hours she  
poured kerosene on herself and committed suicide and at about 16.00 hours PW1  
came to the Police Station and lodged a complaint, which was registered and the
same was investigated into.
6.The case was taken on file as P.R.C. No. 69 of 1994 by the Additional Judicial
Magistrate of First Class, Hyderabad West & South, Ranga Reddy District and the
same was committed to the Court of Sessions which was made over to the I 
Additional Sessions Judge, Ranga Reddy District at Hyderabad. On behalf of the
prosecution PWs.1 to 11 were examined and Exs.P.1 to 7, Exs.D1 and D.2 were   
marked and MO1 and MO2 contradictions were also marked on behalf of the accused.   
7.The learned Judge after recording findings, held that A1 to A.3 are not guilty
of the offence under Section 306 IPC and acquittal had been recorded and A.2 and
A3 are also not guilty of the offence under Section 498A IPC and recorded
acquittal, but however, found A1 guilty for the offence under Section 498-A IPC
and sentenced him to under go R.I for one year and to pay a fine of Rs.2,000/-,
in default to suffer R.I for two months.
8.PW1, father of the deceased deposed about the marriage and presentation of
half tula gold and some other household articles and also deposed that for some
time the relationship was good and 13 months after the marriage accused was
finding fault for marrying the deceased without proper dowry.  A2 was also
telling to desert the deceased and some time later A1 came to him and stated
that he was sent by his father to get colour TV, scooter as no dowry was given
and he told him that he was a poor-man and that he cannot meet the demands.  A1 
went and informed his father that he promised to get a shop opened by A1,
though, he did not state so.  Thereafter, A2 also came and asked him about the
setting up of the shop and he told him that he had no money and he had never
promised to pay the same and A2 threatened him as to how he will get his
daughter from his house.  One month later PW1 alone went to the house of the
accused. He had taken one Vital Rao and when they wanted to take his daughter A2 
stated that no dowry was given and she will not be sent.  Then he insisted A2
and his another son Prakash Rao beat him and he did not complain to the police
since he felt that the deceased has to live with the accused only and he was
beaten on head with stick and stone.  This witness also deposed that as per the
advice of the Vittal Rao he gave sewing machine to his daughter and brought her
to his house.  The accused sent her without any objection. The deceased was in
his house for some time and she was sent thereafter.  This witness also deposed
that A1 came and asked for two tulas of gold as he was sent by his father and he
expressed his inability and A1 left saying that he will inform his father and
this witness also deposed about certain other aspects and also about the
incident on the fateful day.  This witness in cross examination deposed that it
is true that in their caste there is no giving of dowry and it is also true that
he had specifically stated to the police that A1 came and asked for TV and
scooter and he did not state to the police about the shop incident as stated by
him now and he stated to the police about A2 threatening him as to why he will
take his daughter and he did not tell to the police about his beating with a
stick and stone.  He further deposed that he did not state before the police as
in Ex.P.1.  This witness further deposed that the colour TV and scooter came up
for discussion at the time of mediation by Vittal Rao and Yeshwantha Rao and
this witness also denied the other suggestions put to him.
9.PW2 wife of the PW1 also deposed on the same lines and had denied the  
suggestions.  PW3 simply deposed that he does not know the family relationship
between the accused and the deceased the deceased never told any thing and the 
accused also never expressed and also deposed that Public gathered at the house 
and he also went there and found the door was pushed by the public and the
deceased received burns and he came back to the house.  No doubt this witness 
was declared hostile.
10.PW4 deposed that the deceased died about four years back He also deposed that  
in the after noon, he was returning to his house along with one Ali, public
gathered in front of the house of accused and they were asked to climb the roof
and in the meanwhile, public pushed the doorway and opened and the deceased  
received injuries.
11.  PW-5 is the witness who just deposed that A2 and A3 came to their house and 
at that time another Vittal Rao who is employed in Education Department and the
members of Mahila Mandali were present. Then PW5 asked A2 as to how the matter   
can be discussed without A1 and he stated that the presence of A1 was not
necessary.  Then the deceased stated that she was not being looked after well by
the accused and then she was not given food and she was afraid that she may be
killed and PW5 told him that   there cannot be any problems and she can inform
him by phone or go to the police station or give a complaint and as per his
advice the deceased was taken away by the accused. This witness no doubt  
volunteered that he also advised A3 not to say like that and he came to know
about the burns of the deceased and this witness was cross-examined. 
12.PW6 deposed that PW1 expressed that the family life of the deceased was not 
good.  This witness, PW1, PW5 and the others met the deceased at the house of  
PW.1 and enquired about her problems, and they asked the deceased as to whether  
the accused was demanding for gold, scooter, colour TV   or any other articles
and further if she was beaten. The deceased informed that there were no such
demands or beating . Then they asked the deceased if there are any other
problems, they can talk to the police. They sent her to the house of the
accused.  At that time A2 and A3 were present.  This witness came to know about 
the burns of the deceased.  This witness was declared hostile.  This witness
specifically deposed that he did not state to the police that the deceased
complaining about the harassment by the accused for bringing two tulas of gold,
colour TV and scooter.
13.PW7 was also declared hostile.  PW8 deposed about Ex.P.4 and Ex.P.5 in   
relation to the inquest.  PW.9 is the Medical Officer who had conducted post-
mortem examination over the dead-body of the deceased. 
14. PW.10 S.I. of Police who had received the complaint from PW1 which is Ex.P.1
had registered the crime.  In cross examination he deposed that PW1 stated as in
Ex.P.1.  PW1 did not state about A2 threatening him as to how he will take his
daughter and also did not state about his plan to go to the house of the accused
on 9.5.1994. PW10 did not express any suspicion about the killing of the
deceased. 
15.PW.11 Investigating Officer, SDPO. R. Nagar deposed that he had taken up the
investigation after the S.I of Police Shamshabad registered the crime and also
deposed about the other particulars of investigation and filing the charge
sheet. This witness deposed that PW2 stated as in Ex.D.2. PW.5 did not state
that A3 expressed his willingness to take the deceased.  He also did not state
that she was not given food by the accused and she was not willing to go and she
did not state at the time of panchayat A1 was absent and he enquired from A2
about it.  Certain suggestions were denied.  This is the evidence available on
record.
16.Even as per the evidence of PW1 the conduct and behaviour of A1 also may have 
to be taken in to consideration while deciding the matter.  PW1 himself deposed
that he had informed his father that his father-in-law PW1 promised to got open
a shop by A1, though he did not state so.  Evidently, as per the evidence
available on record A1 was not interested in making any such demands at all.
The other evidence available on record also would go to show that A2 was
threatening, but having recorded acquittal as far as A2 is concerned, convicting
the accused under Section 498-A IPC just on the ground that he is the husband of
the deceased, may not be justified.  Except this evidence of PW1 and 2 husband
and wife i.e. parents of the deceased there is no other evidence available on
record.  At the earliest point of time, these aspects were not mentioned, but
these improvements were introduced.  The panchayatdar was declared hostile and 
there is no other acceptable evidence on record in relation to the panchayat.
Apart from this aspect of the matter, the demands made by PW1 also may have to  
be taken into consideration that there is no giving of dowry at all in their
caste and also he did not specifically stated before the police that A1 came and
demanded for TV and scooter etc.  In the light of the nature of this evidence
when on the self-same evidence acquittal had been recorded against A2, who has
said to have threatened the husband of the deceased i.e son-in-law of PW1, who
is said to have come and made certain statements before PW.1 at the instance of
A2, father of A1, definitely cannot be convicted under Section 498-A IPC,
especially in the light of the acquittal recorded in relation to this charge
also as against A2.
17.Viewed from any angle, the evidence available is highly insufficient to
sustain the conviction recorded under Section 498-A IPC.  Accordingly the
conviction and sentence are hereby set aside and the appellant-accused  No.1 is
entitled for acquittal and accordingly acquittal is recorded.
18.This Criminal Appeal is allowed. Bail bonds of the appellant/A1 shall stand
cancelled.

?1 AIR 1990SC 209  

