

THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE P.S. NARAYANA        
Criminal Appeal No.  979 of 1999

13-10-2004 

The Public Prosecutor, High Court of A.P., Hyderabad

A. Shivashankar and another 

Counsel for Appellant: Additional Public Prosecutor

Counsel for Respondents : Sri Praveen Kumar 

:JUDGMENT:   

        This criminal appeal is filed as against the acquittal recorded in
Sessions Case No.87 of 1995 on the file of the Assistant Sessions Judge at
Sangareddy, dated 26-06-1998. 
  The Deputy Superintendent of Police, Woman Protection Cell, C.I.D., Hyderabad,
filed charge sheet against the respondents-accused for the offences punishable
under Sections 406, 498-A, 304-B of the Indian Penal Code ( for short 'the
Code') and Section 3 & 4 of the Dowry Prohibition Act.
        The case of the prosecution, in brief, is that the marriage of Vandana   (
herein after referred to as 'deceased') was celebrated with A1 on 20-11-1992 and
both of them were living together along with A2-the mother of A1.  At the time
of marriage, the parents of the deceased presented 5 tulas of gold, steel cot,
silver vessels, steel almyrah, folding dining table with 4 chairs, household
articles, Bajaj scooter and Rs.30,000/- cash for clothes. After the marriage,
the accused harassed the deceased for bringing more amount and she returned 
three times to her parents' house within a period of one and half months.  The
accused used to harass the deceased not only to bring money but also for decolum
cot and gas cylinder as gifts.  Due to the harassment made by the accused, the
deceased died by setting herself ablaze. On a complaint, a case in Crime No. 11
of 1993 under Section 174 of the Code of Criminal Procedure was registered by
the Police Station, Narayanguda.  The Mandal Revenue Officer conducted inquest
over the dead body of the deceased and he also recorded the dying declaration of
the deceased. During the course of investigation, it was established that the
deceased was harassed by A1 before her death for want of dowry and she died with
burn injuries within seven years of her marriage.
        The learned Judicial First Class Magistrate, Sangareddy, committed the
case to the Court of Session and on appearance of the accused, a charge under
Section 304-B of the Code was framed and the accused pleaded not guilty. The
prosecution examined P.Ws 1 to 15 and got marked Exs.P1 to P11 on its behalf and  
also Ex.D1 and D2 were marked on behalf of accused. The learned Judge, after
recording the reasons in detail, found the accused not guilty of an offence
under Section 304-B of the Code and recorded an acquittal. Hence, the appeal.
        The learned Additional Public Prosecutor would contend that A1 married the
deceased and had taken the dowry, and after the marriage also he had been
demanding more money and gifts as additional dowry and began harassing and ill-
treating her, and as a result, the deceased committed suicide within two months
of her marriage. The learned Additional Public Prosecutor would also contend
that the death was within seven years of her marriage and hence, the presumption
is available under Section 113 B of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (for short
'the Act'}.  The learned Additional Public Prosecutor also would submit that the
evidence available on record is clear, cogent and consisting relating to the
demand of dowry and the harassment by A1 on the deceased.  The learned  
Additional Public Prosecutor also would contend that the dying declarations, on
which a strong reliance was placed by the learned Judge in recording an
acquittal, had been made by the deceased due to the influence of the accused
over the deceased at the relevant point of time and hence, in view of both the
Sections 113(a) and 113(b) of the Act, the accused are to be found guilty and
the findings are to be reversed.
        Sri Praveen Kumar, learned counsel for the respondents, on contrary would
contend that the learned Judge appreciated the evidence available on record,
recorded the findings in detail and ultimately, recorded an acquittal and even
with regard to the harassment, the evidence of P.Ws 1, 2 and 12 also would not
establish the same, at any rate, because they are interested witnesses.  The
learned counsel also would submit that in the light of Ex.P4-the dying
declaration recorded by the duty doctor of Sangareddy hospital- P.W.8 and Ex.P6-
the dying declaration recorded by XXIII Metropolitan Magistrate, Hyderabad-
P.W.14, it is clear that the death was due to sheer accident and nothing more.
        Heard both the counsel.
        P.W.1-the mother of the deceased deposed about the celebration of marriage
and as per the demand of the accused she gave 5 tulas of gold, Rs.10,000/- for
purchase of clothes, Rs.20,000/-for purchase of scooter, Rs.4000/- for utensils
and also dining table, cot and got celebrated the marriage of her daughter with
A1. This witness also deposed that after the marriage, the deceased and A1 had
gone to Sadasivpet and after four days they both came to their house and her
daughter told her that there are no mirrors to the almyrah and no decolum to the
dining table and also to the cot and the above articles were demanded by the
accused.  She further deposed that she told her daughter that her father was
sick and she will pacify A1. She had also further deposed about the Sankranthi
festival.   She sent her son to call her daughter and A1 to celebrate Sankranthi
festival, but their house was locked and her son wrote a letter and dropped in
their house and came back. She further deposed that on the next day, when they
were waiting for the arrival of the deceased and A1, one of their relatives
received a telephone message that the deceased received burn injuries and was
admitted in Gandhi hospital, then they went and shifted her to CDR hospital, but
after two days she died.  This witness also deposed that when her daughter
visited their house, she stated to her that the accused are demanding
Rs.40,000/- for the purpose of securing a job to A1.  Hence, she lodged a
complaint- Ex.P1.
        P.W.3 is the paternal uncle of the deceased.  P.W.4 and P.W.5 are the
brothers of the deceased. P.W.2 deposed that A1 is her husband's younger brother
and on the date of accident, at about 6-00 P.M., when they returned from the
fields, the deceased told them that she will bring tea to them and went inside
the house, and then as her saree caught fire she started cries. She further
deposed that by the time herself, her husband and A2 went, the deceased was 
almost on fire and A1 came over there and tried to cover blanket on her.  They
took the deceased to Sadasivpet hospital and from there to Sangareddy hospital.
P.W.6 is the Mandal Revenue Officer, who conducted the inquest over the dead
body of the deceased on 14-1-1993, deposed about the conducting of panchanama in  
the presence of P.Ws 1 and 3 and Ex.P2 is the panchanama, which contains the  
opinion of the witnesses.
P.W.7 is the Professor, Forensic Department, who conducted autopsy on the dead  
body of the deceased, deposed that the deceased died due to burn injuries.
P.W.8 is the panch witness for the inquest panchanama-Ex.P2 and she signed on  
it.
P.W.9 is the doctor, who had given treatment to the deceased and recorded her
dying declaration, which is Ex.P4. P.W.10 is the retired Head Clerk of
Metropolitan Magistrate Court, Alampur, who had identified the signature of
Metropolitan Magistrate, who recorded the dying declaration of the deceased.
P.W.11 is the doctor, who identified the signature of   Ms. Rashmi, who worked
under him, on the dying declaration-Ex.P5. P.W.12 is the paternal uncle of the
deceased, who no doubt supported the version of P.W.1, P.Ws 3 to 5. P.W.13 is 
the District Superintendent of Police, who investigated the case, deposed about
the details of investigation.  P.W.14 deposed that as per the instructions of
D.G.CID, he had taken up investigation in Crime No.12 of 1993 under Section 304-
B of the Code, visited Sadasivpet, examined the scene of offence and recorded
the statements of witnesses and after receipt of medical certificate, and after
completion of investigation, he filed charge sheet.  P.W.15 is the Head
Constable, who deposed about receiving the complaint from P.W.1 and registering
the case.
From a careful scrutiny of Ex.P4-the dying declaration recorded by the duty
doctor of Sangareddy Government Hospital-P.W.8 and Ex.P6-the dying declaration  
recorded by the XXIII Metropolitan Magistrate, Hyderabad, it is clear that what
had been deposed by P.Ws 1 to 5 and P.W.12 definitely cannot be believed.  The
said dying declaration Ex.P4 reads as hereunder;












Ex.P6 reads as hereunder; 









In the light of the dying declarations made by the deceased herself, it is clear
that the incident happened due to sheer accident.  The version of the
prosecution definitely cannot be believed.  The learned Judge had recorded the
reasons in detail and had given a clear fining that in view of the two dying
declarations referred to supra, the harassment alleged and the consequent death
styling it as 'dowry death' by the prosecution cannot be sustained and on that
ground, the evidence of the relations of the deceased had been disbelieved.
 On appreciation of the evidence of P.W.1 to P.W.15 and also Exs.P1 to P11 and
Ex.D1-the portion of 161 Cr.P.C. statement of P.W.3 and Ex.D2-the postal card
and cover by P.W.4, the findings recorded by the learned Judge cannot be found
fault in any way. Even, on                re-appreciation of the evidence
available on record, this Court is of the considered opinion that any other view
is not possible and hence, the acquittal recorded by the learned Judge
definitely is well justified in the facts and circumstances of the case and the
findings recorded by the learned Judge are hereby confirmed and the appeal shall
stand dismissed. 
        Accordingly, the Criminal appeal is dismissed.


