

THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE P.S. NARAYANA        
Criminal Appeal No.1645 of 1999 

25-11-2004 

Pentakota Srinivas Rao @ Sriknu 

State of A.P. represented by
Public Prosecutor

Counsel for appellant   : Sri C.Praveen Kumar 

Counsel for respondent : Additional Public Prosecutor

:JUDGMENT:   
        A-1 in S.C.No.179/98 on the file of Principle Sessions Judge,
Visakhapatnam filed this Criminal Appeal as against the Judgment of the learned
Judge convicting him under Section 498-A IPC and imposing Rigorous Imprisonment  
for a period of 3 years and also to pay a fine of Rs.1000/-, in default to
suffer Simple Imprisonment for one week.  However, A-1 was found not guilty on
charges under Sections 302 and 304-B IPC and A-2 was acquitted of all the
charges.
        A-1 and A-2 were originally charged with the offence under Section 302 IPC
and in alternative under Section 304-B IPC but however an additional charge was
framed under Section 498-A IPC as against   A-1 and A-2.  The case of the
prosecution is that A-1 is the husband of one Pentakota Nookaratnam, hereinafter
referred to as "deceased" for the purpose of convenience and A-2 is the mother
of A-1.  PW-1 and PW-2 are the parents of the deceased.  The marriage of the
deceased had taken place with A-1 at Munagapaka village in the month of June
1997.  It is also the version of the prosecution that at the time of marriage,
the parents of the deceased gave Rs.40,000/- cash to the bridegroom as dowry and
also 10 tolas of gold ornaments.  The dowry amount of Rs.40,000/- demanded by 
the accused was deposited by PW-1 and PW-2 in S.B.I. Munagapaka branch in the    
name of the deceased.  It is also the version of the prosecution that they gave
sare articles worth Rs.50,000/- at the time of marriage and the deceased was
looked after well by the accused and subsequent thereto PW-1 and PW-2 began  
harassing for dowry amount on the ground that what was already given was not
sufficient.  It is also the version of the prosecution that the accused
suspected fidelity of the deceased and attributed unchastity and illicit
intimacy with others.  It is also the version of the prosecution that the
deceased informed the same to PW-1 and PW-2 and they raised a dispute relating  
to the harassment made by A-1 and the parents informed that they would set right
the things.  It is also the version of the prosecution that the deceased
informed her brother PW-4 that A-1 was harassing for colour T.V. and for
purchasing a scooter.  In spite of the invitation extended by PW-1 and PW-2, A-1
did not attend for Sankranthi festival and he also did not allow the deceased to
attend the Sankranthi festival.  While so on 6-2-1998 PW-1's younger brother's
daughter's marriage was performed at Gavarla Anakapalle and in that connection
A-1 and the deceased attended the marriage function and A-1 did not visit the
house of PW-1 and in that connection the deceased informed that she was 
subjected to mental and physical cruelty and harassment by A-1 and it is
unbearable and also informed that she would not go to the house of the accused.
PW-1 and PW-2 asked her to adjust herself to the situation and go along with her
husband.  PW-1 informed that the deceased was beaten by A-1 on their way to 
Munagapaka.  On 10-2-1998 at about 1 p.m. PW-1 received information from PW-8   
about the death of the deceased at Munagapaka.  Immediately PW-1, PW-4 and   
others rushed to the house of the accused and found the dead body of the
deceased in front of their house and they also found some abrasions on the neck
of the deceased.  When PW-1 enquired how the deceased died, the accused informed   
that the deceased committed suicide by hanging. PW-1 did not believe the version
of the accused regarding the death and suspected the killing of the deceased due
to not meeting the demand of dowry and suspecting fidelity of the deceased by
the accused and gave report to the police.
        Originally the charge sheet was filed under Sections 302 and   304-B IPC
and the said charges were framed and an additional charge under Section 302 IPC
was framed and subsequent thereto another charge under Section 498-A IPC also  
was framed.  The prosecution examined PW-1 to PW-15 and Exs.P-1 to P-20 and    
M.Os.1 to 5 were marked. Ex.D-1 to D-9 also had been marked and ultimately as 
referred to supra A-1 alone was convicted for the offence under Section 498-A
IPC and hence the present Criminal Appeal.
        The learned Counsel representing the appellant/A-1 would point out that on
appreciation of evidence the learned Judge having arrived at a conclusion that
the offences under Sections 302 and 304-B IPC had not been established,
definitely erred in recording conviction under Section 498-A IPC as against A-1.
The learned Counsel would submit that there is variation between the earlier
version and what was deposed by PW-1 and PW-2 before the Court.  The learned  
Counsel also had pointed out to Ex.D-3 in this regard.  The learned Counsel also
would submit that the Investigating Officer PW-15 also admitted in his cross-
examination that PW-1 stated before him as in Ex.D-3.  The learned Counsel also
pointed out that PW-3 did not state about the complaints made to her by the
deceased to police, but PW-3 deposed about the same before the Court for the
first time and hence the evidence of PW-3 should have been viewed with
suspicion.  The Counsel also pointed out the inconsistent versions of PW-3 and
PW-4.  The learned Counsel also had taken this Court through the evidence of PW-
5 and PW-7 and would conclude that at any rate there is no acceptable
independent evidence and the evidence available on record is more in the nature
of hear say and the ingredients of Section 498-A IPC are not satisfied and hence
recording of conviction on the basis of such evidence cannot be said to be in
accordance with law.  The learned Counsel also pointed out to the contradictions
and omissions and the inconsistent versions relating to the alleged incidents as
per the episode of the prosecution.  Reliance was placed on GANANATH PATTNAIK    
Vs. STATE OF ORISSA 1 and INDERPAL Vs. STATE OF M.P. 2.         
        Per contra the learned Additional Public Prosecutor would submit that the
evidence on record is sufficient to satisfy the ingredients of Section 498-A
IPC.  The learned Additional Public Prosecutor also would submit that the mere
fact that acquittal had been recorded under Sections 302 or 304-B IPC, by itself
it cannot be contended that automatically A-1 is entitled for acquittal for the
charge under Section 498-A IPC also.  The learned Additional Public Prosecutor
also would contend that on a careful reading of the evidence of PW-1 to PW-4 and
also the other evidence available on record relating to the incident which
happened prior thereto, there cannot be any doubt whatsoever that the learned
Judge is well justified in convicting A-1 under Section 498-A IPC having
recorded findings in detail in this regard and hence the said findings are to be
confirmed and consequently the conviction and sentence imposed by the learned 
Judge also are to be confirmed.
        Heard both the Counsel at length and also perused the evidence of PW-1 to
PW-15, Exs.P-1 to P-20 and Exs.D-1 to D-9. 
        PW-1 deposed that the marriage took place between A-1 and the deceased   
about 11/2 years back.  It is the version of PW-1 that he had agreed to give
cash of Rs.40,000/- in cash, 10 tolas of gold and sare samans worth about
Rs.50,000/- by the time of the marriage.  10 tolas of gold was presented in the
form of jewellery and articles to the deceased.  An amount of Rs.40,000/- cash
was paid to A-2 and the marriage was performed at the house of A-1 as per the
caste custom prevailing in Gavarla community.  It was further deposed that the
deceased joined A-1 after the marriage and sare samans were presented and they 
both lived happily for about 2 or 3 months and were visiting his house.
Venkasanna Appa Rao, eldest son of PW-1, is employed in Visakhapatnam and he is    
married.  The second son of PW-1 was unmarried and was staying with him.  It was
also further deposed that himself (PW-1) and his youngest son and his wife were
residing in his house and his eldest daughter-in-law is also a native of their
village.  PW-1 further deposed that his son-in-law (A-1) did not send the
deceased when he was invited for Ammathalli festival and again PW-1 invited A-1
and the deceased to join them during Sankranthi festival.  A-1 sent the deceased
but he did not come.  The eldest son of PW-1 and his wife joined them during
Sankranthi festival days.  PW-1 further deposed that three days after the
Sankranthi festival, A-1's mother came to take back the deceased.  When PW-1 
questioned her, she stated that A-1 had got some work and due to that reason he
did not come.  PW-1 deposed that the deceased informed that her husband (A-1) 
felt insufficiency of dowry and sare samans furnished by them and due to that
reason he did not visit for Sankranthi festival days and the same thing was told
during Sankranthi days.  PW-1 further deposed that the deceased went along with
A-2 to stay along with A-1 and on the invitation extended to A-1 and the
deceased, they came to attend the marriage function in the house of his younger
brother's house and three days after the marriage, the deceased died.  When PW-1
invited A-1 and the deceased to come to his house after the marriage, they
represented that they would come later and on the next day morning the deceased
visited the house of PW-1 and informed that A-1 would not visit his house and
would not take tea.  PW-1 further deposed that when a boy came and informed 
about the death of the deceased, himself and his wife along with the person who
brought the news of death went to the house of A-1 at Munagapaka.  The body of
the deceased was lying on a country mat spread out on the floor which was kept
outside the house.  PW-1 further deposed that A-1 informed him that the deceased
committed suicide by hanging.  PW-1 entertained suspicion of murdering the
deceased on seeing the injuries on the back side of the neck portion, on the
forehead and on the chest.  PW-1 deposed that the roof portion of the house is
at a height of 14 ft. from the ground.  PW-1 got the complaint drafted by Malla
Appalanaidu and he put his thumb mark on the said complaint and got it written
at Munagapaka which was presented to the S.I. of Police, Munagapaka. 
        PW-2 also deposed about the marriage between A-1 and the deceased and   
presenting Rs.40,000/- cash and 10 tolas of gold towards dowry and giving sare
samans worth about Rs.50,000/- at the marriage that took place at the house of
the accused.  PW-2 also deposed that the deceased joined her husband after the
marriage and lived happily for three months and the deceased used to inform her
that A-1 used to beat her.  She also further deposed that the deceased told her
that A-1 was suspecting her and he was beating suddenly and later treating well
and he was also expressing about the insufficiency of sare samans.  PW-2 further
deposed that during Sankranthi festival after the marriage PW-1 went and brought
the deceased to their house.  A-1 did not come to their house for festival.  By
the date of the death of the deceased she was pregnant and running her fourth
month and the deceased died 15 days prior to the marriage that took place in the
house of her husband's brother.  It was also further deposed that the marriage
of Paradesinaidu's son took place during the month of February after Sankranthi
and A-1 and the deceased attended the said marriage and some witnesses informed  
PW-2 that the accused took away the deceased by beating all-through.  PW-2 
further deposed that on the date of marriage the deceased did not inform her
anything and she only informed to her brother and sister-in-law and on the fifth
day after the marriage that took place in her husband's brother's house, she
died and they received information about the death of the deceased at about 1
p.m.  Ramana Sanni Appa Rao is the eldest son of PW-2 and Apparao is the second   
son.  PW-2 further deposed that the dead body of the deceased was kept on the
hay in front of the house of A-1 and she went and saw the same.  PW-2, PW-1 and 
her co-sister went in the first instance and they found some injuries on the
neck portion, forehead and on the sides of the body of the deceased and
thereupon PW-1 gave report.  PW-2 identified the body of the deceased as that of
her daughter from Exs.P-2 to P-4 which are the positive photographs.  PW-2 also
deposed that MO-1 blouse, MO-2 upper cloth, MO-3 petty coat and MO-4 langa   
belonged to the deceased.  PW-2 further deposed that only sacred thread around
the neck, ear studs and two rings were found on the body of the deceased and she
further deposed that the deceased used to tell her about the accused harassing
her about the insufficiency of the sare samans and dowry given to her.
        PW-3 deposed about the marriage that took place during June 1997 with A-1 
at Munagapaka and PW-3 also deposed that one tola of gold also was presented to 
A-1 and the remaining 9 tolas were presented by way of jewellery to the deceased
and the dowry amount of Rs.40,000/- was handed over to A-2 at the time of
marriage and in the beginning the amount was deposited in the name of the
deceased and   A-1 and later it was transferred in such a way that any one of
them can withdraw.  The furniture and other articles worth Rs.50,000/- were also
given to the deceased.  PW-3 and her husband had been residing at Visakhapatnam  
since six years.  PW-3 further deposed that during Sankranthi festival days she
met the deceased at her parents-in-law's house and the deceased attended the
marriage of Paradesinaidu's son on 6th February 1998 and the deceased died on
10-2-1998.  PW-3 also deposed that the deceased was complaining of harassment by   
A-1 stating that they could have presented more articles since her eldest
brother was employed and she told the police that she attended the marriage of
the junior paternal uncle's son of the deceased.  The deceased informed   PW-3
during the marriage shedding tears that the accused was demanding more amount  
and asking her to demand more and he was beating her and she was unwilling to 
join him. PW-3 further deposed that she learnt about the death of the deceased
while they were at Visakhapatnam and herself and her husband rushed to 
Munagapaka.    A-2 informed them that the deceased was found in sofa and whereas  
A-1 informed them that she hanged herself and died.  PW-3 further deposed that
nobody informed her that she died due to hanging except A-1 and A-2.  PW-3 also
further deposed that the chest was found swollen when she saw the deceased and 
there were finger impressions around the neck and she saw injuries on the head
and forehead.  PW-1 to PW-3 categorically stated that the M.R.O. came and 
conducted inquest and they gave statements to M.R.O. and the Investigating
Officer as well.
        PW-4, the brother of the deceased also deposed about the marriage and also
a sum of Rs.40,000/- being given towards dowry and 10 tolas of gold presented at
the time of marriage to the deceased.  PW-4 also deposed that sare samans 
presented were worth about Rs.50,000/- and the marriage took place in the house
of A-1 and A-1 and the deceased lived happily for three months after the
marriage.  A-1 and A-2 started ill-treating the deceased stating that the dowry
was not sufficient and he (PW-4) used to visit the house of A-1 at Munagapaka
now and then and the deceased told him that A-1 was suspecting her character and 
was beating her and PW-4 informed the same to his father/PW-1.  PW-4 and PW-1   
went and questioned A-1's conduct.  A-2 and the father of A-1 told them that
they were young and the things would get set right after some time.  The
deceased used to tell him (PW-4) that they were demanding a colour T.V. and a
scooter and he informed A-1 and A-2 about their inability to meet the said
demand.  PW-4 also deposed about the non-attending to Sankranthi festival by A-1
when his father/PW-1 went and invited A-1 and the deceased.  He also deposed 
about the deceased attending to the marriage during February 1998 in his junior
paternal uncle's house and A-1 not permitting the deceased to talk to anybody
and beating the deceased when she desired to visit her parents house.  PW-4
learnt about the beating of the deceased by A-1 through somebody who saw it and
he deposed that PW-1 to PW-3 attended the marriage and they met A-1 and the  
deceased at the marriage function.  PW-4 deposed about coming to know about the  
death of the deceased and they going and visiting the house of A-1 and finding
the corpse placed on a country mat in front of the door way and finding injuries
on the neck portion of the deceased.  PW-4 also found the chest of the deceased
being swollen.  PW-4 further deposed that when he saw on 6th he felt that A-1
and his wife were not having cordial relations.
        PW-5 belonging to Gavarla Anakapalle deposed about A-1 giving a slap to
the deceased while going on the road and when he intervened A-1 chastised him
stating that he should not intervene in the quarrel in between wife and husband.
PW-6 also deposed about the incident that had taken place on 6-2-1998 at about
8.30 p.m. when he was proceeding towards his shop.  At that time he saw the
deceased and A-1 going together and the deceased was going behind the back of A- 
1 and A-1 questioned the deceased as to why she was walking behind him and the  
deceased said that she was following him and he beat her with his hand on the
back side.  PW-7 deposed that when she was returning after supplying milk at the
junction, the deceased was shedding tears and A-1 beat the deceased on her back 
after boarding the rickshaw.  PW-8 deposed about receiving telephone call on 10-
2-1998 in between 12-30 p.m. and 1 p.m. that the deceased died and he passed on 
the information to the parents of the deceased.  PW-9, the Branch Manager of
S.B.I. Munagapaka deposed about deposit of Rs.39,000/- in their branch by   A-1
and the deceased as a Special term deposit.  PW-10 deposed about the conduct of 
inquest and also taking of photographs.  PW-11 deposed about Ex.P-10 inquest 
report and conduct of inquest.  PW-12 deposed about taking of the photographs of
the scene of offence.  The positive photographs are Exs.P-2 to P-8.  PW-13,
Professor & Head of the Department of Forensic Medicine deposed about conducting  
of post mortem examination over the dead body of the deceased and this witness
further deposed that he found the body was built, nutrition was moderate, height
was 156 cms., scalp hair was 45 cms. and black in colour, eyes were closed and
both the corneas were hazy, conjunctiva was congested, mouth was partly opened, 
blood stains and white frothy liquid was coming out from the nose and mouth and
stained on the face.  PW-13 observed that the finger nails were blue in colour
and the upper part of the chest, neck, both shoulders were livid.  Rigor mortis
was present in lower limbs and he also observed that the post mortem staining
was on the back.  He further deposed that the abdomen was slightly bleated and
the body was kept in cold storage.  PW-13 found the following observations and
external injuries.  While glistering, dried salivary stains were present on the
green colour voni and PW-13 further noticed the following external injuries :
1. A reddish brown coloured ligature mark of 18 cms. in length with a varying
width of 1-2 cms. present on the front of neck, going upwards obliquely upto
left part of the neck on left side upto a point of 4 cms. below the angle of
lower jaw and going upwards obliquely upto hair line on the back on the right
side of neck 4 cms. below and behind the right mastoid process.  There is
echymosis.  There is no ligature mark on the back of neck to a length of 115
cms.  The total circumference of the neck is 33 cms.  No clear pattern.  No knot
mark. 
2. An abrasion of 3 x 2 x 21/2 cms, reddish brown in colour present on right
upper part of neck near the mid line extending towards on right side of neck
present immediately above the ligature mark.  Echymosis is present.
3. Abrasion of 41/2 x 2 cms. reddish brown in colour present on the middle of
neck and left upper part of neck 11/2 cms. above the ligature mark.  Echymosis
is present.
4. A contusion of 6 x 4 cms. on right temporal region of scalp.
5. A contusion of 3 x 2 cms. on front upper part of chest at upper sternal
regions.
6. Contusion of 21/2 x 1/2 cms. on front of right shoulder.
7. Contusion of 3 x 2 cms. on front of left shoulder region.

All the injuries are fresh and red.
On cut opening of the body, he found the following :
There was no bony injury in the skull.  The brain is 1200 gms. and congested.
Orbital, nasal and aural cavities are normal.  Mouth, tongue and pharynx are
normal.  Hyoid bone is intact.  Thyroid cartilage, cricoid and trachea rings are
normal.  Chest wall injury found.  Ribs are intact.  Diaphragm, mediastunum,
oesophagus are normal.  Trachea, bronchi contained blood stained froth.  Pleural
cavities are normal.  Right lung is 450 gms.  Left lung is 410 gms.  They are
congested and oedematous.  Heart is 230 gms. and is normal.  Large blood vessels 
of the body are normal.  Abdominal wall, peritoneal cavity are normal.  Stomach
contained 50 mls. Of liquid food material.  Pieces of digested rice particles
were found.  There was no specific smell.  No signs of poisoning.  It was found
that small and large intestines are bleated with post mortem gases.  They are in
normal condition.  Liver is 1280 gms.  Spleen is 160 gms. Right kidney is 130
gms.  Left kidney is 135 gms.  They are congested.  Pancreas and adrenal are
normal.  Pelvic wall is normal.  External genitalia are normal.  Urinary bladder
is empty.  Uterus is 620 gms. in weight, enlarged, pregnant and contained a male
foetus of 4 months, intra uterine age.  The length of the foetus is 16 cms.
Spine is intact.

PW-13 deposed that himself and the other doctor concluded the examination at
3.00 p.m. on 11-2-1998.  The injuries are ante-mortem in nature.  He opined that
the cause of death is asphyxia due to hanging associated with injuries.  He
further deposed that there is likelihood of abrasion being caused to the neck
portion due to wearing of ornaments around the neck and the injuries 4 to 7 can
be caused by a fall or coming into contact with blunt object or blunt force.  He
issued Ex.P-18 post mortem certificate.  He also deposed about death of foetus
and opined that this is a case of suicide.
        PW-14 is the S.I. of Police, Munagapaka who registered F.I.R. Ex.P-1 as
Cr.No.5/98 under Section 304-B IPC.  PW-15 is the Deputy Superintendent of 
Police, Anakapalli who received telephonic message from PW-14 and registration
of the case and taking up the case and examination of the witnesses and
preparing the scene of observation report, seizure of properties and getting the
scene of offence photographed.  He also deposed about examination of witnesses 
and filing of the charge sheet after receipt of inquest report.
        This is the evidence available on record.
        Ex.P-1 reads as hereunder :
        "The marriage of my second daughter Nookaratnam was performed with   
Pentakota Sreenivasa Rao @ Sreenu, s/o Paradesinaidu of Munagapaka village in  
June 1997.  Rs.40,000/- was paid as dowry to the bride at the time of marriage
and 10 tulas of gold to the bride-groom.  The dowry amount was deposited in a
Bank at Munagapaka, as agreed.  Rs.40,000/- worth sare samans were given as per  
custom. 
        The parents-in-law and husband treated well upto three months after the
marriage.  Subsequently they used to demand our daughter to bring more dowry as 
the previous dowry was not sufficient and used to ill-treat her.  Further her
husband used to ill-treat her stating that she had illicit intimacy with another
person.  When our daughter told us about the above ill-treatment, we asked our
son-in-law and his parents, but they replied that their son was an idiot and
they will pacify the matter.  On 6-2-98 the marriage of the son of my brother
Paradesinaidu was performed.  On that day my daughter Nookaratnam and my son-on-    
law Sreenu came to our village for the marriage.  Then my daughter told me by
weeping that my son-in-law was ill-treating her every day, and beating her.  She
also told me that she will not go to him. Then my self, my wife and neighbours
chastised her and sent her to her house on 7-2-98, Saturday along with her
husband. 
        On 10-2-98 at about 1-00 P.M. a phone call was received at the house of
Dadi Atchiyya stating that my daughter was dead and inform the same to me. 
        Immediately we went there along with my family members and saw the dead  
body on the verandah.  When asked as to how my daughter died, the persons there 
said that the dead body was found in the sofa set.
        When asked as to how she died in a sofa-set since she had no diseases, 
nothing was replied by any one. Therefore, the death was not a natural death
except murder and the death might be caused by her husband and parents-on-law, 
keeping in view the previous ill-treatment.
        Hence necessary action may be taken and do justice." 

PW-1 in cross-examination deposed that statements were recorded by M.R.O. during  
inquest and he did not state to M.R.O. as in Ex.D-1.  Ex.D-1 reads as hereunder
:
        "..... My son-in-law on that day did not send my daughter to my brother-
in-law's son's marriage......"

PW-1 further deposed that he did not complain against father of A-1 and brother
of A-1 in his first report and he did not state as in Ex.D-2 in Section 161
Cr.P.C. statement marked for the purpose of contradiction.  Ex.D-2 reads as
hereunder :
        ".....In hurry our relative Malla Appalanaidu drafted the report on
Sreenivasa Rao's brother and father but Sreenivasarao's father and brother are
good persons...."

PW-1 deposed that he did not state as in Ex.D-3 in Section 161 Cr.P.C.
statement, marked for the purpose of contradiction.  Ex.D-3 reads as hereunder :
        "..... On the eve of Sankranthi festival I went to Munagapaka and called
my son-in-law and daughter but my son-in-law did not come and also did not send
my daughter to the festival.....".

PW-1 also deposed that he does not know the contents of Ex.P-1 and he did not 
tell police about he inviting A-1 and the deceased to his house for Ammathalli
festival.  This witness further deposed that he did not state as in Ex.D-4, the
portion marked in the complaint Ex.P-1 which reads :
        ".....When asked as to how my daughter died, the persons there said that
the dead body was found in the sofa-set.....".

Likewise, Ex.D-5 was marked through PW-3 as a contradiction and Ex.D-6 through  
PW-4 as a contradiction, Ex.D-7 through PW-4 and Ex.D-8 through PW-5 and Ex.D-9   
through PW-6 and the said contradictions marked through these witnesses read as 
hereunder :
Ex.D-5:
        ".....On 6-2-98 my husband's uncle Paradesinaidu's daughter's
marriage.....".
Ex.D-6:
        ".....On the eve of Sankranthi festival, my father went to Munagapaka and
invite to my sister and brother-in-law for pongal.  My brother-in-law did not
come for festival and prevented my sister to attend festival.....".
Ex.D-7:
        ".....On 6-2-98 my uncle Paradesinaidu's daughter's marriage performed in
our village.....".
Ex.D-8:
        ".....In our village on 6-2-98 my uncle daughter's marriage was
performed.....".
Ex.D-9:
        ".....On 6-2-98 in our village, Nookaratnam uncle's daughter's marriage
was performed.....".

These contradictions were duly proved through the Investigating Officer.
The learned Judge recorded the finding of cruelty and harassment mainly on the
ground that on facts it had been established that there was willful conduct of
giving beatings in public by the husband i.e., A-1 to the deceased/wife.  No
doubt the prosecution had let in some evidence relating to the incident, the
quarrel between the deceased and A-1 and the beatings given by A-1 in public.
As far as the other evidence of  PW-1 to PW-4 is concerned, it is more in the
nature of hear-say and what had been stated by the deceased to these witnesses.
Apart from this, there are several contradictory versions which had been
referred to supra.  In INDERPAL Vs. STATE OF M.P. 3 it was held :
"Unless the statement of a dead person would fall within the purview of Section
32(1) of the Indian Evidence Act there is no other provision under which the
same can be admitted in evidence. In order to make the statement of a dead
person admissible in law (written or verbal) the statement must be as to the
cause of her death or as to any of the circumstances of the transactions which
resulted in her death.
The High Court while dealing with the appeal found that the offence under
Section 306 IPC was not made out as it could not be held that death of the
deceased was due to commission of suicide.  Nonetheless, the High Court 
proceeded to consider whether any other offence has been made out and ultimately
found the appellant guilty of the offence under Section 498-A IPC.
By no stretch of imagination can the statements of the deceased contained in
letters, where reference had been made by her regarding her life in the house of
her in-laws, and the statements quoted by the witnesses, who had not spoken of
anything which they had seen directly, be connected with any circumstance of the
transaction which resulted in her death.  Even that apart, the matter herein is
concerned with an offence under Section 498-A IPC disjuncted from the offence
under Section 306 IPC the question of her death is not an issue for
consideration and on that premise also Section 32(1) of the Evidence Act will
stand at bay so far as these materials are concerned."

In GANANATH PATTNAIK Vs. STATE OF ORISSA 4 the appellant therein was tried for      
the offences punishable under Sections 304-B and 498-A IPC for allegedly
subjecting his wife to cruelty and causing dowry death.  The trial Court
acquitted him of the charge under Section 304-B for want of acceptable evidence
but convicted him under Section 498-A IPC. The Court had, on evidence, found
that the appellant-accused had taken away the child from the deceased, had
disallowed her to sit on his scooter, remained frequently absent from the house
and had illicit relationship with his son-in-law.  His acquittal of the charge
under Section 304-B IPC was not further challenged but his conviction under
Section 498-A IPC was, on being challenged, confirmed by the High Court.  Before
the Supreme Court, the appellant contended that the said circumstances did not
constitute "cruelty" for the purposes of Section 498-A IPC. He further contended
that the findings of the trial Court were not based on legal evidence.  This
contention involved the question whether the deposition of the deceased's sister
before the trial Court that the deceased had been telling her about (i) ill-
treatment given to her by her husband and in-laws for non-fulfilment of balance
dowry, (ii) assaults by her husband, and (iii) taking away of the child from
her, etc., was admissible in evidence.  Rejecting the first contention of the
appellant but allowing the appeal on the second point, the Supreme Court held :
        "The concept of cruelty and its effect varies from individual to
individual, also depending upon the social and economic status to which such
person belongs.  "Cruelty" for the purposes of constituting the offence under
the said section need not be physical.  Even mental torture or abnormal
behaviour may amount to cruelty and harassment in a given case.
        ......
        ......
        The statement of the deceased's sister was taken on record with the aid of
Section 32 of the Evidence Act at a time when the appellant was being tried for
the offence under Section 304-B and such statement was admissible under Section 
32(1) as it related to the cause of death of the deceased and the circumstances
of the transaction which resulted in her death.  Such a statement is not
admissible in evidence for the offence punishable under Section 498-A IPC and
has to be termed as only a hearsay evidence.  Section 32 is an exception to the
hearsay rule and deals with the statements or declarations by a person, since
dead, relating to the cause of his or her death or the circumstances leading to
such death.  If a statement which otherwise is covered by the hearsay rule does
not fall within the exceptions of Section 32 of the Evidence Act, the same
cannot be relied upon for finding the guilt of the accused.
        .....
        .....
        Thus, there was no legal evidence for returning a finding with respect to
the alleged cruelty of the accused with the deceased.  Therefore, it has to be
held that the prosecution has failed to prove, beyond doubt, that the appellant
had committed the offence under Section 498-A IPC.  It is further held that the
present case is a fit one where he is entitled to be given the benefit of
doubt."

Section 498-A IPC reads as hereunder :
        "Husband or relative of husband of a woman subjecting her to cruelty:-
Whoever, being the husband or the relative of the husband of a woman, subject
such woman to cruelty shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to three years and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section, 'cruelty' means-
(a) any wilful conduct which is of such a nature as is likely to drive, the
woman to commit suicide or to cause grave injury or danger to life, limb or
health (whether mental or physical) of the woman; or
(b) harassment of the woman where such harassment is with a view to coercing her
or any person related to her to meet any unlawful demand for any property or
valuable security is on account or failure by her or any person related to her
to meet such demand."  

In HIRALAL Vs. STATE 5 the Apex Court while dealing with cruelty, the common  
essential to both Sections 304-B and 498-A IPC held that the question is whether
a case under Section 498-A IPC has been made out even if accusation under 
Section 304-B IPC fails. It is to be noticed that Section 304-B IPC and Section
498-A IPC cannot be held to be mutually inclusive.  These provisions deal with
two distinct offences.  It is true that cruelty is a common essential to both
the offences and that has to be proved.  Explanation to Section 498-A IPC gives
meaning of cruelty.  In Section 304-B IPC there is no such explanation about the
meaning of cruelty but having regard to the common background of these offences
it is to be taken that the meaning of cruelty or harassment is the same as
prescribed in the Explanation to Section 498-A IPC under which cruelty by itself
amounts to an offence.  Under Section 304-B IPC it is dowry death that is
punishable and such death should have occurred within 7 years of marriage and no
such period is mentioned in Section 498-A IPC and a person charged and acquitted
under Section 304-B IPC can be convicted under Section 498-A IPC without that
charge being there if such a case is made out.  If the case is established there
can be conviction under both the Sections and on the facts of the case even
though it is difficult to sustain the conviction under Section 304-B IPC there
are sufficient materials to convict the accused-appellants in terms of Section
306 IPC along with Section 498-A IPC.
        In STATE Vs. BALAPPA 6 a Division Bench of Karnataka High Court held that  
even if a case under Section 304-B IPC is not made out the offence under Section
498-A IPC does not fail automatically and failure of case under Section 304-B
IPC does not exclude the conviction under Section 498-A IPC if cruelty is
proved.  In Ch.NARENDER REDDY Vs. STATE OF A.P. 7 while dealing with Explanation      
and meaning of cruelty under Section 498-A IPC it was held :
        "The finding of the learned IV Additional Metropolitan Sessions Judge,
Hyderabad that the allegations raised by the revision petitioner seeking divorce
when ultimately turned to be baseless resulting in dismissal of the divorce
petition, ultimately amount to cruelty cannot for a moment be accepted.  The
main allegation made by the revision petitioner while seeking divorce is that
PW-1 was suffering from virulent disease like cancer.  It is unheard of in legal
parlance that such a ground raised by the husband seeking divorce against the
wife amounts to legal cruelty.  She was suspected of throat trouble and she was
operated upon.  Except the perceptional difference, it cannot be said that it is
baseless.  We can understand that if an allegation of unchastity is attributed
to the wife, it might amount to cruelty. About all, that can be a best ground
for seeking maintenance, but it cannot be considered that it is that cruelty, as
is envisaged to be proved under Section 498-A of the Indian Penal Code.  It has
been held by this Court in C.Veerudu Vs. State of A.p. (1998(2) ALT 171) that
even in respect of the offence under Section 498-A IPC, the necessary mens rea
is required, and it cannot be said by any stretch of imagination that the ground
mentioned in the divorce petition that the wife was suffering from Cancer, if
ultimately considered to be a cruelty for a moment, the necessary mens rea is
lacking, which is necessary ingredient, so as to bring home the offence under
Section 498-A IPC.  This approach of the learned Additional Sessions Judge is
totally wrong and has been given oblivious of the very provisions of Section
498-A IPC and the explanation appended to the said section, the word 'cruelty'
has been sought to be illustrated and thus may be extracted hereunder for
brevity and better understanding of the matter and also for appreciation of the
points germane for consideration:
        Section 498-A IPC: 
        Explanation: For the purpose of this Section "Cruelty" means:-
(a) Any wilful conduct which is of such a nature as is likely to drive the woman
o commit suicide or to cause grave injury or danger to life, limb or health
(whether mental or physical) of the woman; or
(b) harassment of the woman where such harassment is with a view to coercing her
or any person related to her to meet any unlawful demand for any property or
valuable security or is on account of failure by her or any person related to
her to meet such demand. 
It is obvious from the perusal of the explanation given under Section 498-A IPC
that cruelty means a wilful conduct of such nature and of such a magnitude so as
to drive a woman to commit suicide or to cause grave injury or danger to life or
limb or health of the woman.  Seeking divorce on the ground that she was
suffering from virulent disease like cancer, it cannot be said by any stretch of
imagination that it would lead to such a situation where PW-1 would prepare to
commit suicide.  The explanation further says that the harassment of woman shall
be within a view to coerce her or any person related to her to meet any unlawful
demand for any property or valuable security.  This has to be considered with
reference to the legal principles enunciated by this Court in the judgment
referred to (1 supra-1998(1) ALT 171) of this Court that the element of mens rea
shall be there.  After having considered the explanation appended to Section
498-A IPC, it is manifest that the finding of the learned IV Additional
Metropolitan Sessions Judge that the grounds mentioned by the revision
petitioner in seeking divorce which turned out to be baseless by themselves
amounts to cruelty are not well founded and cannot be countenanced."

        On a careful reading of the Explanation to Section 498-A IPC, to attract
Explanation (a) there should be willful conduct which is of such a nature as is
likely to drive the woman to commit suicide or to cause coercion, injury or
danger to life, limb or health whether mental or physical of the woman, and to
fall under Explanation (b) of the said provision, harassment of the woman where
such harassment is with a view to coercing her or any person related to her to
meet any unlawful demand of valuable property or unlawful security or is on
account of failure by her or any person related to her to meet any such demand.
On a careful scrutiny of the evidence available on record relating to demand
made, except the interested testimony of PW-1 and his family members there is no
other independent evidence available and even the statements which had been
deposed by these witnesses appear to be more of hear say in nature and hence on 
the strength of such evidence it cannot be said that Explanation (b) of Section
498-A IPC would be attracted.
        Relating to the chastity or beating in the public place some evidence is
available on record, but at any rate this conduct of the husband/A-1 even if to
be accepted may not attract the expression "wilful".  There may be varied
reasons and varied quarrels which may be either petty or serious and as far as
the domestic quarrels are concerned, especially in between the couple inter se
such conduct of A-1 as such may not fall within the expression "wilful".  In
judging whether quarrels between couples would fall under the expression
"wilful" or not, the nature of quarrels, the gravity of quarrels and the facts
and circumstances of a given case also may have to be carefully considered and
it is needless to say that every quarrel automatically may not fall under the
expression "wilful".  Hence on the strength of such evidence to convict the
appellant/A-1 under Section 498-A IPC may not be just and proper especially
having recorded an acquittal after recording reasons in detail in relation to
the main charges under Sections 302 and 304-B IPC.  Hence, viewed from any  
angle, the conviction and sentence imposed as against the appellant/A-1 under
Section 498-A IPC cannot be sustained and hence the said conviction and sentence 
are hereby set aside.
        The Criminal Appeal is allowed. The bail bonds of the appellant/A-1 shall
stand cancelled. The appellant is entitled to refund of fine amount, if any paid
by him.

?1 2002 SCC (Crl) 461 
2 2003 SCC (Crl) 1049 
3 2003 SCC (Crl) 1049 
4 2002 SCC (Crl) 461 
5 2003 AIR SCW   3570 = AIR 2003 SC 2865          
6 1999(2) ALT (Crl) 39 (DB) (Karn)
7 2000(2) ALT (Crl) 409 (A.P.)


