

THE HONOURABLE SRI JUSTICE P.S.NARAYANA           
Criminal  Appeal No. 22 of 1999

05.10.2004 

Mohamad Yacub   

State of A.P. represented by
Public Prosecutor

Counsel for the Appellant/Accused : Sri Kanaka Raju

Counsel for the Respondent/Complainant :    Sri Mohd. Osman Sheed, Addl. Public 
Prosecutor 

:JUDGMENT:   

        Heard Sri Kanaka Raju, Counsel representing the appellant-A1 and Sri Mohd.
Osman Shaheed, Additional Public Prosecutor.  
2.      Sri Kanaka Raju, the learned Counsel representing the appellant-A1 had
raised an objection that in view of the fact that the appellant-A1 was charged
under Section 302 IPC, without a charge under Section 304-B IPC, convicting the
accused under Section 304-B IPC cannot be sustained, and since Section 304-B IPC  
is not a minor offence when compared with the offence under Section 302 IPC,
without there being a charge, the conviction itself is not sustainable. The
learned Counsel placed strong reliance on Sadala Bhadriah V. state of A.P1, and
Sohan Lal alias Sohan Singh V. State of Punjab2.
3.      The learned Additional Public Prosecutor had taken this Court through
the factual matrix and also would contend that this appears the view of the Apex
Court too.  The learned Additional Public Prosecutor also placed reliance on
Sadala Bhadriah V. State of A.P.(1 supra), Sangaraboina Sreenu V. State of
Andhra Pradesh3, Sangaraboina Sreenu V. State of Andhra Pradesh4 and Afzauddin   
Ansary V. The State5. 
4.      The Inspector of Police, Anakapalle Circle, filed charge sheet in Crime
No. 305 of 1997 of Anakapalle Town Police Station  against A1 and A2 for the
offence under Section 302 IPC.
5.      The case of the prosecution is that A1 and A2 are brothers.  One Shammi
Munnisa Begam is a resident of Kancharapalem in Visakhapatnam.  Her daughter   
Munneera was married with A1 about six years ago. At the time of marriage, a sum
of Rs.3,000-00 in cash, one wrist watch and six annas of gold ring were given to
the first accused besides some gold articles presented to the said Munneera. For
about one year after the marriage, A1 and his wife lived peacefully. They were
blessed with one son by name Bahadur and a daughter by name Jasmin who are    
minors of tender age. A1 used to harass his wife demanding for money. About one
year ago, the mother Shammi Munnisa Begam had presented 1/2 tula gold chain to  
the said Munneera. A1 was also harassing by demanding Munneera to get the said  
gold chain. About four months back, the said Munneera visited the house of her
mother Shammi Munnisa Begam and requested her to give Rs.5,000/- since A1 was    
demanding and harassing by beating for the amount. Further the said Munneera 
visited the house of her mother about fifteen days ago requesting to give her
Rs.3,000/- as A1 was threatening with dire consequences unless she gives that
amount to him. 
        While so, on 22.09.1997, A1 and A2 came to the house. A1 slept along with
his family members, whereas A2 slept in the rear side of the room. At about 3.00
A.M. A1 caught hold of the legs and hands of Munneera, whereas A2 sat on her 
chest and pressed her mouth and nose with a cotton pillow and thereby caused her
death. The incident was witnessed by Bahadur, who is the son of A1 and the
deceased. The incident was informed in the morning by the said Bahadur to one
Konathala Adi Venkataratnam and others. On information given by one Mohamad   
Jilani of Aanakapalle Shammi Munnisa Begum along with others came to Anakapalle   
and found Munneera lying dead. On enquiry, the said Bahadur informed them that
A1 and A2 killed his mother Munneera and went away.  On the early hours of
23.09.1997, one Shaik Rokiyabee had seen A1and A2 going from the house of the  
deceased Munneera. On a report given by Shammi Munnisa Begum, the Sub-Inspector     
of Police, Anakapalle Town Police station, registered the same as a case in
Crime no. 305 of 1997 under Sections 498-A and 306 IPC. Subsequently, it was 
altered into section 304-B IPC.  The Medical Officer after conducting autopsy on
the dead body of the deceased Munneera, issued Post-mortem examination report  
wherein he opined that  the deceased died of asphyxia due to smothering.  Basing
on that  information, the section of law was altered into section 302 IPC. A1
was arrested on 27.09.1997 who made a disclosure statement in the presence of 
one Budda Veerunaidu and Rayavarapu Gangaraju. A2 was absconding ever since the    
offence.
6.      The charge sheet was taken on file under Sections 302 and 304-B read with
section 34 IPC, the same was numbered as P.R.C.No.3 of 1998 on the file of the
Additional Munsif Magistrate, Anakapalli and the same was committed to the Court
of Session, Visakhapatnam, and in turn, the same was made over to the District
and Sessions Judge, Visakhapatnam. Ultimately, a charge under Section 302 IPC  
had been framed as against the appellant-A1.  The said charge reads as
hereunder-
        "That you and your brother Mohamad Ismail, on or about the 23rd day of
September, 1997 at about 3 a.m. in your house situated in Konathala Venkatareddy 
Gari Street, Nidanam Doddi, Anakapalle, did commit murder by intentionally or
knowingly causing the death of your wife Mohammad Munneera, by catching hold of  
her legs and hands while your brother Ismail pressing her mouth and nose with a
cotton pillow by sitting on her chest, and thereby committed an offence
punishable under Section 302  of the Indian Penal Code and within my
cognizance." 
7.      The evidence on record, in brief, is as hereunder:-
        (i) P.W.1 is mother of the deceased-Munnera. She stated about the marriage
of her deceased-daughter with A1, presentation of cash of Rs.3,000/-, gold ring,
wrist watch and other articles at the time of marriage.  She also stated about
the demand made by A1 for money subsequently and harassment made by A1 to the     
deceased.  She also stated that on 23.9.1997 one person by name Jilani who is
examined as P.W.7 came to Visakhapatnam and informed about the death of her   
daughter Munneera.  Thereupon, P.W.1, P.W.5, P.w.6 and others went to the house  
of the deceased.  On enquiry, one Bahudur who is no other than the son of the
deceased stated that his mother was killed by the A1 and A2. Thereupon, P.W.1 
gave Ex.P-1 report to the Police.
        (ii) P.W.2 is Mohammad Bahudur aged 5 years.  He is the son of A1 and the 
deceased Munneera.  He stated that his mother and A1 used to quarrel.  His
senior paternal uncle pressed his mother with a pillow.
        (iii) P.W.3 stated that the deceased and A1 are residing by the side of
her house in Anakapalle.  Both the deceased and A1 were having disputes and 
therefore, not living amicably.  About one year ago at about 4 A.M., she found
A1 and A2 going hurriedly from the house of A1.  At that time she was going to
answer calls of nature.  Later when she returned home, P.W.4 who is the land
lady of the house, wherein the deceased and A1 were residing, informed that
there was no response from the said Munneera.  Thereafter, they went to the
deceased Munneera, but there was no response from her.  P.W.2 was stating in 
Urdu.  As she does not know Urdu, she called P.W.8 who is urdu knowing woman.   
P.W.2 stated to P.w.8 that A1 caught hold of the legs of the deceased and A2
pressed with a pillow on the face of the deceased.
        (iv) P.W.4 stated that herself, P.W.3 and P.w.8 when asked P.W.2 as to
what had happened to his mother, P.W.2 stated that A1 and A2 killed his mother.
A1 caught hold of her legs and A2 pressed on the face of the deceased with a
pillow.
        (v) P.W.5 is mother of P.W.1.  The deceased Munneera is her grand-
daughter.  On being informed by P.W.7, herself, P.W.1 and the daughter-in-law of
P.W.5 went to Anakapalle.  When they asked P.W.2 about the incident, P.W.2 told  
them that A1 caught hold of the legs of the deceased and the brother of A1
pressed the deceased by laying a pillow.  According to this witness, there were
disputes between the deceased and A1, and A1 used to demand for dowry.  
        (vi) P.W.6 is daughter-in-law of P.W.5.  The husband of P.W.6 and P.W.1
are related as brother and sister.  She also stated about the presentation of
dowry and other articles at the time of marriage to A1.  She also stated about
the information of the death of Munneera and proceeding from Visakhapatnam to
Anakapale.  When questioned, P.W.2 stated to them, A1 caught hold of the legs of
the deceased  and the brother of A1 pressed on the face with a pillow.
        (vii) P.W.7 is a resident of Anakapalle.  He found A1 and A2 going on the
road leading to Pendurthi at about 5 A.M. On 23.9.1997 at 8.00 A.M., he came to
know Munneera died.  Then, he went to Visakhapatnam and informed the same to   
P.W.1 and others.  P.W.2 stated to them that A1 caught hold of the legs of his
mother and the other accused pressed his mother with a pillow.
        (viii) P.W.8 is a resident of Anakapalle.  The deceased Muneera used to
stay in the street next to her street.  On being sent word by P.W.3, she went to
P.W.3.  P.W.8 knew Urdu language.  She asked P.W.2 in Urdu, the cause of death  
of his mother. P.W.2 stated that there was an altercation between his mother and
A1 and his Senior paternal uncle killed his mother.
        (ix) P.W.9 stated that he knew about the marriage of the deceased with A1.
According to him, there were disputes between A1 and the deceased as the 
deceased used to complain.  After coming to know, the said Munneera died, he
visited their house.  P.W.2 stated that his mother was killed by his father and
his uncle.
        (x) P.W.10 stated that he drafted Ex.P-1 report to the dictation of P.W.1.
        (xi) P.W.11 stated that she acted as inquest panchayatdar over the dead
body of Munneera.  She opined that the deceased's death is homicidal.
        (xii) P.W.12 is one of the mediators in whose presence police seized two
pillows and one cotton blanket, which are marked as M.Os 1 to 3 respectively. In
his presence, an observation report was prepared by the police, wherein he also
signed.
        (xiii) P.W.13 is a photographer at Anakapalle.  He has taken three photos
of the dead body.  Exs.P-4 to P-6 are the photos with negatives.
        (xiv) P.W.14 is Sub-Inspector of Police, who registered        Ex.P-1
report given by P.W.1 as a case in the above crime under Sections 498-A and 306
of IPC.  He submitted the original First Information Report to the concerned.
He gave requisition to Mandal Executive Magistrate, Anakapalle to conduct
inquest over the dead body.  Subsequent investigation was made by the Inspector
of Police.
        (xv) P.W.15 is Civil Assistant Surgeon of Community Health center,
Anakapalle.  On 23.9.1997, after receiving the requisition from Mandal Revenue
Officer, Anakapalle, Post-mortem examination was conducted on the dead body of 
Munneera on 24.9.1997 along with Dr.S. Ratnamma, who is another Civil Assistant 
Surgeon.  He is of the opinion that the deceased died of Asphyxia due to
smothering, 30 to 40 hours prior to post-mortem examination.  Ex.P-8 is post-
mortem certificate.  According to him, death is possible, if a pillow is pressed
on the face by which action of respiration will be restrained.
        (xvi) P.W.16 is Mandal Revenue Officer, Anakapalle.  He received the
requisition marked as Ex.P9 from Station House Officer, Anakapalle (Town) Police
Station to conduct the inquest over the dead body of the deceased Munneera.
Thereupon, he summoned the inquest-panchayatdars and recorded the statements of   
the blood relations of the deceased Munneera.  The Panchayatdars opined that the
death is unnatural and homicidal.
        (xvii) P.W.17 is Inspector of Police, Anakapalle.  He stated that on
receiving express First Information Report in the above crime, he visited the
scene of offence, found the deceased Munneera, secured the presence of P.Ws 1, 3 
to 5 and others, prepared an observation report and seized M.Os 1 to 3.  He also
prepared rough sketch, got photographed the scene of offence and subsequently
altered the section of law to 304-B IPC from Sections 498-A and 306 IPC.
According to him, the deceased died within seven years after the marriage.  On
his requisition, Post-mortem examination was conducted over the dead body of the
deceased after inquest.  Further investigation was taken up by P.W.18.  Later he
filed charge sheet.
        (xviii) P.W.18 stated that on receiving express memo in the above crime
along with first information report, he visited the scene of offence and
supervised the investigation made by P.W.17.  On 27.9.1997, he examined P.W.8  
and recorded her statement.  He arrested the accused at Sabbavaram Junction in
the presence of mediators and brought him to Anakapalle.
8.      On appreciation of the evidence of P.Ws 1 to 18, Exs.P1 to P.11, Ex.D1 and
M.Os 1 to 3, the learned Judge found the accused not guilty for the offence
under Section 302 IPC and recorded an acquittal, but convicted the appellant-
accused for the offence under Section 304-B IPC.  It is needless to say that the
learned Judge framed the charge only under Section 302 IPC and not under Section
304-B IPC.  In Sadala Bhadriah Case (1supra) at paragraphs 8 and 9, it was held
that
        
        "The learned Counsel appearing for the appellant submits that, under
Section 304-B, IPC there is a presumption   of committing an offence and this
presumption imposes a responsibility on the accused to discharge the onus that
he was not responsible for the suicide of the wife.  A duty is cast on the
accused under Section 113-B of Evidence Act.  But, since he was not in know of
the fact that he is being charged under Section 304-B, IPC, therefore he had at
no point of time got any chance to show that he was innocent. Even the questions
put to the accused-appellant while he made statement under Section 313, Cr.P,.C.
were with regard to an offence under Section 302, IPC. The learned Public
Prosecutor however states that, in terms of Section 222, Cr.P.C. the Court can
convict a person of an offence which is minor in comparison to the one for which
he has been tried. This argument does not hold good in view of the fact that
Section 304-B, IPC is not a minor offence than an offence under Section 302,
IPC, 304-B, IPC  carries life imprisonment which is the punishment carried under
Section 302, IPC and the punishment of less than seven years is minimum. Similar
question was considered by the Supreme Court in Sangaraboina Sreenu Vs. State of  
A.P. (AIR 1997 SC 3233) in which a person who had been charged under Section  
302, IPC was eventually convicted under Section 306, IPC.   The Supreme Court
found it to be illegal. This is a small judgment of the Supreme Court which is
reproduced below:-
        "The appellant was put up for trial before the Sessions Judge, Warangal
for uxoricide. The accusation against him was that on May 15, 1987 at or about
9.30 P.M. he poured kerosene oil on the body of his wife and set her on fire.
The trial Court convicted the appellant under Section 302, IPC but in the appeal
preferred by him the High Court set aside his above conviction and convicted him
under Section 306, IPC. The above judgment of the high Court is under challenge
in this appeal.
        This appeal must succeed for the simple reason that having acquitted the
appellant of the charge under Section 302, IPC which was the only charge framed
against him-the High Court could not have convicted him of the offence under
Section 306, IPC. It is true that Section 222, Cr.P.C. entitles a Court to
convict a person of an offence which is minor in comparison to the one for which
he is tried but Section 306, IPC cannot be said to be a minor offence in
relation to an offence under Section 302, IPC within the meaning of Section 222,
Cr.P.C. for the two offences are of distinct and different categories. While the
basic constituent of an offence under Section 302, IPC is homicidal death those
of Section 306, IPC are suicidal death and abatement thereof.
        For the foregoing reason the appeal is allowed and the conviction of the
appellant under Section 306, IPC is set aside. The appellant who is on bail, is
discharged from his bail bonds."
        The sentence under Section 306, IPC is only 10 years whereas the sentence 
under Section 304-B, IPC is life and the Courts are not empowered to sentence a
person convicted under this offence for a period less than seven years.
Therefore, in my view an offence under Section 304-B, IPC is no less a serious
offence than an offence under Section 302, IPC as far as the punishment is
concerned." 
Reliance also was placed on Sohan Lal Alias Sohan Singh case (2 supra), wherein 
it was held that
        "Abetment is a substantive offence and failure to frame charge under
Section 109, IPC would cause prejudice to the accused and in a bride burning
case accused-husband was charged only under Section 304-B IPC. Hence his   
conviction under Sections 300 and 109 IPC liable to be set aside."
9.      In view of the legal position, since the appellant-A1 was charged only
under Section 302 IPC, but convicted and sentenced under Section 304-B IPC, the
said conviction and imposition of sentence cannot be sustained, and accordingly,
the same are hereby set aside.
10.     Accordingly, the Criminal Appeal is hereby allowed.  The bail bonds of the
appellant-accused shall stand cancelled.

?1 2000(1)ALT (Crl.) 47 (A.P.)
2 AIR 2003 SC 4466  
3 1998(1) ALT (Crl.) 20(SC)
4 1997(4) Supreme 214  
5 1997(2) Crimes 53 


