

THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE P.S. NARAYANA        
Criminal Appeal No.1787 of 1998 

26-10-2004 

Bangi Naga Raju 

State of A.P. represented
by Public Prosecutor

Counsel for appellant : Sri C.Padmanabha Reddy 

Counsel for respondent : Additional Public Prosecutor

:JUDGMENT:-   
Accused No.1, Bangi Naga Raju, aggrieved by the Judgment made in S.C.No.568/96   
dated 11-12-1998 on the file of II Additional Sessions Judge, Karimnagar had
preferred the present Criminal Appeal.
The accused 1 and 2 were charged with an offence under Sections 304-B and 306  
IPC and the learned Judge found A-1 guilty of the offence under Section 304-B
IPC only but however found A-2 not guilty for the offences under Sections 304-B
and 306 IPC and accordingly acquitted A-2 and sentenced A-1 to undergo Rigorous 
Imprisonment for a period of 7 years.
Bangi Srilatha, the wife of the appellant herein/A-1, hereinafter referred to as
"deceased" for the purpose of convenience, was aged about 19 years and her
father (PW-1) lodged a complaint on 17-2-1996 at 10 a.m. in Kesavapatnam Police
Station which was registered as Cr.No.7/96 under Section 304-B IPC and under
Section 4 of the Dowry Prohibition Act.  It was stated that the defacto
complainant got the deceased Srilatha married to A-1 of Molangur village three
years prior to the incident and during the marriage Rs.25,000/- cash and other
articles and Rs.5000/- for purchase of cots was given as dowry.  It was further
stated that six months after the marriage A-1 and his mother Nandamma (A-2)
started harassing the deceased to get additional dowry of Rs.10,000/- and they
threatened to kill her by burning.  The deceased informed her parents about the
constant torture and requested them to settle the problems before elders.  The
parents of the deceased could not meet the demand of dowry made by A-1 and  
fourteen days prior to the giving report by PW-1, A-1 took the deceased to his
house.  On            16-2-1996 PW-1 received a message about the death of the
deceased at 10 p.m.  Then he went along with his wife to Molangur village and
found the deceased dead due to burn injuries.  It was further stated that A-1
and his mother (A-2) might have killed the deceased by pouring kerosene.  On
receipt of the above complaint a case was registered and investigated into by
the S.I. of Police, Keshavapatnam.  The S.I. of Police visited the scene of
offence and sent a requisition to M.R.O. Keshavapatnam to hold inquest.  After
inquest the dead body of the deceased was sent to Government Hospital, Huzurabad  
for autopsy.  The Medicial Officer conducted autopsy and opined that the cause
of death was due to shock due to extensive burns.  The S.I. of Police examined
PW-1, PW-2, PW-3 and one Gondyala Gangadhar.  It is also the case of the  
prosecution that the investigation revealed that the deceased was given in
marriage to A-1 three years prior to the incident as per the caste custom and
during her marriage her parents gave her Rs.30,000/- cash and other articles of
dowry and sent her to the house of A-1 and six months thereafter A-1 started
harassing the deceased to bring additional dowry and he was demanding additional
dowry on the instigation of his mother (A-2).  A-1 used to torture the deceased
mentally and physically and she informed the same to her parents by way of
letters and also on their personal visits.  The parents of the deceased, PW-1
and PW-2, expressed their inability to comply with the demand made by the
accused and with the help of Kailasam, Venkataiah and others they sent her to
her in-laws house to lead the marital life.  Due to constant harassment of the
accused and as the accused had sent legal notice stating that he would marry
another girl at last the deceased was sent to her parents house in the month of
January 1996 for not getting additional dowry amount.  Fourteen days thereafter
A-1 went to the deceased and demanded the amount and took away the deceased to    
his village giving a warning to the brother of the deceased.  On 16-2-1996 the
deceased was alone at home and the accused were away from the village and her  
father-in-law was in the village.  As the deceased could not tolerate the
constant harassment and torture she poured kerosene on her body and set fire to
herself and she died subsequently.  The Sub-Divisional Police Officer took up
the investigation.
During trial, PW-1 to PW-11 were examined, Exs.P-1 to P-6 and M.Os.1 and 2 were  
marked.  Sri Padmanabha Reddy, the learned Senior Counsel representing the  
appellant would submit that in the absence of legally acceptable evidence, the
learned Judge totally erred in convicting the appellant.  The learned Counsel
had taken this Court through the evidence of PW-1 and PW-2 and also PW-3 and  
would pointed out that the letter referred to by PW-3 had not been produced and
the panchayatdars were not examined.  The learned Counsel also pointed out to
the contents of Ex.D-1 and would contend that the contents of Ex.D-1 would
definitely show that the prosecution is not coming with true version. The
learned Counsel pointed out to the relevant portions of the evidence of PW-1 and
would comment that in the light of the evidence of PW-1 and Ex.D-1, the father
of the deceased thought of implicating the appellant with some ulterior motive.
On the contrary, the learned Additional Public Prosecutor had drawn the
attention of this Court that Ex.D-1 would show that there was a dispute. The
learned Counsel also explained the ingredients of dowry death and also Section
113-B of the Indian Evidence Act 1872 and would contend that in the light of the
clear evidence available on record the findings which had been recorded by the
learned Judge may have to be confirmed.
Heard both the Counsel.
PW-1 is the father of the deceased who deposed that he celebrated the marriage
of the deceased on 12-2-1993 with A-1 and he gave cash of Rs.25,000/- towards
dowry and valuable articles worth about Rs.5000/- and she went to lead marital
life with A-1 and for three months she lived happily with A-1 and after about
five months after the marriage, A-1 and A-2 started ill-treating the deceased to
get additional dowry of Rs.10,000/- and she was beaten and abused in filthy
language by A-1 and A-2 and they were threatening her to kill by pouring
kerosene.  A panchayat was held in that connection at Chigurumamidi and one 
Bhadraiah (LW-5) and Kailasam (LW-6) were the elders to mediate with the accused 
and they advised A-1 and A-2 not to ill-treat the deceased and to keep her
happy.  Thereafter PW-1 sent the deceased to the house of the accused and after
about ten days he brought the deceased to his house and the deceased stayed at 
his house for a period of ten days.   PW-1 further deposed that A-1 came to
their village and went to different houses in the village instead of coming to
their house and abused them in most filthy language before the villagers and as
he was demanding for taking away the deceased PW-1 sent the deceased with A-1.   
PW-1 also deposed that A-1 again continued to ill-treat the deceased by burning
her private parts of breasts and thighs with cigarette butts and he necked out
the deceased from his house and the deceased came to their house.  PW-1 further 
deposed that the deceased told him all about the harassment and cruelty shown to
her by A-1 and A-2.  After about ten days A-1 came to their house in his absence
and forcibly took away the deceased and on his return to the house his wife told
him and requested him to get the deceased back and he had sent his son Shiva 
Prasad (PW-3) to the house of the accused to get the deceased but the accused 
opposed and necked him out.  A-1 had also challenged his son Shiva Prasad (PW-3)  
that they have to send Rs.10,000/- cash in 14 to 20 days or else he will pour
kerosene and set the deceased on fire.  The accused also abused PW-3 that he 
would see that his betrothal for the marriage is cancelled.  On 16-2-1996 after
receiving information that the deceased died at the house of the accused PW-1
and his family members went to the house of the accused and saw the dead body of 
the deceased with burn injuries and she was lying in front of the house of the
accused. On 17-2-1996 at 10 a.m. PW-1 gave a complaint at P.S. Shankarapatnam.   
Ex.P-1 is the complaint given by him to the police and it bears his signature.
PW-1 further deposed that at the time of inquest over the dead body his
statement was recorded by the police and A-1 and A-2 harassed and challenged 
that they would kill the deceased and they must have poured kerosene and burnt
her alive.  This witness was cross-examined at length.  Several details relating
to the property and other aspects had been cross-examined.  This witness also
deposed that there was only one panchayat regarding demand of dowry made by the  
accused and the said panchayat was held in their village and the panchayat was
held one year after the marriage.  One of the elders by name Bhadraiah is a
resident of Mogilipalem village.  A-1 informed Bhadraiah that PW-1 was not
sending the deceased to his house and therefore Bhadraiah acted as a mediator
and Bhadraiah and Kailasam belong to Balija caste and they are known to PW-1 and  
he used to perform poojas in their houses and they are his disciples.  PW-1
further deposed that in three years he went to the house of A-1 for about 20
times. PW-1 also deposed that A-1 beat him once when he asked about the ill-
treatment of the deceased and he also deposed about the nature of behaviour of
A-1.  This witness also deposed that it is true that A-1 got treated the
deceased at Rohini hospital at Hanmakonda for her ill-ness and it is not true to
suggest that the deceased used to vomit blood while brushing teeth in the
morning.  PW-1 denied the suggestion that the deceased was having suspicion that
she got ailment of cancer disease and as such she used to tell that she would
not live for a long period.   PW-1 admitted that after the death of the deceased
he executed a receipt after receiving Rs.32,000/- from the accused and it is
marked as Ex.D-1 and it contains his signature and the signature of his son PW-3
also.  Ex.D-1 was read over to him and he signed it.  PW-1 did not lodge any
complaint before the police stating about the ill-treatment meted out by A-1 to
the deceased.  PW-1 further deposed that after 14-2-1996 he sent his son to
bring the deceased to his house and at that time A-1 told that he would kill the
deceased by pouring kerosene if he does not get the amount demanded by him and  
PW-1 did not contemplate that he would kill the deceased even though he warned
in the presence of his son.   PW-1 further deposed that he did not make any
attempt to hold panchayat in the village of the accused regarding the threats
given by   A-1 to the deceased and he did not state to the police that the
accused used to beat and scold the deceased in filthy language and he stated to
the police that Bhadraiah and Kailasam acted as elders in the panchayat held at
Chigurumamidi village and he stated to the police that the elders advised A-1 to
look after the deceased well.  A-1 used to reside in the house of Kailasam and
Ch.Veeramallaiah whenever he used to come to his house and in their houses he 
used to scold them.  PW-1 further deposed that he does not know whether A-1 was 
in the habit of smoking cigarettes and PW-1 got some ointment when the deceased 
received burn injuries by the accused with cigarette butts and PW-1 did not ask
A-1 even after the incident of inflicting burn injuries to the deceased.  PW-1
stated to the police that the deceased was necked out from the house and he
stated to the police that A-1 came to his house and forcibly took away the
deceased.  He further stated that A-1 threatened that he would get the marriage
of his son cancelled if PW-1 does not send Rs.10,000/- and this witness no doubt
denied the suggestions relating to the demand of dowry and other aspects.
PW-2 is the wife of PW-1 who no doubt had substantially deposed in support of
the version given by PW-1. PW-3 is the son of PW-1 and PW-2 and the brother of
the deceased.  This witness deposed that the deceased was married to A-1 on 12-
2-1993 and at the time of marriage they paid cash of Rs.25,000/- towards dowry
and Rs.5000/- towards purchase of articles.  For about three months she lived
happily with A-1 and after about six months after marriage the accused started
ill-treating the deceased to extract additional dowry of Rs.10,000/-.  He went
to the house of the accused for about four or five times to see his sister.
During that period A-1 threatened him that he will kill his sister by pouring
kerosene if additional dowry of Rs.10,000/- was not paid to him and on 16-2-1996
they received information that his sister (the deceased) died and all of them
went to the house of the accused and saw the dead body of the deceased with burn
injuries.  PW-3 further deposed that the deceased used to inform their parents
about the cruelty shown to her by A-1 and A-2.  PW-3 in cross-examination
deposed that he did not state to police that he went to the house of A-1 for
about four or five times and his father obtained a loan of Rs.25,000/- and paid
towards dowry to the accused and he was present when the dowry amount was paid.   
PW-3 also deposed that he does not remember how much amount was paid prior to    
the marriage and after the marriage and the deceased studied upto Xth class and
she used to write letters to them after marriage about the dowry harassment by
the accused and also about the second marriage proposal of A-1.  PW-3 handed 
over one letter to police.  PW-3 also deposed that three panchayats were held
regarding the disputes between A-1 and the deceased about dowry harassment and  
ill-treatment and the first panchayat was held at Molangur, the second panchayat
was held at Keshavapatnam and the third panchayat was held at Chigurumamidi.  
PW-3 further deposed that he did not lodge any complaint before the police about
the harassment made by A-1 to the deceased and he denied the suggestion that the 
deceased was having suspicion that she had cancer disease.  PW-3 attended two  
panchayats and he had denied certain other suggestions also.
PW-4 was examined who deposed about the disputes between the deceased and A-1     
regarding dowry and PW-4 and Kailasam were the elders to settle the disputes
between the deceased and A-1 and they advised A-1 and A-2 to take the deceased  
to their house since her parents were not in a position to pay additional dowry
and the accused took the deceased to their house and on 16-2-1996 they came to 
know that the deceased was killed by A-1 and A-2 as told by PW-1.  This witness
also deposed that PW-1 informed them that the deceased was killed by the accused 
by pouring kerosene at their house.
PW-5 deposed that his house is about 100 yards from the house of the accused and 
he knows the deceased and the deceased was not having any disputes or quarrels 
with the accused and he does not know anything about the disputes of the accused
with the deceased and he does not know how the deceased died.  This witness was  
no doubt declared hostile.  PW-6 was examined in relation to Ex.P-3 panchanama. 
PW-7, the M.R.O. was examined in relation to Ex.P-3 inquest panchanama which was   
conducted by him in the presence of panchas.  At the time of inquest he
recovered one match box MO-1 and ash collected in a brass vessel MO-2.  In
cross-examination this witness deposed that he did not record the statement of
parents and relatives of the deceased and denied the suggestion that he recorded
the statements of relatives of the deceased and they did not state to him
anything about the harassment for additional dowry and due to that reason the
deceased committed suicide and as the statements go against the case of the 
prosecution he did not file the same into Court.  He drafted inquest panchanama
Ex.P-3.  PW-8 is the Civil Assistant Surgeon who had conducted autopsy over the
dead body of the deceased and found the following ante mortem injuries :
"About 80 or 90 % burns superficial to deep noted on both upper limbs, face,
neck, front of chest, front of abdomen, back of chest, both legs, blebs, third
reaction limbs of demarcation noted."

PW-8 opined that to the best of his knowledge the cause of death was shock due
to extensive burns.  This witness deposed about Ex.P-4 post mortem report issued
by him and another Doctor.
PW-9 deposed that he received report from PW-1 and registered the crime and sent
express F.I.Rs. to all the concerned.  Ex.P-5 is the F.I.R. sent to Court and he
sent requisition to the M.R.O. for conducting inquest over the dead body of the
deceased and he visited the scene of offence and examined PW-1 to PW-3 and  
handed over the further investigation.  In cross-examination this witness
deposed that PW-1 did not state to him that Bhadraiah and Kailasam acted as 
elders in the panchayat held at Chigirumamidi village and PW-1 did not state
before him that the elders advised A-1 and A-2 to look after his daughter well.
PW-1 stated before him that A-1 came to his house and took away the deceased,  
but he did not state to him that A-1 had taken the deceased forcibly.  PW-1 did
not state before him that A-1 threatened him that he would get the marriage of
his son cancelled if he does not send Rs.10,000/-.  PW-9 further deposed that
PW-2 did not state before him that the accused used to beat the deceased and he
volunteered that physical torture means beating.  PW-9 further deposed that PW-2
did not state to him that the accused demanded Rs.10,000/- when her son went to
see her daughter, the deceased and PW-2 did not state before him that A-1 came 
and forcibly took away the deceased.  PW-9 deposed that he did not examine the 
neighbours of the complainant and the accused.  This witness also referred to
the letters and deposed that M.R.O. conducted inquest in his presence and he
does not know whether M.R.O. recorded the statements of any witnesses.  PW-10 is  
the Inspector of Police who had deposed about further investigation.  The rough
sketch of scene of offence prepared by S.I. of police was marked as Ex.P-6.
This witness deposed that he had visited the scene of offence, examined the
witnesses Bhadraiah, Kailasam, Venkataiah and Sammi Reddy and recorded their   
statements and this witness also deposed about the arrest.  In cross-examination
this witness deposed that PW-4 did not state to him that PW-1 informed him that
A-1 and A-2 set fire to the deceased by pouring kerosene as the demand of dowry
request was not fulfilled.  Omissions in Section 161 Cr.P.C. statement of PW-4
also had been elicited.  This witness also deposed that it is revealed in the
investigation that the deceased addressed letters to her parents informing the
dowry harassment of the accused and the S.I. of Police might have seized those
letters.  He deposed that he had mentioned about the letters in his remand
report after verification of investigation done by the S.I. and he asked the
S.I. about the letters but he did not show any letters.  No doubt this witness
denied the other suggestions.
PW-11 verified the investigation done by PW-9 and PW-10 and filed charge sheet.
In cross-examination this witness deposed that he had not seen the letters
alleged to have been written by the deceased to her parents about the harassment
made by the accused on her and certain suggestions were denied by this witness.
DW-1, a practicing Advocate was examined who deposed that A-1 approached him    
asking him to issue notice to the deceased stating that she left to her parents
house and was not coming to his house in spite of repeated requests made by him 
and then he got issued a notice to the deceased and father-in-law of A-1 i.e.,
PW-1.  Ex.D-2 is the notice.  The notices were refused by the deceased and PW-1 
and the returned notices are Exs.D-3 and D-4.  A-1 again went to DW-1 and
informed him that the deceased came to his house after receipt of notice and
resided with him for some time and left for her parents house without intimating
him and therefore he again sent a second notice to the deceased and PW-1.  Ex.D-
5 is a xerox copy of the notice issued by him.  In cross-examination this
witness denied the suggestion that Ex.D-5 was issued only with the intention to
take divorce from the deceased which was not acceptable to her.
On the strength of this evidence, findings in detail had been recorded by the
learned Judge.  A careful scrutiny of the evidence of PW-1, PW-2 and PW-3 would
go to show that PW-1 had given certain exaggerated versions and apart from this
aspect of the matter, there is a clear admission on the part of PW-1 to the
effect that after the death of the deceased he executed a receipt after
receiving Rs.32,000/- from the accused which is marked as Ex.D-1.  Ex.D-1
contains his signature and the signature of his son also.  Ex.D-1 was read over
to him and he signed it and he did not lodge any complaint before the police
stating about the ill-treatment of the deceased by A-1.  Certain acts of sadism
which had been deposed by this witness appear to be exaggerated versions.  PW-3 
specifically deposed that the deceased was writing certain letters and one such
letter had been delivered to police also.  The Investigating Officers also had
deposed about these letters but however none of those letters had been produced
before the Court.  PW-3 also deposed about three panchayats alleged to have been
held.  Except the vague evidence of PW-4 there is no other evidence available on
record in this regard.  The learned Judge recorded certain reasons in relation
to Ex.D-1 and had made a comment that in the light of certain interpolations or
the difference in ink and the writings, the same is suspicious.  It is pertinent
to note that in the evidence of PW-1 nothing had been elicited in this regard.
Merely because it had been stated in Ex.D-1 that the deceased committed suicide
due to unforeseen reasons which is clearly suggestive of the fact that the
appellant/A-1 was not responsible relating to the same especially in the absence
of any explanation in this regard elicited by the prosecution to clarify the
situation, the learned Judge is not justified in viewing Ex.D-1 with suspicion.
Apart from this aspect of the matter, though three panchayats were said to have
been held, none had been examined except PW-4 and the evidence of PW-4 is just  
general in nature.  In the light of the clear admission relating to Ex.D-1 made
by PW-1, the version of the prosecution relating to dowry death becomes highly
doubtful especially in the light of the conduct of the appellant/A-1 towards the
deceased in getting her treated and also the evidence of  DW-1 who clearly
deposed that serious attempts were made by the appellant/A-1 to get the deceased
back to his house by issuing notices.  On a careful scrutiny of the evidence of
PW-1 to PW-11, DW-1 and also Exs.P-1 to P-6 and Exs.D-1 to D-5, the following 
facts clearly emerge :
It is stated by PW-3 that several letters were addressed by the deceased, but
none of the letters were produced before the Court. PW-3 also deposed about
delivering one such letters to the police.  The Investigating Officers also had
confirmed about the writing of letters.  None of the neighbours had been
examined and one such neighbour had been declared hostile.  Except PW-4, none of  
the panchayatdars also had been examined though it is said that three panchayats
had been held.  It is also pertinent to note that no statement of any other
relatives had been recorded at the time of inquest.  Apart from all these,
Exs.D-2 to D-5 and the evidence of DW-1 will clearly go to show that there was
attempt on the part of the appellant/A-1 to get his wife i.e., the deceased,
back.
The reasons given by the learned Judge viewing Ex.D-1 with suspicion cannot be
sustained in the absence of any explanation in this regard in the evidence of
PW-1.  Hence, the findings recorded by the learned Judge in any view of the
matter cannot be sustained.  This Court is of the considered opinion that on
suspicion conviction had been recorded and the accused had been sentenced and  
hence the conviction and sentence imposed on appellant/A-1 for the offence under
Section 304-B IPC also definitely cannot be sustained and the same are set aside
and acquittal is hereby recorded.
The Criminal Appeal is accordingly allowed.  The bail bonds of the appellant
shall stand cancelled.


