

THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE P.S. NARAYANA        
Criminal Appeal No.1353 of 2003 

11-11-2004 

Saluvala Rajaiah

State of A.P. represented by
Public Prosecutor

Counsel for appellant : Jayanthi Chandra Sekhar

Counsel for respondent : Additional Public Prosecutor

:JUDGMENT:   
        The sole accused in S.C.No.144/2002 on the file of II Additional Sessions
Judge, Karimnagar, had preferred this Appeal aggrieved by the Judgment dated 16-
6-2003 by virtue of which the learned Judge convicted the accused for offences
under Section 498-A and 304-B IPC and Section 4 of Dowry Prohibition Act and
sentenced him to undergo Rigorous Imprisonment for 2 years and to pay a fine of
Rs.1000/-, in default to undergo Simple Imprisonment for 3 months for an offence
under Section 498-A IPC and sentenced him to undergo Rigorous Imprisonment for 2 
years and to pay a fine of Rs.2000/-, in default to undergo Simple Imprisonment
for six months under Section 4 of the Dowry Prohibition Act and also further
sentenced him to undergo Rigorous Imprisonment for 7 years under Section 304-B 
IPC.
        Sri Jayanthi Chandra Sekhar, the learned Counsel representing the
appellant by way of Legal Aid would submit that the learned Judge erred in
believing the evidence of PW-1 to PW-4 and PW-6 who are close relatives of the
deceased.  The Counsel also would submit that even  PW-5, a co-villager of
parents of the deceased also is not an independent evidence.  The Counsel also
would submit that there are no independent witnesses to speak relating to
payment of dowry at the time of marriage or demand of additional dowry by
appellant/accused.  The Counsel also would contend that PW-7 had not claimed any 
personal knowledge relating to harassment.  The Counsel also would submit that
the alleged panchayat to settle the disputes even if accepted, would not prove
any harassment as such and just on strong suspicion the conviction was recorded
by the learned Judge.
        Per contra, the learned Additional Public Prosecutor had taken this Court
through the findings recorded by the learned Judge and would contend that the
presumption under Section 113-B of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 also is
available and the ingredients of Section   304-B and also Section 498-A IPC and
Section 4 of Dowry Prohibition Act had been clearly established by the
prosecution by letting in the evidence of PW-1 to PW-16 and marking Exs.P-1 to
P-10.  The learned Additional Public Prosecutor also would submit that Exs.D-1
and D-2, the relevant portions of Section 161 Cr.P.C. statements of PW-8 and PW-
9 are not of such a nature which would in any way shatter the episode of the
prosecution.  The learned Additional Public Prosecutor also pointed out relating
to MO-1, the poison tin.  Ultimately the learned Additional Public Prosecutor
had taken this Court through the findings recorded by the learned Judge
commencing from paras 19 to 26 and would contend that this is a clear case of
dowry death and it is needless to say that the other offences under Section 498-
A IPC and also Section 4 of Dowry Prohibition Act also had been established and
hence the findings as such may have to be confirmed.
        Heard both the Counsel.
        The sole accused in S.C.No.144/2002 on the file of II Additional Sessions
Judge, Karimnagar is the appellant.  The appellant/accused was charged with the
offences under Sections 498-A, 304-B, 306 IPC and Section 4 of the Dowry
Prohibition Act.  The case of the prosecution is that about ten months prior to
27-9-1999 the deceased Rama Devi was married to the accused and at the time of 
marriage, PW-1 gave Rs.20,000/- as dowry besides other household articles.  Few
months thereafter the accused and deceased shifted to Sirsed village of
Jammikunta Mandal where the brother-in-law of the deceased was residing.  The
accused started harassing the deceased physically and mentally with a demand of 
additional dowry.  The complainant/PW-1 along with Ramidi Narasaiah/PW-5 and  
Ramidi Nagaiah/PW-6 went to Sirsed village and convinced the accused and 
requested him not to harass the deceased.  Later the couple migrated to Adavi
Srirampur village where the accused again started harassing and subjecting the
deceased to cruelty with a demand for additional dowry.  It is further the case
of the prosecution that the accused used to allege illegal intrigue with others
and L.Ws.11 and 12 warned the accused on the information of the same.  Because  
of the harassment the deceased decided to leave the house of the accused to her
parents house but the accused beat her severely and snatched away the bus fair
amount from her.  It is also the case of the prosecution that on 26-9-1999 at
7.30 a.m. the deceased consumed poison and died because of the harassment meted    
out to her and based on a complaint the crime was registered in Cr.No.53/99 for
the offence punishable under Section 304-B and 498-A IPC and after due
investigation charge sheet was laid for the offences under Sections    304-B,
498-A, 306 IPC and under Section 4 of Dowry Prohibition Act.
        The learned Judicial Magistrate of First Class, Mandapet had taken the
charge sheet under Section 498-A, 304-B, 306 IPC and under Section 4 of Dowry 
Prohibition Act and committed the same to the Court of Session which made over
the case to II Additional Sessions Judge, Karimnagar and the learned Judge
recorded the evidence of PW-1 to PW-16 and also marked Exs.P-1 to P-10 and MO-1   
and on behalf of defence, Exs.D-1 and D-2, the contradictions in the evidence of
PW-8 and PW-9 also had been marked and the learned Judge on appreciation of the  
evidence after recording findings in detail arrived at a conclusion that the
accused is guilty of offences punishable under Section 304-B, 498-A IPC and
under Section 4 of the Dowry Prohibition Act.  Hence the Criminal Appeal.
        PW-1 is the father of the deceased who lodged the complaint and narrated
all the details.  PW-2 is the elder brother of PW-1 who had corroborated the
evidence of PW-1.  PW-3 is the sister of the deceased who had supported the
version of PW-1 and PW-2.  PW-4 is the grand-father of the deceased who had 
deposed about the payment of dowry at the time of marriage and subsequent demand  
of additional dowry by the accused.  PW-5 is a resident of the village of PW-1
who also deposed relating to the said facts.  PW-6 is the maternal uncle of the
deceased who also deposed about celebration of marriage, payment of dowry, 
demand of additional dowry and the other aspects.  PW-7 is the brother-in-law of
the accused who had supported the version of the prosecution relating to the
harassment by the accused by demanding additional dowry and cruelty.  PW-8 and  
PW-9 are residents of Adavi Srirampur and are neighbours of PW-7 and these 
witnesses also supported the version of the prosecution.  PW-10 is the
photographer, PW-11 is the pancha at the scene of offence, PW-12 is the witness
to the inquest over the dead body of the deceased.  PW-13 is the S.I. of Police
who had conducted investigation and recorded the statement of witnesses,
apprehended the accused, visited the scene of offence and prepared the rough
sketch of the scene of offence.  PW-14 is the Civil Assistant Surgeon who
conducted autopsy over the dead body of the deceased. PW-15 is the Mandal  
Revenue Officer who conducted inquest over the dead body of the deceased.  PW-16 
is the Sub-Divisional Police Officer, Godavarikhani at the relevant point of
time who had effected the arrest of the accused and sent visceral parts of the
deceased to Forensic Science Laboratory and examined the witnesses, but he did 
not re-record their statements as they were recorded by PW-13.
        The defence is one of total denial.
        PW-1, the father of the deceased deposed that the deceased is his 5th
daughter and she was married to the accused ten months prior to her death and he
paid an amount of Rs.20,000/- as dowry at the time of marriage besides other
articles.  They lived happily for four months and later the accused started
harassing the deceased for an amount of Rs.10,000/- as additional dowry.  This
witness also deposed about the restrictions imposed on the movements of the
deceased by the accused and also unreasonable conditions and the accused also  
used to attribute unchastity.  PW-1 also deposed that the accused got married
twice before this marriage and the first marriage ended in divorce and the
second wife died by consuming poison.  This witness also deposed in detail about
shifting their residence to Adavi Srirampur where his brother-in-law was
residing and during the stay at Sirsed the accused used to harass the deceased
for additional dowry.  PW-1, his brother-in-law and his maternal uncle went and
tried to mediate the disputes between the accused and the deceased and the
accused promised to lookafter the deceased properly.  Even during the stay at
Adavi Srirampur the accused had not stopped subjecting the deceased to 
harassment and cruelty.  Then the deceased came to his house along with her 
sister-in-law and her sister-in-law also stated that the accused was subjecting
the deceased to cruelty.  They had taken the deceased to the house of the
accused and they left the deceased in the house of the accused.  After ten days
he went to the house of the deceased and called elders of the village by name
Dharmaiah, Mallamma and Muthilingam and they tried to compromise the matter.  
The accused promised to lookafter the deceased properly.  PW-1 further deposed
that the deceased after 15 days came to bus stand in order to come to their
house but the accused came and took her away forcibly and they came to know that 
the accused beat the deceased during that night and not able to bear the
harassment the deceased consumed poison and died.  He further deposed that the  
brother-in-law of the accused sent word to them through one of the residents of
the village and they went and saw the deceased and he gave complaint to police,
Mutharam and Ex.P-1 is the said complaint.  This witness was cross-examined at 
length and he also deposed that all the elders who were present at the panchayat
are known to him but they are the residents of the village of the accused and
they are known to the accused.  Certain suggestions put to PW-1 also had been
specifically denied.
        Ex.P-1 reads as hereunder :
        "I, Ganta Odelu s/o. Veeraiah, age ; 65 years, caste : Munnurkapu, r/o.
Avalaramaiahpall village, I am to state that my fifth daughter Ganta Ramadevi
d/o. Odelu, age : 22 years, marriage performed with Saluvala Rajaiah s/o.
Mallaiah, age : 30 years, Munnurukapu r/o Keshavapuram of Mulugu District.
Warangal about 10 months back, during the marriage paid Rs.20,000/- and other
household utensils given to him, after the marriage my daughter and son-in-law
lived happily for about 3 months and went to Advi-Srirampur where my son-in-law
brother-in-law is residing for livelihood prior to that resided at Srisaid
village, there his son-in-law beaten by his son-in-law, for extracting
additional dowry, then myself, Ramidi Narsaiah, Ramidi Nagaiah all of them went
to Srisaid village and warned him.  Later my son-in-law went to Advi-Srirampur,
there also he used to harassing my daughter and beating my daughter and also
attributing illegal contacts with others and used to illtreating her, on seeing
his harassment the villagers of Advi-Srirampur, Barla Muthilingam, s/o.
Veeramallu and Gasikanti Dharmaiah s/o.Kistaiah, both of them warned him, but
also my son-in-law did not change his attitude and continued the same
harassment, due to which my daughter asked him that she was go to her parents 
house, then my son-in-law dragged her inside the house and beat her, later on
26-9-99 at 7.30 a.m. due to constant harassment of her husband she vexed with
her life and have consumed pesticide poison kept in the house and committed
suicide.  Finally I requested to take necessary action".

        PW-2, the brother of PW-1 had corroborated the evidence of   PW-1 in all
material particulars relating to the payment of dowry, demand of additional
dowry and the harassment and the other details.  It is pertinent to note that
PW-1 married for the first time and got divorced.  Due to harassment his second
wife died by consuming poison.  This is yet another unfortunate incident.  This
conduct of the appellant/accused as deposed by PW-1, which is not in serious
controversy also may have to be taken into consideration while appreciating the
evidence on record.  PW-3, PW-4, PW-5 and PW-6 also had well corroborated the  
evidence of PW-1 and PW-2.  Apart from the evidence of PW-1, the other witnesses 
also deposed that the accused not only used to harass the deceased for the
demand of additional dowry, but he used to suspect the fidelity of the deceased
and PW-4, the grand father of the accused specifically deposed about the holding
of panchayat wherein the accused assured that he would lookafter the deceased
properly. PW-8 and PW-9 deposed about the holding of the panchayat and advising 
the accused to look after the deceased properly and not to harass the deceased.
Much comment was made on the evidence of these witnesses on the ground that they   
had not deposed about the details of harassment or other particulars, but the
fact remains that there was mediation in relation to the problems in between the
appellant/accused and the deceased.  PW-10 is the photographer who deposed about   
the photographs marked as  Ex.P-2.  PW-11 deposed about Ex.P-3 scene of offence   
panchanama and also MO-1.  PW-12 deposed about Ex.P-4, inquest panchanama.  PW-       
13 is the S.I. of Police who had deposed about the registration of Cr.No.53/99
and the other details of investigation.  PW-14 is the Civil Assistant Surgeon,
Sircilla who had conducted the post-mortem examination over the dead body of the
deceased.  Ex.P-8 is the post mortem certificate and Ex.P-9 is the final
opinion.  PW-15 is the M.R.O. who deposed about the conducting of inquest and 
examination of the relations of the deceased at the time of inquest orally.
Ex.P-7 is the inquest panchanama.  PW-16 is the Deputy Director of A.A.C. of
Ministry of Petroleum of Government of India and he worked as S.D.P.O.
Godavarikhani from 7-2-1999 to 31-10-1999.  He deposed that he effected the
arrest of the accused and vicera was sent to Forensic Science Laboratory on 11-
10-1999, verified the investigation done by PW-13 and also deposed about laying
of the charge sheet.
        On the strength of the evidence available on record, the learned Judge
recorded reasons in detail, commencing from paras 19 upto 25 and in view of the
clear evidence available on record the learned Judge arrived at a conclusion
that the guilt of the accused under Section 304-B, 498-A IPC and under Section 4
of the Dowry Prohibition Act had been established taking into consideration the
nature of the evidence available on record.  There is specific evidence
available on record that the harassment was not only in relation to the demand
of additional dowry but also on the ground of suspicion relating to fidelity of
the deceased.  The evidence of the grand father of the appellant/accused i.e.,
PW-4 and the other witnesses, the elders, definitely appear to be very clear and
specific.  Apart from the relative witnesses, the independent witnesses also had
supported the version of the prosecution and hence this Court is of the
considered opinion that on appreciation of the over all facts and circumstances
and the whole evidence available on record, the findings recorded by the learned
Judge cannot be found fault in any way and accordingly the said findings are
hereby confirmed.
        There is no merit in the Criminal Appeal and accordingly the Criminal
Appeal shall stand dismissed.


