

THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE P.S. NARAYAN        
Criminal Appeal No.1363 of 1999 

18-11-2004 

B.P. Vittal Reddy       
and others

State of A.P.
Represented by Public Prosecutor 

Counsel for appellants  :  Sri C.Padmanabha Reddy  

Counsel for respondent : Additional Public Prosecutor

:JUDGMENT:   
        A-1 and A-2 preferred this Criminal Appeal against the Judgment of IV
Additional Metropolitan Sessions Judge, Hyderabad made in S.C.No.273/97 dated  
23-7-1999.  Originally the charge sheet was filed as against three accused under
Section 307 IPC in Cr.No.114/96 of Malakpet Police Station and during the
pendency of the case, A-3 died and in view of the same, the learned Judge
proceeded with trial as against A-1 and A-2, recorded the evidence of PW-1 to
PW-8, marked Exs.P-1 to P-6 and also Exs.D-1 to D-5 and ultimately found A-1 and 
A-2 guilty of an offence punishable under Section 307 IPC and each accused was
sentenced to Rigorous Imprisonment for 7 years and to pay a fine of Rs.3000/-
each in default to suffer Simple Imprisonment for six months.  Hence the present
Criminal Appeal.
        The case of the prosecution in nutshell is as per the information received
from Yashoda Super Speciality Hospital, Malakpet, Hyderabad on 17-8-1996, 
H.C.No.2939 (PW-6) went to the Hospital and recorded the statement of injured
PW-1 wherein PW-1 had stated that he was working as Assistant Executive  
Engineer, Panchayat Raj, Amangal, Mahaboobnagar District and was residing in 
Pratapnagar, Malakpet, Hyderabad and on 17-8-1996 at 9.30 p.m. while he was 
proceeding to his sister's house after dinner on the way near St.Thomas School
all the three accused armed with knives attacked him.  A-1 stabbed him on his
stomach, left hand and right hand shoulder.  A-2 and A-3 attacked him with stone
and knife.  PW-1 cried for help and on hearing the cries his sister PW-2 and
also neighbours rushed towards the scene of offence and in view of the same A-1
to A-3 ran away.  PW-1 was shifted by PW-2 and others to Yashoda Super  
Speciality Hospital.  The Circle Inspector of Police, PW-8, registered Crime
No.114/96 under Section 307 IPC and subsequent thereto A-1 to A-3 were arrested 
and sent to judicial remand.
PW-1 is the son-in-law of A-1 as PW-1 married the daughter of A-1 and they were
blessed with a female child.  The wife of               PW-1 i.e., Vanaja died
at Amangal in a fire accident which is the subject matter of Cr.No.22/96
registered under Sections 498-A and 302 IPC and other offences as against PW-1.
This appears to be the motive and the version of the prosecution is several
times A-1 tried to manhandle PW-1 because of the said reason and to his fortune
he was escaping but ultimately A-1 to A-3 made this plan of attack to do away
with the life of PW-1.
The defence is one of total denial.
The XII Metropolitan Magistrate, Hyderabad had registered the crime as
P.R.C.No.26/96 and the same was committed to the Court of Session which was made    
over to the learned IV Additional Metropolitan Sessions Judge, Hyderabad who had
recorded the evidence of PW-1 to PW-8, marked Exs.P-1 to P-6 and Exs.D-1 to D-5  
and on appreciation of the evidence found A-1 and A-2 guilty.
Sri Padmanabha Reddy, the learned Senior Counsel representing the appellants had 
taken this Court in detail through the contents of Ex.P-1 and the evidence of
PW-1 and would submit that there are certain material deviations in between
Ex.P-1 and also the evidence of PW-1 and in view of the same, the version of the
prosecution may have to be viewed with suspicion.  The learned Senior Counsel
also would point out that the Investigating Officer had not done the
investigation on proper lines and he failed to collect the blood stained earth
and had not even drawn the rough sketch of the scene of offence.  The learned
Senior Counsel also would contend that in view of the specific information
furnished by PW-2 to the Police at the earliest point of time, the present first
information cannot be said to be the F.I.R.  The learned Senior Counsel also
would submit that the material witnesses PW-4 and PW-5 had not supported the  
version of the prosecution and taking into consideration Exs.D-1 to D-5 which
are the improvements made by the witnesses, the appellants are entitled for an
acquittal. The learned Counsel also would submit that even prior thereto, there
was enmity between the parties and taking advantage of certain injuries the
foisting of cases as against A-1 and A-2 by PW-1 cannot be ruled out.  The
learned Senior Counsel also had pointed out to the suggestions put by the
defence in this regard and ultimately the learned Counsel would conclude that
even otherwise except the evidence of PW-1 there is no other evidence available
on record and even if the evidence of PW-2 is carefully scrutinized it cannot be
said that PW-2 corroborated the evidence of PW-1 and in view of the close
relationship between PW-1 and PW-2, the same may have to be viewed with  
suspicion.  The learned Senior Counsel also pointed out that none of the weapons
had been seized and in the light of these infirmities acquittal may have to be
recorded.
Per contra, the learned Additional Public Prosecutor would submit that Ex.P-1 is
not an encyclopedia and the mere slight variation in between Ex.P-1 and the
evidence of PW-1 cannot be a ground for recording acquittal.  The intention to
do away with the life of PW-1 on the part of A-1 to A-3 is clear since the
motive is grudge which A-1 owes towards PW-1 in view of the death of his
daughter.  The learned Additional Public Prosecutor had taken this Court through
the findings recorded by the learned Judge and also placed reliance on certain
decisions to substantiate his submissions.
Heard both the Counsel.
The specific case of the prosecution is that on the fateful day A-1 to A-3 in
view of the grievance A-1 had as against PW-1 due to the death of his daughter,
the wife of PW-1, with an intention to do away with the life of PW-1, had
attacked PW-1.  PW-1 married the daughter of A-1 and A-2 is the son of A-1.  It
is not in controversy that the wife of PW-1 met with fire accident and a
complaint also was lodged in this regard which is the subject matter of Crime
No.22/96.  The daughter of PW-1 is in the custody of the appellants in view of
the compromise.  With a view to take revenge, inasmuch as the appellants thought
that PW-1 was responsible for the death of the daughter of A-1 and sister of A-
2, the present attack was planned and PW-1 was attacked near St.Thomas school   
and the specific case of the prosecution is that A-1 stabbed PW-1 on his
stomach, left hand and right hand shoulder indiscriminately and the other
accused attacked him with stone and knife respectively.  PW-5, the S.I. of
Police of Police, Bhavaninagar Police Station since 1997 deposed that on 17-8-
1996 at about 9.30 p.m. when he was at his residence he heard some loud cries in
front of St.Thomas High School and he came out of the house and saw PW-1 lying 
in a pool of blood.  Immediately he went inside the house and made a telephonic
call to Malakpet Police Station and again he went to the injured person and
there he found PW-2, the sister of PW-1, and some other persons.  PW-5 further
deposed that he saw some persons going on two wheelers and he had not seen their  
faces and he came to know through the sister of PW-1 that the incident took
place due to family disputes. Police shifted PW-1 to hospital and PW-5 also was
examined by the police.  Though this witness (PW-5) is a Sub-Inspector of Police
he was declared hostile by the prosecution.  In cross-examination by prosecution
this witness had specifically deposed it is not true to say that he stated to
police in Ex.P-3 to the effect that he saw the accused running away on the
scooter.  This witness also was cross-examined by the Counsel for the accused.
Though PW-5 deposed that he made a telephonic call to the Malakpet Police 
Station relating to the incident, this cannot be treated as F.I.R. for the
reason that no details had been furnished by PW-5.
Ex.P-1 reads as hereunder :
"Today i.e., on 17-8-96 at about 9.30 PM I, namely Praveen Kumar went to my
sister's house from our house, again while I was going to my mother's house,
Near St.Thomas in Shalivahana Nagar, some people throwed stones from my back, on   
my head.  I turned back and saw three persons namely Vittal Reddy, Manohar 
Reddy, Ranadhir Reddy came nearer to me and stabbed me with big knives.  They  
stabbed me on my stomach, right hand and left hand with knives.  Then I shouted
"Bachavo, Bachavo".  They went away leaving me there itself.  By hearing my
shoutings, my sister and some other people came there and took me to the Yashoda  
Hospital and admitted there.  I was taking these MLC.No.4633 treatment.  Kindly,
I request you to take legal action against the three persons."

Thus it is clear that in Ex.P-1 it is stated that some people threw stones on
the back side of PW-1's head and he turned back and saw three people namely 
Vittal Reddy, Manohar Reddy and Ranadhir Reddy coming nearer to him and stabbed   
him with big knives on his stomach, right hand and left hand with knives and he
shouted "Bachavo, Bachavo" and they went away leaving him there itself.  By
hearing his shoutings his sister and some other people came there and took him
to Yashoda Hospital for treatment.  This is the earliest stand taken by PW-1 in
Ex.P-1 wherein specific stand was taken that all the three stabbed him with big
knives and it is also pertinent to note that on hearing the shoutings, his
sister and some other people came there and took him to Yashoda Hospital and 
admitted in the Hospital for treatment.  As per the earliest version of PW-1,
PW-2 reached the spot on hearing the cries and it is highly doubtful whether PW-
2 could have witnessed the incident at all.  PW-1 deposed that he married the
daughter of A-1 and A-2 is the brother of his wife and in 1992 he was blessed
with a daughter and on 18-3-1996 his wife died in a fire accident and soon after
the fire accident on 7-3-1996 he admitted his wife in C.D.R. Hospital and on
that day the relatives of A-1 and A-2 beat him with suspicion that he was
responsible for the fire accident of his wife and they also had taken away his
daughter.  PW-1 gave complaint at Narayanaguda Police Station for beating him.
This witness also deposed that the Circle Inspector of Police, Narayanaguda
booked a case against him and he was sent to the Amangal Police Station in
Mahabubnagar District and meanwhile his wife expired on 19-3-1996 and after his
return from judicial custody at the intervention of elders an agreement was
entered into under which he paid Rs.1,50,000/- in cash to the maintenance of his
daughter and he returned utensils.  PW-1 further deposed that after a week days
time thereafter the elders demanded him to transfer some land in favour of his
minor daughter who was then aged 3 years then and since he did not oblige to
their demand they attacked him.  This witness also further deposed that on 17-8-
1996 he was returning from his sister's house situate at about 300 yards away at
9.30 p.m. and when he reached the gate of St.Thomas school he was hit by a stone 
on his head causing bleeding injury.  He turned back and saw his brother-in-law
with raised hands and he also saw A-1 and A-3 (who is no more) coming in his
direction while parking their two wheelers and they parked their vehicles near a
street light.  A-1 uttered in filthy language to kill him.  A-1 was armed with a
knife and stabbed him continuously on the left side of his stomach and all over
the body and A-3 also stabbed him and he received bleeding injuries all over the
body.  He raised cries "bacho, bachao" and then fell down.  A-2 after he fell
down tried to hit him with a stone by raising his hands.  Meanwhile one
Prashanth came and saved him and by then his sister by name P.Sujatha came   
running in his direction and in their presence the accused tried to run away.
PW-1 further deposed that the incident took place near the house of S.I. who
telephoned to police and police came within five or ten minutes and shifted him
in an auto to Yashoda Hospital near Nalgonda Cross Roads.  Thereafter police
came to the Hospital and recorded his statement and he affixed his thumb
impression on his statement and it is Ex.P-1.  PW-1 deposed that he was treated
as an in-patient in Yashoda Hospital for about 17 or 18 days.
        A careful scrutiny of the evidence of PW-1 and Ex.P-1, definitely would go
to show that PW-1 is making an improved version while deposing before the Court
in deviation of what had been stated in    Ex.P-1.  In cross-examination PW-1
deposed that he was facing a trial on allegation of murdering his wife in
Sessions Court, Mahabubnagar and A-1 herein is the complainant in the said case
and A-2 and A-3 may be the witnesses.  No doubt PW-1 denied certain suggestions  
relating to details of dowry and this witness also denied the suggestion that on
failure of giving additional dowry he started torturing his wife and several
answers were elicited in relation to murder of his wife.  This witness also
deposed that A-1 is working as Lecturer in Maths in a Government college and at
that time A-2 was studying Intermediate.  Soon after the incident he got his
wife admitted in C.D.R. Hospital and it is not true to say that in his presence
the Magistrate recorded dying declaration of his wife and the witness adds at
that time he was in Narayanaguda Police Station and after his release he came to
know that two dying declarations of his wife were recorded and he also denied
the suggestion that he threatened his wife to give false statement that she
received accidental burn injuries.  Several questions were put in relation to
the said case.  This witness further deposed that he did not state to police
about the incident of beating on 7-3-1996 by Anji Reddy and others as it was not
asked and however he gave complaint against them on 7-3-1996 at Narayanaguda   
Police Station and he did not state about lodging complaint in Narayanaguda
Police Station for the incident dated 7-3-1996 in his statement or Ex.P-1.
Cross-examination at length was made in relation to the incident of death of the
wife of PW-1.  PW-1 also deposed that after the incident he was conscious and
police recorded his statement at Yashoda Hospital and he was conscious when  
police came to the spot and he does not remember the designation of the officer
who came to the spot and he told to the police on their enquiry that he was
stabbed and he gave this statement on the spot when police arrived and he does
not remember if the Doctor in Yashoda Hospital enquired him the details of
incident and if he had noted them in the record sheet.  He also does not know if
the Casualty Doctor sent information about stabbing to the police and he does
not remember if by 9.30 p.m. he was taken to Yashoda Hospital and he does not 
remember if he had stated to the Doctor that he was stabbed at 8.30 p.m. on 17-
8-1996.  No doubt he had denied the suggestion that he did not name A-1 to A-3
herein as assailants when he was enquired by the Doctor and police.  Certain
questions were put to him relating to topographical features of the scene of
offence too.  Police recorded his statement under Ex.P-1 within one hour of his
admission in the hospital and he stated to police about the incident of
stabbing. PW-1 deposed that he did not state the reason of dinner in Ex.P-1
though he stated that he went to his sister's house.  The accused came from
Western side behind him and he was going towards East.  The C.I. of Police
recorded his statement two or three days after the incident and he does not
remember whether the C.I. of Police had examined and recorded his statement on 
17-8-1996 and in all the C.I. visited him in connection with the case twice or
thrice.  PW-1 also deposed that he did not state to police as in Ex.D-1 that on
17-8-96 at about 9.30 p.m. while he was proceeding from his parents house after
completion of dinner towards his sister's house on the way near St.Thomas
School, Shalivahana Nagar one stone came and hit him behind his back.  PW-1  
further deposed that it is not true to say that he did not state to the Police
and also in Ex.P-1 that A-1 to A-3 parked their vehicles near a burning tube
light and came in that direction and that A-1 was uttering words in filthy
language to kill him and that A-1 stabbed him.  This witness further deposed
that it is not true the say that there is no such burning tube light as stated
by him where A-1 and A-3 parked their two wheelers and that he was deposing 
about the presence of tube light for the first time before the Court and he does
not remember if he had not stated to police about he identifying A-1 to A-3.  He
stated to police that after he cried "bachao bachao" the accused went away.  PW-
1 also deposed that he did not state to Police as in Ex.D-2 that his sister
arrived after the accused left the place.  He further deposed that though it is
not in his statement Ex.P-1 that his sister witnessed the incident but in fact
she witnessed the incident and the contents of Ex.P-1 read over to him before
obtaining his thumb impression.  Though he had not mentioned the individual
overt acts of the accused he stated that the accused stabbed him all over the
body.  He stated to police that A-1 first stabbed in his stomach.  PW-1 further
deposed that it is not true to say that he did not state to police that all the
accused stabbed and he stated to police about A-2 trying to leave the stone and
hitting him on his head after he had fallen.  This omission was marked as Ex.D-
3.  This witness also specifically denied that he had falsely implicated A-1 to
A-3 because of bitter enmity.  PW-1 deposed that it is true that his sister had
divorced her husband Bhagya Reddy and it is true that Bhagya Reddy gave 
complaint against him in Collectorate but he was exonerated.    PW-1 denied the
suggestion that he had got many enemies including Bhagya Reddy and taking  
advantage of the same he had falsely implicated the accused in this case.  The
other allegations also had been denied.  This is the evidence of PW-1.
        PW-2 is the sister of PW-1.  She had deposed about the death of the wife
of PW-1 and the accused coming and threatening PW-1 and the other aspects and   
she deposed that on 17-8-1996 PW-1 came from his father's house to her house for
dinner and was returning at about 9.30 p.m. towards his house and after few
minutes she heard loud cry and suspecting the loud cry to be of PW-1 she rushed
in the said direction and saw A-2 raising his hands with a stone and one
Prashanth kicked   A-2 and the stone fell down on the ground.  She also saw the
accused stabbing PW-1 and going towards the parked two wheelers.  PW-1 fell down  
and she went near PW-1 and started crying.  Near the place of incident there is
house of one Srinivas, Inspector who telephoned to police and police came
immediately.  This witness was cross-examined at length.  PW-2 deposed that she 
did not state to police as in Ex.D-4 i.e., "on 17-8-1996 at about 9.30 p.m. my
brother Praveen Kumar proceeding towards his sister's house after completion of
his meal at his parent's house, on the way".  She also deposed that she heard
the cries of his brother while he was being attacked and not when he was
attacked and she did not state to police as in Ex.D-5 i.e., "that on the way
near St.Thomas School, Shalivahana Nagar three persons Vittal Reddy, Manohar  
Reddy and Ranadheer Reddy stabbed upon my brother at that time I heard hue and  
cry of my brother".  She further deposed that when she first witnessed the scene
she saw A-2 about to hurl a stone on PW-1 and simultaneously accused stabbing  
PW-1 and at the time when she saw the incident PW-1 fell on the ground.  The
witness again says that PW-1 was standing when she saw him first.  No doubt this
witness denied other suggestions.
        In the light of Ex.P-1 and also the evidence of PW-1, the improved
version, and the evidence of PW-2, the presence of PW-2 is definitely doubtful
inasmuch as the version is not clear when actually she reached the scene of
offence.  As per the earliest version in Ex.P-1, the evidence of PW-2 that she
had witnessed the incident cannot be believed.  Hence, except the evidence of
PW-1 there is no other evidence available on record relating to what actually
had transpired on the fateful day regarding the offence with which the accused
had been charged with.
        PW-3 is the father of PW-1 and PW-2.  He just deposed about the accused  
demanding Rs.1,50,000/- towards maintenance of the minor child of PW-1 and also 
about the threats to kill PW-1 if the amount is not paid and after the payment
of the above amount there was no dispute, but however on 17-8-1996 the accused
stabbed PW-1 near St.Thomas School at 9.30 p.m. and on hearing the cries of PW-1  
he rushed to that direction and saw PW-1 had fallen down due to injuries and the
accused ran away.  The evidence of PW-3 to the effect that PW-1 had fallen due
to injuries and the accused ran away also cannot be believed since he could not
have reached the scene of offence as deposed by him.  A suggestion was put to
PW-3 and PW-3 deposed that it is not true to say that he went to the place of
offence only after Prashanth came and informed him.  The other suggestions also
had been denied. 
        PW-4 deposed that PW-1 to PW-3 are his neighbours and on     17-8-1996 at 
about 9 or 9.15 p.m. when he was returning home with his friends he heard loud
cry "save, save" and he thought that school boys were playing near the school
and the sound was in connection with a game but soon thereafter he realized the
mistake and went in that direction and found some people quarrelling.  Himself
(PW-4), Ramesh and Sampath went to rescue and the offenders ran away.  PW-4    
further deposed that he saw he saw PW-1 lying on the ground and he cannot 
identify the offenders as it was dark.  PW-1 was lying in a pool of blood and
one of the friends rushed to the house of PW-2 and he (PW-4) ran to the house of
PW-3 and brought PW-3.  Meanwhile PW-2 arrived and PW-1 was shifted to the   
hospital.  This witness was declared hostile by the prosecution and this witness
was cross-examined.  
        It is pertinent to note that Sampath and Ramesh were not examined and PW-4  
deposed that he could not identify the offenders as it was dark.  The version of
PW-1 is that there was tube light and he was able to identify the parking of two
wheelers by A-1 and A-3.  In the light of the evidence of PW-4, the evidence of
PW-2 and PW-3 relating to the exact time when they had reached the scene of 
offence would become highly doubtful and their version that they had witnessed
the accused running away also definitely cannot be believed.  Apart from this
aspect of the matter, PW-5 immediately made telephonic call and the Police
reached the spot.  The police personnel who immediately rushed to the spot also
had not been examined. 
        PW-6 is the Head Constable who had recorded the statement of PW-1, Ex.P-1.  
PW-7 is the Doctor who examined PW-1 who was brought by PW-2 and had deposed      
about as many as 12 injuries.  Ex.P-4 is the medical certificate issued by PW-7.
This witness specifically deposed that it is true that he had to mention each
injury either simple or grievous and each of the injury is simple but their
cumulative effect endangers the life.  PW-8 is the Investigating Officer who
deposed about receiving the statement recorded by H.C. (PW-6) and registering
the case on the strength of Ex.P-1 as Cr.No.114/96 under Section 307 IPC,
issuing F.I.R. Ex.P-5 and taking up investigation, visiting scene of offence and
recording statements of PW-1 to PW-5.   PW-4 and PW-5 stated before him as in  
Exs.P-2 and P-3.  Since the scene of offence was disturbed he did not draw any
sketch and he could not collect even the blood stained earth from the scene of
offence as it was completely disturbed and he visited Yashoda Hospital and he
could not collect blood stained clothes as the Hospital did not preserve the
clothes of PW-1.  On 5-9-1996 he received medical certificates from Yashoda
Hospital and on 20-8-1996 he arrested A-1 to A-3 and sent them for judicial
remand.  The photographs of the injured were taken in Yashoda Hospital.
        The learned Judge recorded reasons in detail and placing reliance on the
evidence of PW-1, PW-2 and PW-3 and also the medical evidence PW-7, believed the   
version of the prosecution and conviction had been recorded.  In DR.KRISHNA PAL 
Vs. STATE OF U.P. 1 while dealing with omissions in F.I.R. in an incident of
murder witnessed by a number of persons and the first informant was not a eye
witness and the F.I.R. was lodged after talking to the witnesses present on the
spot it was held in the circumstances that non-mention of name of one of the eye
witnesses in the F.I.R. is not fatal.  No doubt submissions at length were made
by the learned Additional Public Prosecutor that the First Information Report
cannot be treated as an encyclopedia and all the details need not be mentioned
and some small omissions or variations need not be considered with seriousness
if otherwise acceptable evidence is available on record.  Placing strong
reliance on the evidence of PW-1, the injured, submissions at length were made
to the effect that the evidence of PW-1 is definitely trustworthy and hence the
conviction can be sustained.  In JOSE Vs. STATE OF KERALA 2 while dealing with   
the evidence and proof in the case of murder it was held that conviction for
murder can be based on the honest and trustworthy testimony of even a single
witness.  In JOSEPH Vs. STATE OF KERALA 3 it was held that in a case of murder   
evidence of a solitary injured eye witness can form basis for conviction when it
is cogent and reliable but where the evidence of solitary witness injured in the
incident was in conflict with other evidence and medical evidence and he
admitting that signatures on F.I.R. and acknowledgement of summons which were  
alleged to be his signatures were also different, conviction on the basis of his
sole testimony is not proper.  In OMPRAKASH Vs. STATE OF UTTARANCHAL 4 it was        
held that the first information report need not contain an exhaustive account of
incident and where all essential and relevant details of incident were given in
the F.I.R. and the witness who had dictated the F.I.R. gave few more details in
her evidence, it was held that the evidence given by the witness cannot be
doubted on ground that there is improvement.  In S.B. NARSALE Vs. STATE OF    
MAHARASHTRA 5 in the case of conviction under Section 302 IPC  where evidence of   
only eye witness was corroborated by other circumstantial evidence and motive
was disclosed by the prosecution evidence, the Supreme Court refused to
interfere.  In MOHANAN Vs. STATE 6 the Division Bench of Kerala High Court while
dealing with appreciation of evidence of witnesses and minor discrepancies it
was held :
        "So far as these discrepancies in the evidence are concerned, it has to be
noted that every minor discrepancy does not affect credibility of prosecution
case.  While appreciating evidence of a witness, the approach must be whether
the evidence of the witness read as a whole appears to have a ring of truth.
Once that impression is formed, it is undoubtedly necessary for the Court to
scrutinize the evidence more particularly keeping in view the deficiencies,
drawbacks and infirmities pointed out in the evidence as a whole and evaluate
them to find out whether it is against the general tenor of evidence given by
the witnesses and whether the earlier evaluation of the evidence is shaken as to
render it unworthy of belief.  Minor discrepancies on trivial matters not
touching the core of the case, hyper-technical approach by taking sentences
borne out of context here or there from the evidence, attaching importance to
some technical error committed by the Investigating Officer not going to the
root of the matter would not ordinarily permit rejection of the evidence as a
whole.  If the Court before whom the witness gives evidence had the opportunity
to form the opinion about the general tenor of evidence given by the witness,
the Appellate Court which had not this benefit will have to attach due weight to
the appreciation of evidence by the trial Court and unless there are reasons
weighty and formidable it would not be proper to reject the evidence on the
ground of minor variations or infirmities in the matter of trivial details.
Several honest and truthful witnesses may differ in some details unrelated to
the main incident because power of observation, retention and reproduction
differ with individuals.  Cross-examination is some times an unequal duel
between a rustic and refined lawyer.  If a case is proved perfectly, it is
argued that it is unnatural; if a case has some flaws, inevitably because human
beings are prone to err, it is argued that it is too imperfect.  It is found
that the learned trial Judge has elaborately analysed evidence of P.Ws.3 and 4
and found it to be credible. There is
no infirmity therein to take a different view."

In RAMMI Vs. STATE OF M.P. 7 while dealing with impeaching the credit of 
witness, inconsistent statement and what amounts to contradiction it was held at
paras 24, 25, 26 and 27 as hereunder :
        "When a eye witness is examined at length it is quite possible for him to
make some discrepancies.  No true witness can possibly escape from making some   
discrepant details.  Perhaps an untrue witness who is well tutored can
successfully make his testimony totally non-discrepant.  But courts should bear
in mind that it is only when discrepancies in the evidence of a witness are so
incompatible with the credibility of his version that the court is justified in
jettisoning his evidence.  But too serious a view to be adopted on mere
variations falling in the narration of an incident (either as same witness) is
an unrealistic approach for judicial scrutiny.
        It is a common practice in trial courts to make out contradictions from
the previous statement of a witness for confronting him during cross-
examination.  Merely because there is inconsistency in evidence it is not
sufficient to impair the credit of the witness.  No doubt Section 155 of the
Evidence Act provides scope for impeaching the credit of a witness by proof of
an inconsistent former statement.  But a reading of the Section would indicate
that all inconsistent statements are not sufficient to impeach the credit of the
witness.  The material portion of the Section is extracted below :
        "155.  Impeaching credit of witness.- The credit of a witness may be
impeached in the following ways by the adverse party, or, with the consent of
the Court, by the party who calls him -
(1)...
(2)...
(3)  by proof of former statement inconsistent with any part of his evidence
which is liable to be contradicted.

        A former statement though seemingly inconsistent with the evidence need
not necessarily be sufficient to amount to contradiction.  Only such of the
inconsistent statement which is liable to be "contradicted" would affect the
credit of the witness.  Section 145 of the Evidence Act also enables the cross-
examiner to use any former statement of the witness, but it cautions that if it
is intended to "contradict" the witness the cross-examiner is enjoined to comply
with the formality prescribed therein.  Section 162 of the Code also permits the
cross-examiner to use the previous statement of the witness (recorded under
Section 161 of the Code0 for the only limited purpose i.e., to "contradict" the
witness.
        To contradict a witness, therefore, must be to discredit the particular
version of the witness.  Unless the former statement has the potency to
discredit the present statement, even if the latter is at variance with the
former to some extent it would not be helpful to contradict that witness
(Tahsildar Singh v. State of U.P. (AIR 1959 S.C. 1012 : 1959 Crl.L.J. 1231).

        There cannot be any doubt or controversy that even if a single witness is
found to be trustworthy reliance can be placed on such evidence and conviction
be sustained.  However, here is a case where there had been admitted strained
relationship or enmity between the parties even by that date.  No doubt this
aspect of enmity may be viewed either positive to the defence or negative to the
defence as well.  The degree of proof in criminal trial may be (i) charge proved
beyond shadow of doubt; (ii) want of evidence in establishing the charge as
against accused which would result in clean acquittal; (iii) evidence falling
short of absolute proof and giving scope to benefit of doubt; (iv) evidence for
prosecution and defence equally and evenly balanced, and prosecution proving the
case and accused admitting the incident, but putting forth defence under
exceptions wherein too depending upon the nature of evidence, benefit of doubt
may come into play.  The aspects referred to supra are only illustrative and at
any rate cannot be said to be exhaustive and it is needless to say that the
proof of charge as against the accused in a criminal case may have to be judged
depending upon the facts and circumstances and on appreciation of the evidence
available on record.  Enmity between the accused and victim is a double edged
weapon.  It may provide instinct for the crime and it may also provide reasons
for falsely implicating the accused.  In such a case evidence may have to be
carefully scrutinized.  In STATE OF PUNJAB Vs. PRITAM SINGH 8 it was held by the   
Apex Court at para-4 as hereunder :
        "It might appear that the High Court did not try to consider the intrinsic
merits of the evidence of the eye-witnesses but rejected the evidence of those
witnesses only on the ground that they  were interested and inimical witnesses.
But on a very careful consideration of the judgment of the High Court in the
light of the evidence led by the prosecution, we feel that the view taken by the
High Court was not wrong. Apart from the circumstances mentioned by the High 
Court in its judgment there were certain important intrinsic circumstances which
threw a good deal of doubt on the prosecution case.  In the first place, it is
admitted that there was serious enmity between the parties and there was
sufficient motive for Pala Singh to have implicated the respondents at whose
instance he was implicated in the murder of Toga Singh and eventually convicted
to life imprisonment.  Equally there was a motive for the respondents also to
kill Pala Singh in order to wreak vengeance on him for having caused the death
of the father of Gurmej Singh, Teja Singh and Byan Singh. When the motives were
thus equally balanced, the Court had to look to surrounding circumstances in
order to find out the truth".

In the present case, in the light of the evidence of PW-4, the evidence of PW-2
and PW-3 definitely is highly doubtful. PW-5 was declared hostile.  No doubt PW-
4 also was declared hostile.  The earliest version of PW-1 in Ex.P-1 is in
deviation of what he had deposed as PW-1.  Apart from this aspect of the matter,
the weapons had not been seized.  The blood stained earth also had not been
seized and none others except PW-4 had been examined and the police personnel   
who immediately rushed to the spot on the telephonic call given by PW-5 also had
not been examined.  In the light of the contradictions and omissions which had
been elicited and also taking into consideration the evidence of PW-1 in
particular and also Ex.P-1, the earliest version, and in the light of specific
suggestions put to the prosecution witnesses relating to the enmity which PW-1
may have with certain others too, the possibility of implicating the father-in-
law and brother-in-law by PW-1 in the present case cannot be totally ruled out.
Hence in the facts and circumstances of the case, this Court is of the
considered opinion that on the solitary testimony of PW-1, especially taking
into consideration the evidence of PW-4 and also PW-5 in this regard, benefit of
doubt to be given to the appellants and hence the findings recorded by the
learned Judge definitely cannot be sustained and the prosecution was unable to
establish the guilt of the accused beyond all reasonable doubt.  Hence, the
appellants are entitled for an acquittal and accordingly the Criminal Appeal is
hereby allowed.  The bail bonds of the appellants shall stand cancelled.  It is
needless to say that the appellants are entitled to the refund of fine amount,
if any, paid by them.

?1 1996 SCC (Crl) 249 
2 AIR 1973 S.C. 944 
3 AIR 2003 S.C. 507 
4 2003 Crl.L.J. 483
5 AIR 1972 S.C. 1171 
6 2001(1) ALT (Crl)  85
7 1999(8) SCC 649 
8 AIR 1977 S.C. 2005 


