

THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE P.S. NARAYANA        
Criminal Appeal No.961 of 2003

26-10-2004 

Ramagiri Santosh Kumar  

State of A.P. rep.by
Public Prosecutor,
High Court of A.P.

Counsel for appellant : Mr.T.S.N.Murthy

Counsel for respondent : Additional Public Prosecutor

:JUDGMENT:   
Ramagiri Santhosh Kumar, Convict No.8211, Central Prison, Warangal, aggrieved by 
the Judgment of the learned IV Additional District & Sessions Judge, Karimnagar
dated 10-4-2003 in S.C.No.539/2001 wherein he was convicted for an offence under
Section 304-B IPC and sentenced to undergo Rigorous Imprisonment for 7 years and 
further convicted and sentenced for an offence under Section 498-A IPC to
undergo Rigorous Imprisonment for 2 years and to pay a fine of Rs.500/-, in
default to undergo Simple Imprisonment for one month and further convicted for
an offence under Section 4 of the Dowry Prohibition Act and sentenced to undergo
Rigorous Imprisonment for 2 years and to pay a fine of Rs.2000/- in default to
undergo Simple Imprisonment for six months, had preferred the present Criminal
Appeal by way of Legal Aid.
The episode of the prosecution in short is that the marriage between the accused
and his wife Sunitha, hereinafter referred to as "deceased" was celebrated 8
months prior to the death of the deceased and at the time of marriage, PW-1
agreed to pay a dowry of Rs.85,000/-, out of which Rs.80,000/- was paid on three
occasions in cash and an amount of Rs.5000/- was yet to be paid and the accused 
had been making demands for additional dowry and also articles like colour T.V.
and PW-1 promised to give him black and white T.V. and convinced him but on 7-
11-2000 PW-1 received information that the deceased was not well and went to see
her by which time she died and a ligature mark was found around her neck.  Based
on the report given by PW-1, Cr.No.178/2000 was registered against the accused
for the offences punishable under Sections 304-B and 498-A I.P.C.  The same was
registered as P.R.C.No.20/2001 and committed to the Court of Session which was 
made over to IV Additional District & Sessions Judge-Fast Track Court,
Karimnagar who had recorded the evidence of PW-1 to PW-12 and marked Exs.P-1 to    
P-18, MO-1 to MO-3 and also Exs.D-1 to D-6 and ultimately conviction as
aforesaid had been recorded and sentences as referred to supra also had been
imposed.  Hence the present Criminal Appeal.
Sri T.S.N.Murthy, the learned Counsel defending the appellant/accused provided
by Legal Aid made the following submissions.  The learned Counsel with all
emphasis would submit that there are several material discrepancies between
Ex.P-1 and the evidence of PW-1 and PW-1 and PW-2 are the wife and husband i.e.,  
the parents of the deceased and PW-3 also is a close relative of the deceased
and most of the evidence of these witnesses can be said to be only hear say and
definitely not direct evidence.  The learned Counsel also would submit that the
evidence available on record is highly insufficient to prove the ingredients of
the offences with which the accused had been charged with and convicted and
sentenced.  The learned Counsel also pointed out to Exs.D-4, D-5 and D-6 i.e.,
Section 161 Cr.P.C. statements of Agaiah, Laxmi and Narahari and would point out
that if these statements are taken into consideration the whole episode of the
prosecution would become doubtful.  The Counsel would submit that though these 
witnesses were not examined during trial their statements had been recorded by
the police and for a limited purpose as specified by Section 172(2) Cr.P.C. the
same can be used and hence the accused is entitled to the benefit of doubt.  The
learned Counsel also had pointed out the discrepancies in between the evidence
of PW-1 and PW-2 and also the discrepancies between the evidence of PW-1 and   
Ex.P-1.  The learned Counsel also pointed out that PW-3 was examined after
sufficiently a long time by police and no explanation is forthcoming from the
side of the prosecution in this regard and hence the delay in recording the
statement also may have to be viewed with suspicion.  The learned Counsel
ultimately would conclude that this is a case where the conviction had been
recorded on insufficient evidence and hence acquittal may have to be recorded.
Per contra, the learned Additional Public Prosecutor had pointed out the object
and ambit of Section 304-B IPC and would submit that the harassment in relation
to the dowry would be within four corners of the house and these are more
domestic problems and it is very difficult to get the other independent
evidence.  The learned Additional Public Prosecutor also would contend that in
the present case, apart from the evidence of PW-1, PW-2 and PW-3, the evidence 
of PW-7 also is available and the conduct of the deceased and the conduct of the
accused as deposed by PW-7 also would throw light on the incident.  The learned
Additional Public Prosecutor also would contend that apart from the statements
which had been said to have been made by the deceased to these witnesses there  
is direct evidence relating to the demand of Rs.15,000/- made by the accused
himself and PW-1 deposed about the same and in this view of the matter, the
ingredients of the offences charged with had been proved.  The learned
Additional Public Prosecutor also explained about the scope and ambit of Section
113-B of Indian Evidence Act, 1872 and placed reliance on ZAHOOR Vs. STATE OF    
U.P. 1 and RADHE SHYAM NARENDRA Vs. STATE OF ORISSA 2.            
Heard both the Counsel.
Section 304-B IPC reads as hereunder :
(l) Where the death of a woman is caused by any burns or bodily injury or occurs
otherwise than under normal circumstances within seven years of her marriage and
it is shown that soon before her death she was subjected to cruelty or
harassment by her husband or any relative of her husband for, or in connection
with, any demand for dowry, such death shall be called "dowry death", and such
husband or relative shall be deemed to have caused her death.
Explanation.-For the purposes of this sub-section "dowry" shall have the same
meaning as in Sec. 2 of the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961 (28 of 1961).
(2) Whoever commits dowry death shall be punished with imprisonment for a term
which shall not be less than seven years but which may extend to imprisonment
for life.
Section 498-A IPC reads as hereunder :

"Whoever, being the husband or the relative of the husband of a woman, subject
such woman to cruelty shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to three years and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section, 'cruelty' means-
(a) any wilful conduct which is of such a nature as is likely to drive the woman
to commit suicide or to cause grave injury or danger to life, limb or health
(whether mental or physical) of the woman; or
(b) harassment of the woman where such harassment is with a view to coercing her
or any person related to her to meet any unlawful demand for any property or
valuable security is on account of failure by her or any person related to her
to meet such demand.  
Section 113-B of Indian Evidence Act 1872, dealing with Presumption as to dowry
death, reads as hereunder :
"When the question is whether a person has committed the dowry death of a woman  
and it is shown that soon before her death such woman had been subjected by such 
person to cruelty or harassment for or in connection with, any demand for dowry,
the Court shall presume that such person had caused the dowry death.
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section, "dowry death" shall have the same
meaning as in Sec.304-B of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).
Ex.D-4 is dated 8-11-2000, the statement of R.Agaiah recorded under Section 161
Cr.P.C. by the police.  Exs.D-5 and D-6 also are of the same day, the statements
of Ramagiri Laxmi and Ramagiri Narahari recorded under Section 161 Cr.P.C. by
the Police.  It is not in controversy that these witnesses were not examined
during trial before the Court.  Submissions at length were made relating to
these statements and the doubtful version of the prosecution episode.  Sections
161 and 162 Cr.P.C. read as hereunder :
Section 161 Cr.P.C. - Examination of witnesses by police:-

(1) Any police officer making an investigation under this Chapter, or any police
officer not below such rank as the State Government may, by general or special
order, prescribe in this behalf, acting on the requisition of such officer, may
examine orally any person supposed to be acquainted with the facts and
circumstances of the case.
(2) Such person shall be bound to answer truly all questions relating to such
case put to him by such officer, other than questions the answers to which would
have a tendency to expose him to a criminal charge or to a penalty or
forfeiture.
(3) The police officer may reduce into writing any statement made to him in the
course of an examination under this section; and if he does so, he shall make a
separate and true record of the statement of each such person whose statement he
records.
Section 162 Cr.P.C. - Statements to police not to be signed.  Use of statements
in evidence :-

(1)  No statement made by an person to a police officer in the course of an
investigation under this Chapter, shall, if reduced to writing, be signed by the
person making it, nor shall any such statement or any record thereof, whether in
a police diary or otherwise, or any part of such statement on record, be used
for any purpose, save as hereinafter provided, at any inquiry or trial in
respect of any offence under investigation at the time when such statement was
made : 
Provided that when any witness is called for the prosecution in such inquiry or
trial whose statement has been reduced into writing as aforesaid, any part of
his statement, if duly proved, may be used by the accused, and with permission
of the Court, by the prosecution, to contradict such witness in the manner
provided by Section 145 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872); and when
any part of such statement is so used, any part thereof may also be used in the
re-examination of such witness, but for the purpose only of explaining any
matter referred to in his cross-examination.
(2)  Nothing in this section shall be deemed to apply to any statement falling
within the provisions of clause (1) of Section 32 of the Indian Evidence Act,
1872 (1 of 1872) or to affect the provisions of Section 27 of the Act.
Explanation :- An omission to state a fact or circumstance in the statement
referred to in sub-section (1) may amount to contradiction if the same appears
to be significant and otherwise relevant having regard to the context in which
such omission occurs and whether any omission amounts to a contradiction in the
particular context shall be a question of fact.

Section 172 Cr.P.C. deals with Diary of proceedings in investigation and Section
172(2) Cr.P.C. specifies :
"Any Criminal Court may send for the police diaries of case under inquiry or
trial in such Court, and may use such diaries, not as evidence in the case, but
to aid it in such inquiry or trial."

The Counsel for the appellant had laid stress on the words "...... aid it in
such enquiry or trial".  On the strength of these words, submissions were made
that these statements can be used for the limited purpose of testing whether the
version of the prosecution is bonafide or believable or not, but it is pertinent
to note that Section 172(2) Cr.P.C. specifically says "...not as evidence in the
case".  This is a clear bar of using such material as evidence in the case.  The
proviso to Section 162(1) Cr.P.C. specifies :
Provided that when any witness is called for the prosecution in such inquiry or
trial whose statement has been reduced into writing as aforesaid, any part of
his statement, if duly proved, may be used by the accused, and with the
permission of the Court, by the prosecution, to contradict such witness in the
manner provided by Section 145 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872); and
when any part of such statement is so used, any part thereof may also be used in
the re-examination of such witness, but for the purpose only of explaining any
matter referred to in his cross-examination."

Section 145 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 dealing with Cross-examination as
to previous statements in writing reads :
"A witness may be cross-examined as to previous statements made by him in  
writing or reduced into writing, and relevant to matters in question, without
such writing being shown to him, or being proved; but, if it is intended to
contradict him by the writing, his attention must, before the writing can be
proved, be called to those parts of it which are to be used for the purpose of
contradicting him."

In TAHSILDAR SINGH Vs. STATE OF U.P. 3 the Apex Court observed (per majority) :    
"The procedure prescribed for contradicting a witness by his previous statement
made during investigation, is that, if it is intended to contradict him by the
writing, his attention must, before the writing can be proved, be called to
those parts of it which are to be used for the purpose of contradicting him. The
proviso to Section 162 only enables the accused to make use of such statement to
contradict a witness in the manner provided by Section 145 of the Evidence Act.
It would be doing violence to the language of the proviso if the said statement
be allowed to be used for the purpose of cross-examining a witness within the
meaning of the first part of Section 145 of the Evidence Act.  The argument that
it would not be possible to invoke the second part of Section 145 of the
Evidence Act without putting relevant questions under the first part thereof
cannot be accepted.  The second part of Section 145 of the Evidence Act clearly
indicates the simple procedure to be followed.  To illustrate : A says in the
witness box that B stabbed Contract; before the police he had stated that D
stabbed C.  His attention can be drawn to that part of the statement made before
the police which contradicts his statement in the witness-box.  If he admits his
previous statement, no further proof is necessary; if he does not admit, the
practice generally followed is to admit it subject to proof by the police
officer.  On the other hand, if the witness is asked "did you say before the
police-officer that you saw a gas light ?" and he answers "yes", and then the
statement which does not contain such recital is put to him as contradiction,
the procedure involves two fallacies:  one is, it enables the accused to elicit
by a process of cross-examination what the witness stated before the police
officer.  If a police-officer did not make a record of a witness's statement,
his entire statement could be brought on record.  This procedure, therefore,
contravenes the express provision of Section 162 of the Code.  The second
fallacy is that there is no self-contradiction of the primary statement made in
the witness-box, for the witness has yet not made on the stand any assertion at
all which can serve as the basis.  The contradiction, under the section, should
be between what a witness asserted in the witness box and what he stated before
the police-officer, and not between what he said he had stated before the
police-officer and what he actually made before him.  In such a case the
question could not be put at all; only questions to contradict can be put and
the question here posed does not contradict; it leads to an answer which is
contradicted by the police statement."

In NARAYANAN Vs. KRISHNAN 4 it was held :     

"Even if case diary statements are treated as part of police diaries Section
172(2) of the Code authorizes a criminal Court to send for police diaries and
use the diaries not as evidence in a case but to aid the enquiry or trial.  In
other words, even police diaries can be used only to the limited extent of
aiding an enquiry or trial.  In the course of taking aid from a police diary a
criminal Court is not justified in reading confessions and statements found
therein and using such material to disbelieve the prosecution case or the
defence case."

In STATE Vs. AMMINI 5 the Full Bench of Kerala High Court at para-57 held :
"The Sessions Judge adopted another method to scrutinize the confession.  He
made a meticulous comparison of Ext.P.40 with the statement of the fourth
accused recorded by the police during investigation which is incorporated in the
Case Diary file.  The Sessions Judge traced out one or two minor discrepancies
and blew them up out of proportion and observed that they are "significant
omissions which in my view are of some material consequence".  One such  
discrepancy is that the accused mentioned 9-6-1980 as the date of visiting
Merly's house, whereas the date 10-6-1980 is shown in the statement of the
police.  Another omission is that he mentioned the name of Chinnappan (PW-27) in
his statement to the police whereas he did not mention that name in Ext.P.40
(But it is clear that he referred to PW-27 in that statement).  The method
adopted by the Sessions Judge is one forbidden by law.  Section 162 of the Code
imposes the inhibition that no statement made by a person to the investigating
officer during investigation shall be used for any purpose except as provided in
that Section.  But the Sessions Judge appeared to be under the impression that
he can do so by virtue of Section 172(2) of the Code.  That sub-section reads as
follows :

"Any Criminal Court may send for the police diaries of a case under inquiry or
trial in such Court, and may use such diaries, not as evidence in the case, but
to aid it in such inquiry or trial".

Sub-section (1) enjoins on the police officer making the investigation to enter
his proceedings in the investigation day by day, in a diary "setting forth the
time at which the information reached him, the time at which he began and closed
his investigation, the place or places visited by him and a statement of the
circumstances ascertained through his investigation".  The diary mentioned in
Section 172(1) and the statements recorded under Section 161(3) of the Code are
obviously different.  Statements recorded under Section 161(3) are covered by
the sweep of inhibition contained in Section 162 of the Code.  The prohibition
imposed in Section 162 cannot be circumvented by resort to Section 172(2) of the
Code.  The two are different records, though the statements recorded under
Section 161(3) and the diary envisaged in Section 172(1) may together be
incorporated in the same file which police call "Case diary File", for the sake
of convenience.  That apart, Section 172(2) itself embodies an inhibition that
the diary envisaged in that section is not to be used as evidence in the case.
The only use of the diary is "to aid" the Court in the trial, to ascertain the
time at which the investigation was begun and closed on each day, the places
visited by the officer, and the circumstances ascertained through investigation.
It is not a substitute for evidence in the case for the purpose of making a
comparison with the testimonies of witnesses or judicial dying declarations or
judicial confessions.  The Sessions Judge by adopting the above method had
committed an illegality".

In EMPEROR Vs. NAJIBUDDIN 6 a Division Bench of Patna High Court held :    
"Section 162 Cr.P.C. is an application of the rule against hear say evidence
contained in Section 60 of the Evidence Act.  However, it does more than restate
the rule contained in Section 60 Evidence Act because by enacting that no
statement made to a police officer, or any record thereof, shall be used "for
any purpose at any enquiry or trial" it repeals, by implication Section 157
Evidence Act, so far as concerns statements made to a police officer in the
course of an investigation.  Hence it prevents a statement made to an
investigating police officer, or any record thereof, from being used, either by
the prosecution or the defence, for the purpose of corroborating the testimony
given at the trial, by the person who made the statement to the investigating
officer."

It may be that Section 161 Cr.P.C. statements marked as Exs.D-4 to D-6 of these
witnesses whose statements were said to have been recorded by the Police may be  
beneficial to the defence but in view of the clear bar imposed the same cannot
be used as evidence and the learned Judge in the considered opinion of this
Court had committed an illegality in getting those statements marked as D-series
though it is impermissible in law since those witnesses were not examined during
trial and hence the question of contradicting those witnesses with these
statements would not arise.
Ex.P-1 given by PW-1 reads as hereunder : 
"I am to submit that I am resident of Sharmanagar, Karimnagar and living by
artisan.  I performed my elder daughter Sunitha's marriage with one Ramagiri
Santhosh Kumar s/o. Lingaiah, R/o. Moolasla (v), occ: RMP on 23-3-2000.  I
agreed to pay Rs.85,000/- as dowry. Of them, I paid Rs.25,000/- at the time of
engagement and remaining Rs.35,000/- and 4 tolas of gold paid in the marriage.
I gave other household articles all worth Rs.25,000/- and they lived marital
life happily for some days.  Thereafter, my son-in-law started harassment
against my daughter for additional dowry, and my daughter informed the same to
me when she came to my house at Karimnagar.  My daughter has further informed  
that her in-laws and sister-in-law also harassing her for additional dowry of
Rs.30,000/-.  In the month of September, my daughter and son-in-law came to my 
house, and my son-in-law demanded me to give Rs.5000/-.  Accordingly I got
Rs.2000/- from my younger brother - Ravikumar and Rs.3000/- from my brother-in-
law - Venkateswarlu and gave to my son-on-law.  On the occasion of Dasara
festival my wife and son went to get my daughter for festival. Then also my son-
in-law demanded my wife and son for additional dowry and refused to send my
daughter along with them.  The in-laws of my daughter i.e., his father and
mother came to my house and also demanded for additional dowry.  Again on 25-10- 
2000, I went to Moolasala for inviting my son-in-law and daughter to my house
for Deepavali festival, but my son-on-law refused to attend the festival at my
house and demanded to present colour T.V.  I prayed my son-in-law that it is not
possible to get colour T.V. and agreed to give a black and white T.V. after ten
days and get my daughter to Karimnagar. 
On 7-11-2000 while myself and my wife were in the house at about 4.00 my sister
by name Radhika came to my house and informed that Sunitha was fell ill-health
and asked us to go to Moolasala and told us that the above information was
conveyed to my sister over telephone by one V.Sathyanarayana, who is related to
me.  On such information, I along with my inmates went to Moolasala (v), found
my daughter's dead body lying in front of the house and noticed one black mark
found around the neck on skin.  On enquiry my son-in-law told that at about 11
a.m. she had committed suicide by 'Hanging', but in fact they killed my daughter
by harassing mentally and physically.  Therefore justice may be done to me".

PW-1 deposed before the Court that the marriage of the deceased was celebrated 
on 23-3-2000 and she died on 7-11-2000 by committing suicide by hanging due to
demand of dowry.  PW-1 also deposed that at the time of marriage he had promised 
to give an amount of Rs.85,000/- as dowry and at the time of  betrothal ceremony
he paid Rs.25,000/- and at the time of marriage he gave Rs.35,000/- and gold of
four tolas and presented household articles worth Rs.25,000/-.  After marriage
the couple lived cordially for about three months and about four months after
the marriage, the deceased and the accused came to our house together and the 
accused demanded Rs.15,000/-, but he told him that he was not having any amount  
but however he paid Rs.5000/- taking from his elder brother and brother-in-law
and thereupon the deceased and the son-in-law of PW-1 left the place and went
away.  This witness also deposed that at the time of Dasara festival his wife
and son went to the house of the accused for inviting the deceased and the
accused and the accused appear to have told them that he would send the deceased  
when he was paid Rs.30,000/- and thereupon his wife told his daughter be sent
and that they could make such a demand when they come to their house and on her  
saying so the accused sent the deceased along with his son.  On the following
day of Dasara festival parents and sister of accused came to their house and
demanded Rs.30,000/- saying that they had to discharge some debts and he  
collected his relatives and in their presence expressed that whatever the amount
he agreed to pay had been already paid and that it was not possible for him to
pay further amount and requested not to harass the deceased and thereupon they 
went away.  At the time of Deepavali festival he went to the house of the
accused for inviting the deceased and accused for Deepavali festival and the
accused demanded colour T.V. and thereupon PW-1 promised to give black and white   
T.V. within ten days and thereupon they went away.  However, in the meanwhile
the deceased died having committed suicide and on        7-11-2000 at 4 p.m. PW-
1's sister received message on phone to the effect that the deceased was not
doing well.  Then they went there and found the deceased lying on a mat on the
ground and there were injuries on the neck and the left hand palm.  PW-1 filed
Ex.P-1 complaint before Peddapalli Police Station.  This witness deposed that he
is a native of Karimnagar proper and hence the deceased was living at Karimnagar
and the accused is a resident of Moolasala and the alliance of the deceased with
the accused was fixed at the instance of one lady by name Rajeswaramma, their 
neighbour.  Even in cross-examination PW-1 had deposed about certain details
relating to the payment of amounts.  This witness also deposed that after
marriage they were inviting the couple and some times they were going on their
own accord and PW-1 also deposed that he did not make an attempt to have any  
panchayat held through his community people nor he had informed the same to the 
neighbour Rajeswaramma or to anybody in the village of the accused.  This
witness denied the suggestion that in the complaint report he got written that
the accused had demanded Rs.15,000/- and about the fact that the accused stating 
to his wife that he would send the deceased when he was paid Rs.30,000/- and
this witness also deposed that he got written in the complaint report that the
accused had killed the deceased.  He further deposed that while his statement
under Section 161 Cr.P.C. was being recorded though he stated that he had paid
Rs.5000/- he had not stated in the manner recorded as in Ex.D-1.  He further
deposed that it is true that in his statement under Section 161 Cr.P.C. he did
not state about the injury being present on the neck and throat of the deceased.
He denied the suggestion that the alliance was not to the liking of the deceased
and she was got married by force and that is the reason why she committed
suicide.
PW-2 in substance had supported the version of PW-1 and no doubt there are 
certain minor variations in between the evidence of   PW-1 and PW-2.  PW-3 is
the brother of PW-2 who no doubt deposed about the details but most of evidence
of this witness is of hear-say nature since he had deposed what he heard and
this witness also deposed that the alliance was fixed through one Rajeswaramma
and after marriage he never visited the house of the accused and he has no
personal knowledge about the nature of the relation of the accused and he
deposed about Ex.P-1 and this witness also deposed that it is not true to say
that he deposed to police as in Ex.D-2.  Several suggestions put to this witness
also had been denied.  This is the actual evidence available on record relating
to the demand of dowry or additional dowry or additional amount made by the
accused and the relatives of the accused.
The evidence of PW-7 is only to the limited extent that the accused is a
practicing R.M.P. and the deceased died about two years ago and on the day of
incident since he was having some pain in the throat part he went the house of
the accused for medicine at about 9 a.m. and the wife of the accused i.e., the
deceased was lying on a cot and was weeping and when he asked the accused for   
getting his medicine the accused replied that he was not in good mood and hence
he went away and while he was going away the accused accompanied him to go to   
calls of nature and when they were returning he heard some cries and when he
went to the house of the accused the deceased was found lying and he learnt that
the deceased died having committed suicide by hanging.  This is the evidence of
PW-7. 
PW-4 is the Photographer who had taken photos of the deceased.  Exs.P-2, P-3 and  
P-4 are negatives and Exs.P-5, P-6 and P-7 are the positives.  PW-5 is the Civil
Assistant Surgeon who had deposed about the injuries and issuance of Exs.P-8 and 
P-9 and issued the opinion after receipt of report from Director, Forensic
Science Laboratory, Warangal under Ex.P-10 and opined that the cause of death of
the deceased was due to asphyxia due to hanging.  The evidence of PW-6 is to the
limited extent that he went to the house of the accused for extending wedding
invitation of his son and he found the deceased lying on a mat and the body had
been covered by cloth.  He removed the cloth and had a look at the body and
noticed the presence of injury on the front part of the neck or throat and then
he informed to Radhika on phone since she is related to him.  In cross-
examination PW-6 deposed that though he told that there was injury on the neck
part he did not state as "vuri vesukunnatlu" marked as in Ex.D-3.  PW-8 deposed
about M.R.O. conducting inquest and recording the statements of the relatives of
the deceased and drafting of panchanama Ex.P-11 and also seizure of saree MO-1  
and they gave opinion that the deceased committed suicide by hanging.  PW-9 was 
examined in relation to Ex.P-12 and MO-1.  PW-10 is the M.R.O. who received 
requisition from the S.I. of Police for conducting inquest over the dead body of
the deceased.  This witness deposed about Ex.P-11 and also that they had noticed
the presence of injury on the neck or throat part and panchas expressed opinion
that the deceased could have died committing suicide by hanging.  He recorded
the statements of two persons marked as Exs.P-13 and P-14 and they are the 
parents of the deceased and after writing their statements he obtained their
signatures as well as of the witnesses.  The signatures of the parents are
Exs.P-13(a) and P-14(a) and his signatures are Exs.P-13(b) and P-14(b).  No
doubt this witness specifically denied the suggestion that PW-1 and PW-2 had not
made any statement as in Exs.P-13 and P-14 respectively. 
PW-12 is the S.I. of Police who had received Ex.P-1 and registered
Cr.No.170/2000 and sent express F.I.R. marked as Ex.P-18 and examined and   
recorded the statement of PW-1 under Section 161 Cr.P.C. and made requisition to
M.R.O. for holding inquest and PW-11 had taken the further charge of the matter.
PW-11 is the Investigating Officer who had deposed about all the other details
of investigation.  He also deposed that he had not investigated regarding the
fact who were present at the time of alliance and at the time of writing Lagna
Patrika and he had not seized any photos of marriage function.  This witness
further deposed that he had not examined and recorded the statements of
neighbours of PW-1 and PW-2 and he admitted that he had examined and recorded   
the statements of Agaiah (LW-5), Laxmi (LW-6) and Narahari (LW-7), all residents
of Mulasala village who had deposed in a particular fashion and their statements
were recorded as Exs.D-4 to D-6.  These are all statements recorded by him under
Section 161 Cr.P.C. and these witnesses were examined during trial and hence
Exs.D-4 to D-6 cannot be used as evidence even if such statements are beneficial
to the accused.  It was specifically suggested to this witness that PW-3 was
examined after 15 days after the death of the deceased but however the same was
denied and the other contradictions were put to this witness and also to PW-12.
On the strength of this evidence the learned Judge recorded the findings and
ultimately held the appellant/accused guilty of the offences charged with.  No
doubt, the learned Additional Public Prosecutor also placed reliance on certain
decisions (1) and (2) supra.  Delay in examination of eye witnesses by the
police may not be generally fatal but there may be circumstances where the
Investigating Officer had done the same deliberately and in such a case it may
be proved to be fatal (See: G.B.PATEL Vs. STATE OF MAHARASHTRA 7).  However in      
the light of the specific denial by PW-11 this aspect need not be discussed
further.
It is pertinent to note that though specifically it was deposed that the
relatives of the accused went to the house of PW-1 and had made a demand  
relating to Rs.30,000/- for discharging the debts, except the accused none had
been arrayed as accused and the appellant/sole accused alone had been 
prosecuted.  PW-1 is the father of the deceased and PW-2 is the mother of the
deceased.  The whole evidence of PW-3 is just hearsay.  PW-1 deposed about what  
had been communicated to him. No doubt PW-1 deposed about the demand of amount      
of Rs.15,000/- straight by the accused and he told him that he was not having
money but however paid Rs.5000/- taking it from his elder brother and brother-
in-law.  No doubt this witness deposed about the demand made by the parents and 
sister of the accused for Rs.30,000/- to discharge some debts and this witness
also deposed about the promise to supply T.V.  This is the evidence available on
record.  This evidence coupled with the evidence of PW-2, if can be taken to be
sufficient for the purpose of satisfying the ingredients of Sections 498-A and
304-B IPC and also Section 4 of the Dowry Prohibition Act, is the question.  It
is pertinent to note that that portion of the evidence what had been
communicated to PW-1 by his wife (PW-2) would be hear say in nature.  No doubt 
PW-2 also was examined.  It is also pertinent to note that relating to direct
demand which the accused said to have made in relation to Rs.15,000/- there is
no mention of the same in Ex.P-1.  Apart from this aspect of the matter, his
elder brother and brother-in-law from whom it is said PW-1 had borrowed the
amount and paid to the accused also had not been examined.  Rajeswaramma, the   
lady who had settled the alliance, even according to the version of the
prosecution, also had not been examined.  The evidence of PW-7, the independent
witness, is only to the limited extent that the deceased was lying on the cot
weeping and when he asked the accused for medicine he replied that he was not in
good mood and except this PW-7 knows nothing about the other affairs. PW-1 also 
deposed that never he made an attempt to convene any panchayat.  It is no doubt
true that Exs.D-4 to D-6 cannot be relied upon as evidence since these are
Section 161 Cr.P.C. statements of witnesses who were not examined during the 
course of trial.  But the evidence of the Investigating Officer, PW-11, is
available to the effect that he had recorded the statements of witnesses Agaiah
(LW-5), Laxmi (LW-6) and Narahari (LW-7), all residents of Mulasala village.  It
is pertinent to note that none of these witnesses had been examined and no other
independent evidence also is forthcoming.  No doubt submissions at length were
made by the learned Additional Public Prosecutor that in cases of this nature
such independent evidence would not be available and the presumption under
Section 113-B of Indian Evidence Act, 1872 may have to be drawn in aid of the
prosecution.  In the light of the total absence of independent evidence relating
to dowry harassment especially in the light of the discrepancies between Ex.P-1
and the evidence of PW-1, the ingredients of Section 304-B IPC, in the
considered opinion of this Court, had not been satisfied.  The fact that the
deceased committed suicide by hanging cannot be in any controversy in the light
of the medical evidence, but it cannot be said to be in relation to the demand
of dowry as such.  These are all problems more concerned with domestic quarrels
within the four walls and independent evidence which would be available may be
limited  but at the same time equally there should be legally acceptable
evidence before the Court for basing the conviction.  Hence this Court is of the
considered opinion that the conviction and sentence imposed under Section 304-B
IPC and also under Section 4 of the Dowry Prohibition Act cannot be sustained
and the same are therefore hereby set aside.
It is no doubt true that this Court is of the considered opinion that the
ingredients of Section 304-B IPC had not been established.  But, on the material
available on record this Court is of the considered opinion that the accused is
liable to be convicted under Section 498-A IPC only.  In HIRALAL Vs. STATE 8 it
was held that the question is whether the case under Section 498-A IPC has been
made out even if the accusations under Section 304-B IPC fail and it is to be
noted that Sections 304-B IPC and 498-A IPC cannot be held to be mutually
inclusive and these provisions deal with two distinct offences and it is true
that cruelty is a common essential to both the Sections and that has to be
proved and the explanation under Section 498-A IPC gives the meaning of 'cruelty
and in Section 304-B IPC there is no such explanation about the meaning of
cruelty but having regard to the common background of these offences it has to
be taken that the meaning of cruelty or harassment is same as prescribed in the
explanation to Section 498-A IPC under which cruelty by itself amounts to an
offence.  It was further held that under Section 304-B IPC it is dowry death
that is punishable and such death should have been occurred within 7 years of
marriage and no such period is mentioned in Section 498-A IPC and a person
charged and acquitted under Section 304-B IPC can be convicted under Section 
498-A IPC without that charge being there, if such a case is made out.
In the light of the evidence of PW-1 and PW-2 relating to the demands made by
the relatives of the accused and the accused also in relation to T.V., the
ingredients of Section 498-A IPC are attracted.  Hence, in the facts and
circumstances of the case, the conviction imposed by the learned Judge under
Section 498-A IPC is hereby confirmed but the sentence of Rigorous Imprisonment
for a period of two years is modified to Rigorous Imprisonment for one year.
However, the fine of Rs.500/-, in default to under Simple Imprisonment for a
period of one month, is maintained.
The Criminal Appeal is partly allowed to the extent indicated above.  It is
brought to the notice of this Court that the appellant/accused had already
undergone the modified sentence imposed by this Court.  If so, it is needless to
say that the appellant/accused shall be set at liberty forthwith after computing
the period of imprisonment in accordance with law.

?1 AIR 1991 S.C. 40 
2 (1980) 1 SCC 585 
3 AIR 1959 S.C. 1012 
4 1981 Crl.L.J. 563
5 AIR 1988 Kerala 1 (FB)
6 AIR 1933 Patna 589 
7 AIR 1979 S.C. 135 
8 AIR 2003 S.C. 2865 = 2003 Crl.L.J. 3711


