

THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE P.S. NARAYANA        
Criminal Appeal No.1276 of 1999 
& 
Criminal Appeal No.1444 of 1999 

19-11-2004 

Smt.Thahera Begum   

State of A.P.
Represented by Public Prosecutor 

Counsel for appellant   : Sri Suresh Reddy

Counsel for respondent : Additional Public Prosecutor

:COMMON JUDGMENT:       
        The accused were arrayed before the Court for the charge of dowry death
and were convicted.  Hence the present Criminal Appeals.
        Crl.A.No.1276/99 is filed by A-2 as against the Judgment in S.C.No.155/96
on the file of Additional Sessions Judge, Mahabubnagar and Crl.A.No.1444/99 is
preferred by A-1 as against the self-same Judgment and hence both the Appeals
are being disposed of by this Common Judgment.  
        Sri Suresh Reddy, the learned Counsel representing the appellant/A-1 in
Crl.A.No.1444/99 would contend that the ingredients of Section 304-B IPC had not
been satisfied.  The learned Counsel also would submit that the mere fact that
the deceased was not allowed to attend birthday function of PW-1's grand son
would not amount to harassment or cruelty.  The learned Counsel also would
submit that demand for cycle or fan also had not been substantiated.  The
learned Counsel also would submit that even otherwise the testimony available on
record is only interested testimony and also the very nature of evidence which
had been adduced is not legally acceptable so as to establish the guilt or
harassment for the purpose of satisfying the ingredients of the offence and
hence acquittal may have to be recorded.
Sri Praveen Kumar, the learned Counsel representing the appellant/A-2 would
submit that A-2 is the married sister of A-1 and she has nothing to do with the
family of A-1 and there are no independent witnesses at all to speak about the
harassment and A-1 is a handicapped person and because of frustration the
deceased could have committed suicide and there is no independent evidence 
relating to the alleged demand made by the appellants and hence the ingredients
of Section 304-B IPC are not satisfied.
Per contra the learned Additional Public Prosecutor would submit that the
evidence of PW-1 to PW-13 had been discussed at length by the learned Judge and  
conviction had been recorded and in view of the clear findings recorded by the
learned Judge there cannot be any doubt whatsoever that the prosecution was able
to establish the guilt of the accused.
Heard the Counsel. 
The case of the prosecution is that the deceased Parveena Begum was married to 
A-1 on 18-2-1993 who was a resident of Mahabubnagar.  Jabbar and Maqsooda Begum     
are the parents of the deceased.  According to the version of the prosecution
Jabbar, father of the deceased, gave Rs.5000/- cash, one tola gold and two masas
gold and 11/2  tola silver along with household articles as dowry and he also
promised to give cycle and a table fan some time after the marriage, but due to
financial difficulties there was delay in giving those articles.  A-2 is the
sister of A-1 and is living in a portion of the house of A-1 and she started
harassing and torturing the deceased for not getting the table fan and cycle
from her parents as promised.  Noticing this harassment, the father of the
deceased promised to send them as early as possible. Even then also A-1 and A-2 
did not listen and continued their cruelty against the deceased.  On 19-6-1993,
Jabbar, the father of the deceased, came to Mahabubnagar to the house of the
first son in connection with the birth day of his grandson.  He invited his
daughter Parveena Begum, the deceased, and his son-in-law/A-1 to the function.
But A-1 deliberately refused to come and did not allow Parveena Begum to
function on that night.  Sometime thereafter one M.A.Raheem, a neighbour of the
house of A-1 and A-2 and brother-in-law of LW-3 M.A.Qayyum came and informed   
that smoke is coming out of the house of A-1.  Then the father of the deceased,
Jabbar and his sons and his other relations went to the house of A-1 and found
Parveena Begum with burn injuries and she was lying on the floor and while they
were taking her to hospital she died on the way.
The father of the deceased, Jabbar presented a written complaint to S.H.O. II
Town Police Station and Cr.No.114/93 was registered under Section 304-B IPC. 
The Mandal Revenue Officer conducted inquest over the dead body in the presence 
of panchas.  The case was numbered as P.R.C.No.17/95 on the file of Judicial
First Class Magistrate, Mahabubnagar and the same was committed to the Court of 
Session. 
The learned Judge recorded the evidence of PW-1 to PW-13 and Ex.P-1 to P-7 and  
M.Os.1 to 7 were marked.  PW-1, the father of the deceased deposed about the 
details of marriage and demand of amount of Rs.5000/- cash and demand of cycle 
and fan which he promised to give within five months after marriage.  Two months
after the marriage his daughter visited his house for Bakrid festival and she
asked him to give cycle and fan. She stated that the accused were forcing to get
them and he requested six months time as he did not discharge the debts
contracted at the time of marriage.  This witness also further deposed about
inviting his daughter and son-in-law to attend the birthday function of his
grand son.  He was again informed that the accused were demanding fan and cycle 
and they were harassing.  This witness also deposed about the birthday function
and his son requesting A-1 to send his daughter, the deceased.  The function was
celebrated in the in-laws house of his son at Mahabubnagar and the house of his
daughter, the deceased, is at a distance of 25 yards from the in-laws house of
his eldest son and they waited till 9.30 p.m. for the arrival of the deceased,
but A-1 did not send her.  Some time thereafter, the brother-in-law of his son
went out for calls of nature and noticed some smoke coming out of the house of
A-1 and they rushed to the house of A-1 and as the door was locked from inside
they forcibly opened the door and found his daughter in flames and she was
almost completely burnt and she was breathing and while they were taking her on
a rickshaw to the Government hospital, Mahabubnagar she died on the way in the
hospital compound.  PW-1 also deposed that when he visited the house of A-1 the
deceased was burning in one room and A-1 and A-2 and their father were in
another room in the same house and he gave complaint Ex.P-1 against A-1 and A-2. 
PW-1 was examined by police.  A-2 was residing in the same house along with her 
children on the date of the offence.  In cross-examination this witness deposed
that on 23-10-1993 A-1's father gave Rs.5000/- to him in the presence of police
and he passed a receipt   Ex.D-1.  At this stage of cross-examination the
learned Advocate for the defence showed a letter dated 12-12-1993 and put the
contents of the letter to PW-1 and he denied his signatures on the paper and
said that the signature on the paper is similar to his signature and he admitted
his signatures on two papers.  Ex.D-2 is the paper showing receipt of watch.
Ex.D-3 is the list of articles received by the witness.  Ex.D-2 is dated    4-7-
1993 and Ex.D-3 is also dated 4-7-1993.  This witness deposed that he did not
mention in Ex.P-1 that his daughter committed suicide and he did not entertain
such a doubt at that time.  This witness also denied the other suggestions.
PW-2 is the mother of the deceased who had corroborated PW-1 in all material
particulars.  PW-3 is the brother of the deceased who also deposed about the
demand of fan and cycle and the other things in detail.  PW-4 also belonging to
the same family had supported the version of PW-1 to PW-3. PW-5 is the Civil
Assistant Surgeon who had conducted post mortem examination over the dead body.   
The certificate issued by him is marked as Ex.P-2. In cross-examination this
witness, PW-5, deposed that there is no difference between homicidal death and
suicidal death in case of burns and he mentioned that charring was due to
burning of body with kerosene and in this case there is scope for suicidal death
also.
PW-6 is the Mandal Revenue officer who deposed about the securing of panchas and  
conducting inquest over the dead body under cover of Ex.P-3.  PW-7 deposed that
he is the neighbour of A-1 and A-2 and A-1 came and informed him that his wife
was completely burnt.  He took A-1 to his brother's house and they were just
returning at that time and PW-1 and PW-2 and others were bringing the wife of A-
1 in a rickshaw to go to hospital.  PW-7 further deposed that he heard that the
wife of A-1 died on the way.  PW-8 deposed that his house is at a distance of 20
feet to that of A-1 and A-2.  A-2 resides in front portion of the house of A-1.
The portions of A-1 and A-2 are joint and about six years back at about 10.30
p.m. he heard cries in front of the house of A-1 and at that time he went there
and saw the wife of A-1 covered with bed sheets and she was taken to the
hospital and A-1 also followed the rickshaw.  PW-8 was examined by police.
PW-9 also deposed that he heard cries from the house of A-1 and the parents of
the deceased were taking her to the Government hospital for burn injuries and
she died on the way.  In cross-examination this witness deposed that A-1
followed the rickshaw to the hospital.
PW-10 was examined in relation to the inquest report Ex.P-3.  PW-11 was examined  
in relation to scene of offence panchanama Ex.P-4 and Ex.P-5 is the signature
and MOs.1 to 7 were recovered under the cover of Ex.P-4 at the house of A-1.
PW-13 is the C.I. of Police who worked as S.I. II Town, Mahabubnagar Police
Station at the relevant point of time who had registered Cr.No.114/93.  PW-12 is
the Investigating Officer who had deposed about all the details of investigation
and also filing of the charge sheet.
Ex.P-1 given by PW-1 reads as hereunder : 
"I, M.A.Jabbar, s/o. M.A.Razak, age 55 yrs, Retired Attender, r/o. Makthal, to
state that the I had a daughter by name Parveena Begum, aged 19 yrs, I got her
marriage performed on 18-2-93 with Sri Afthab Ahmed Khan s/o. Bashaarath Ahmed   
Khan, age 30 yrs, Lorry driver, s/o. Saddalagundu, Mahabubnagar.  At the time of
marriage I have presented a dowry of Rs.5000-00, one tula and 2 maasas of gold,
41/2 tolas of silver and other utensils.  I could not give the cycle and a table
fan due to financial difficulties and promised to give the same, later on.  I
sent my daughter to her parents-in-law after the marriage.  For some days my
son-in-law and his parents and others I have looked after her very well.  When
my daughter was taken to my house for Bakrid festival (2nd June) my daughter
complained that her husband and elder sister-in-law by name Tahara Begum have 
started to harass her demanding as to why her father is not giving the cycle and
fan as agreed.  I convinced her saying that I will give said articles later on
and sent her to in-laws' house.  On 12-6-93 my son Qayyum left for Mahabubnagar
to attend the marriage of his younger sister-in-law, scheduled on 21-6-93.  The
in-laws' house of my daughter and my son are adjacent to each other.  I, along
with my family members came to Mahabubnagar yesterday i.e., 19-6-93 at about 1  
PM, for attending the birthday function of my grandson, as my grand son was at
the house of the parents-in-law of my son.  Myself and my son went to my
daughters house and requested my son-in-law to send her to the function of my
grand son.  But my son-in-law did not send her.  My daughter again complained us
that her husband and elder sister-in-law are harassing her for the cycle and
fan.  At about 10 PM the younger brother-in-law of my son, by name Raheem came  
and informed my son that some smoke is coming out from the house of my daughter  
and on that myself and my son rushed to her house and found my daughter with 
complete burn injuries and immediately we shifted her to the hospital, but on
the way, at about 11 PM she died.  My daughter committed suicide due to the
harassment made by her husband Afthab Ahmed Khan and her elder sister-in-law  
Tahera Begum, for additional dowry and therefore I request you to take necessary
action against them."

Even as per the evidence of PW-1 to PW-4, their evidence relating to the demand
made by the accused relating to cycle and fan is hear say in nature.  A-2 is the
sister of A-1 and merely because she was residing in a portion of the same
house, automatically it cannot be said that she was in any way responsible for
the death of the deceased unless there is clear and acceptable evidence in that
regard.  From the nature of evidence of PW-1, it is doubtful how in fact the
incident happened.  It is also pertinent to take the conduct of A-1 into
consideration in this regard.  The evidence of PW-8 and PW-9, the persons of
locality, would assume lot of importance since A-1 also followed the rickshaw on
which the deceased was being taken to the hospital.  On an over all appreciation
of facts and circumstances, on the mere fact that the deceased was not sent to a
particular birthday function it cannot be inferred that due to harassment or
cruelty she died.  PW-12, the Investigating Officer, deposed that the M.R.O.
recorded the statements of witnesses and he had taken the copies of the said
statement from the M.R.O. but he had not filed such statements into Court and
his investigation revealed that Parveena Begum, the deceased, committed suicide
and died.  In GANANATH PATTNAIK Vs. STATE OF ORISSA 1 where the prosecution        
witness deposed that prior to death the deceased woman had stated to the witness
that she was not treated well by her husband and in-laws for non-fulfilment of
balance dowry amount and the said witness further mentioned certain specific
acts of such ill-treatment allegedly stated to her by the deceased, it was held
that such evidence although admissible in respect of the offence under Section
304-B IPC by virtue of Section 32(1) of the Evidence Act, 1872, it is not
admissible for the offence under Section 498-A IPC.  On an over all appreciation
of the evidence available on record and also taking into consideration the
conduct of A-1, this Court is of the considered opinion that when the interested
testimony available before the Court appears to be more in the nature of hear-
say, on the strength of such evidence it cannot be said that the prosecution was
able to establish the guilt of the accused beyond all reasonable doubt.  It is
really unfortunate that not only A-1, A-2 the sister of A-1, also had been
convicted for the mere reason that she had been staying in the same house in a
different portion.  On a careful scrutiny of the evidence of the neighbours, the
possibility of the episode being accidental also cannot be totally ruled out.
Hence on the strength of the interested testimony recording conviction, in the
considered opinion of this Court, cannot be sustained.  Accordingly, the
findings recorded by the learned Judge are hereby set aside.
For the reasons recorded supra, the conviction and sentence recorded by the
learned Judge cannot be sustained and the same are hereby set aside.  The
Criminal Appeals are allowed.  The bail bonds of the appellants shall stand
cancelled.

?1 2002 SCC (Crl) 461 


