

THE HON'BLE SRI BILAL NAZKI, THE ACTING CHIEF JUSTICE         
Criminal Appeal No. 327 of 2003

30-06-2005 

Bejjanki Kishan

The State of A.P., rep. by Public Prosecutor.

For the Appellant :  MR.C.PRAVEEN KUMAR     

For the Respondent : PUBLIC PROSECUTOR      

:JUDGMENT : (Per Hon'ble Sri Bilal Nazki, ACJ)

        Heard learned senior counsel for the appellant and also the Public
Prosecutor and perused the record.
        The sole accused in Sessions Case No.749 of 2001 before the II Additional
Sessions Judge at Karimnagar, has filed this appeal, challenging the conviction
and sentence passed against him for the offences under Section 304-B of I.P.C.
and under Section 4 of Dowry Prohibition Act.  Under Section 304-B of I.P.C., he
has been sentenced to imprisonment for life and under Section 4 of the Dowry
Prohibition Act, he has been sentenced to one year imprisonment and he has been 
fined with Rs.1,000/-, in default, he has to undergo simple imprisonment for a
period of three months.
        On an allegation that the accused burnt his wife, charges were framed
against the accused for the offences under Sections 498-A, 302 and 304-B of
I.P.C. and under Section 4 of the Dowry Prohibition Act.  The accused pleaded
not guilty and claimed to be tried.  Prosecution examined 13 witnesses and
exhibited 18 documents.  Defence did not examine any witness. 
        The learned senior counsel for the appellant submits that the accused has
been acquitted of the charges under Sections 498-A and 302 of I.P.C., but was
convicted under Section 304-B of I.P.C. and Section 4 of Dowry Prohibition Act.
He submits that once a person was acquitted of the offence under Section 498-A
of I.P.C., he   could not be convicted under Section 304-B of I.P.C.  But we
have seen from the judgment of the trial Court that the learned Sessions Judge
was of the view that since he was convicting the accused under Section 304-B of
I.P.C., there was no need to convict the accused under Section 498-A of I.P.C.,
as according to him, Section 304-B of I.P.C. was a major offence.  We will not
have to deal with this argument in view of what we are going to hold now on the
basis of the evidence.
        There are two sets of main witnesses in this case.  PWs.1, 2 and 3 are
close relations of the deceased and prosecution has tried to establish through
their testimony that there had been harassment on account of demand for dowry
prior to the death of the deceased, by the accused.  PWs.4, 5 and 6 are the
witnesses, who have spoken about the occurrence.  The learned senior counsel
submits that there is nothing in the evidence of PWs.1, 2 and 3, which would
satisfy the requirement of Section 304-B of I.P.C. that there had been demand
for dowry immediately before the death of the deceased, that she was subjected
to cruelty or harassment in connection with any demand for dowry.  And
similarly, PWs.4, 5 and 6 have not spoken anything about the actual occurrence
and about the involvement of the accused in the offence.  As a matter of fact,
the testimony of these witnesses would show the conduct of the accused, who 
tried to save the deceased.  Before coming to the evidence in detail!
 , we are conscious that the ingredients of Section 304-B of I.P.C. are-
(1) the death should be unnatural,
(2) it should be within 7 years of the marriage, and
(3) there should be harassment or cruelty by husband or his relatives for or in
connection with any demand of dowry. 

If all these three ingredients are proved by the prosecution, then the onus
would be on the accused to show that he was not guilty.  But if any of the
ingredients of Section 304-B I.P.C. was not satisfied, then the conviction under
Section 304-B I.P.C. cannot be sustained.  In the present case, there is no
doubt that two ingredients are satisfied i.e. death of the deceased had occurred
within 7 years of the marriage and that the death was unnatural.  The
controversy is with regard to the third ingredient.  In view of this discussion,
we analyze the testimony of PWs.1, 2 and 3. 
        PW-1 is the cousin of the father of the deceased.  He stated that the
deceased was the daughter of Manda Balamallu, the complainant.  The father of
the deceased had two daughters and one son.  The deceased was the elder  
daughter.  The deceased had been given in marriage to the accused.  The deceased 
died three years before.  He stated that accused poured kerosene on her person
and set her on fire.  The marriage of the deceased had been celebrated four
months earlier to her death.  The father of the deceased had given to the
accused, some ornaments as well as cash of Rs.5,000/- at the time of marriage.
After the marriage, the couple lived cordially and happily for about 1 1/2 to 2
months.  Thereafter, the accused had been beating, ill-treating and harassing
the deceased, forcing her to get further amount towards dowry, since he was
himself not doing any work.  After two months, the accused shifted to Karimnagar
from his village and also brought the deceased with him.  Even !
 after shifting to Karimnagar, the accused was behaving with the deceased in the
same way, beating, ill-treating and harassing, forcing her to get money from her
parents.
The learned senior counsel appearing for the appellant submits that no source of
knowledge with regard to these allegations against the accused, was disclosed by
this witness.  He did not even say that this information was given by the
deceased or any demand was made to him by the accused, or in his presence to  
anybody related to the accused.  This witness further stated that four days
earlier to her death, the deceased was brought to the village by her father.
The accused came to the house of the father of the deceased to get back his
wife, but before that, the father of the deceased had taken away his daughter to
Karimnagar so that she was left at the house of the accused.  When the accused
came to the village, he created a scene and said why had his wife been brought
to the village.  He threatened that he would kill both of them i.e. the father
of the deceased and the deceased.  The persons present there, asked him to
behave properly and advised him to go back as his wif!
 e must have already reached his home.  Then he left the place.  This was an
occasion, where the accused had come to fetch his wife.  Had he been demanding 
any dowry and harassing the deceased on account of non-payment of dowry, then at 
this stage, in the presence of many people, he would have made a mention of his
demand, but at that time, he only complained as to why his wife had been brought
to the village by his father-in-law.  He did not make any demand with regard to
dowry.  Then he stated in his examination as to what happened thereafter, which
relates to the death of the deceased and has nothing to do with the demand of
dowry or harassment on account of dowry. 
        PW-2 is the sister of the deceased.  She also made a general omnibus
statement that the accused was ill-treating and harassing her sister, forcing to
get money from her parents.  She conceded that she had never visited her sister
and accused when they were living at Karimnagar.  There is no specific incident
mentioned by this witness when the accused made demand of a dowry.  She also   
referred to the incident, which happened at the house of the father of the
deceased when the accused came there to get his wife. Even she did not say that
the accused, at that point of time, made any demand for dowry.
        PW-3 also stated that on the day of incident, the father of the deceased
had, along with his daughter, gone to the house of the accused to Karimnagar.
But in the meantime, in the absence of the father of the deceased and deceased,
the accused came to the village and he behaved in a rude manner and created a
scene and shouted.  He was advised not to behave in such a manner and he left
the place.  He further stated that he learnt that the couple was not living
cordially as the accused was ill-treating and harassing the deceased for getting
more amount of dowry.  This statement was also not substantiated as to where
from he got this knowledge.  This is merely a hearsay evidence and even he has
not stated from whom he had heard.  Therefore, we agree with the learned senior
counsel for the appellant that there is no evidence on record to show that there
was harassment on account of demand of dowry immediately prior to the death. 
Therefore, the important ingredient of Section 3!
 04-B I.P.C. was not satisfied.  Therefore, in our view, the appellant could
have not been convicted under Section 304-B I.P.C.
        Then comes another set of witnesses PWs.4, 5 and 6, who were present at  
the place of occurrence around the time of occurrence.  These witnesses merely
stated that the accused and deceased were quarrelling with each other.  On the
other hand they also testified that the accused was seen extinguishing the fire
when the deceased was on a varandah outside her house during the night.  Accused 
also made arrangements to take the deceased to a hospital at Karimnagar, where 
he was advised to take the deceased to a better hospital at warangal.  He did
not have money to shift the deceased, but he borrowed an amount of Rs.200/- from
PW-4.  The learned counsel submits that this conduct of the appellant shows that
he    had not committed the offence for which he was charged.  The learned
Counsel further submits that since PWs.4, 5 and 6 have spoken nothing about the
dowry or demand for dowry or harassment on account of demand for dowry, their
evidence may not at all be relevant because t!
 he accused had already been acquitted of the offence under Section 302 I.P.C.
We agree with the learned counsel for the appellant.  Since we have held that
there was no evidence to suggest that there was demand for dowry at any stage by
the accused, therefore the conviction under Section 4 of Dowry Prohibition Act
can also not be sustained.
        For these reasons, we allow the appeal, set aside the conviction and
sentence passed by the trial Court.  The appellant shall be set at liberty
forthwith, if not required in any other case.  Appellant is entitled for refund
of fine amount paid, if any.

