

THE HONOURABLE Dr. JUSTICE G. YETHIRAJULU          
Criminal Revision Case No.80 OF 2002  

25-04-2005 

Anumaladasu Venkat Rao   

State of A.P. represented by
Public Prosecutor,
High Court of A.P

Counsel for petitioner:   Mr.E.S.Ramachandra Murthy

Counsel for respondent:The Public Prosecutor

:Order:

1. This revision case is preferred by accused No.1 in C.C.No.85 of 1995 on the
file of the II Additional Magistrate of First Class, Eluru.
2. The petitioner and 11 others were charged for the offence under Section 498-A
IPC.  They pleaded not guilty of the offence and claimed for trial.  The
prosecution in order to prove the guilt of the petitioner and others relied on
the evidence of P.Ws.1 to 4 and Ex.P.1-complaint given by P.W.1.  No oral or
documentary evidence was adduced on defence side.  The learned Magistrate after 
considering the evidence adduced by the prosecution found A.1, the petitioner
herein, guilty for the offence under Section 498-A IPC and sentenced to undergo
Rigorous Imprisonment for three years and to pay fine of Rs.500/-, in default to
suffer simple imprisonment for a period of six months.  The trial court
acquitted A.2 to A.12 from the charge under Section 498-A IPC.
3. The petitioner being aggrieved by the judgment of the learned Magistrate
preferred Criminal Appeal No.36 of 1998 on the file of the Sessions Judge, Eluru
and the learned Sessions Judge dismissed the appeal on 15-1-2002 confirming the
conviction, but modified the sentence imposed by the trial court to Rigorous
Imprisonment for one year, but did not disturb the fine amount imposed by the
trial court.  The petitioner being aggrieved by the judgment of the courts below
preferred this revision case challenging their validity and legality.
4. The story of the prosecution leading to the conviction of the petitioner is
briefly as follows:
5. P.W.1 is the wife of the petitioner.  Their marriage took place on 21-10-
1988.  At the time of marriage the parents of P.W.1 gave Rs.25,000/- to A.1
towards Sthreedhana in the presence of mediators.  They also gave Rs.2,000/-
towards Adapaduchu Lanchanams and Rs.2,000/- to A.1 for purchase of clothes.  
The family of the petitioner presented 4 sovereigns of gold ornaments to P.W.1.
They lived happily for about two years, but P.W.1 did not beget children.  Later
the accused used to harass P.W.1 demanding to bring additional dowry in the form
of scooter and gold chain.  In 1991 P.W.1 was sent out on a Vinayakachavithi day
asking to bring scooter and gold chain from her parents.  Subsequently all the
accused tortured P.W.1 for not meeting their demand, abused and bet her.
Subsequently A.1 married A.10 at the instigation of other accused.  A.1 and A.10
were blessed with a son.  A.10 and her child are staying in the house of A.2 and
A.3.  On 30-3-1993 P.W.1 issued a legal notice mentioning that the petitioner
deserted her.  In February 1993 the petitioner told P.W.1 that he took a
separate rented house and they can live separately from the other members of the
family.  Accordingly P.W.1 joined him on 11-2-1993, but the petitioner continued
the harassment.  P.W.1 filed Ex.P.1-complaint before the concerned police
alleging that the petitioner and other accused harassed her.  The police
registered the crime under Sections 498-A and 494 IPC and investigated the case.
The trial court after considering the contents of the charge sheet discharged
the accused for the offence under Section 494 IPC and framed the charge for the
offence under Section 498-A IPC.
6. The prosecution alleged that the petitioner and other accused harassed P.W.1
demanding to bring motorcycle and gold chain from her parents.  Therefore, the
ingredients of Section 498-A IPC are attracted.  The petitioner and other
accused made a general denial and it was contended on behalf of the petitioner
that since there is no specific allegation of harassment made by P.W.1, the
petitioner is not liable for any punishment, therefore, he is entitled to be
acquitted for the offence under Section 498-A IPC.
7. In view of the contentions raised by the parties, the point for consideration
is:
Whether the prosecution proved the guilt of the petitioner beyond reasonable
doubt and whether he is entitled for acquittal?

Point:
8. The learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that there is no consistency
in the evidence of P.Ws.1 and 2, that the evidence of P.W.2 is contrary to the
evidence of P.W.1, that the demand of additional dowry in the form of motorcycle
and gold chain was alleged against all the accused, therefore, the Court cannot
distinguish the petitioner from other accused and he alone cannot be convicted
for the said offence.  He further submitted that whatever benefit was given to
other accused should also be extended to the petitioner.  The learned counsel in
support of his contention also relied on a judgment of a learned single Judge of
this Court in Penchala Sadaiah v. State of A.P.1 wherein a learned single Judge
of this Court held that to attract Section 498-A IPC "cruelty" must be of such
nature so as to coerce wife to meet illegal demands or to commit suicide.  There
must be a nexus between cruelty and suicide.  Except the prosecution witnesses
stating that the accused demanded additional dowry, there is no other evidence
that the accused harassed the deceased for not bringing additional dowry.  The
lower court erred in drawing presumption under Section 113-A of the Evidence
Act.  Since the presumption under Section 113-A can be invoked only when the
prosecution discharged its initial burden of proof that the accused subjected
the wife to cruelty, the conviction of the accused under Section 498-A IPC is
liable to be set aside.
9. In the light of the principle laid down by this Court, it may be appropriate
to refer to the evidence of the prosecution witnesses in this case.
10. P.W.1, the wife of the petitioner stated that after the marriage she joined
him and after two years A.2 to A.10 harassed her for bringing more dowry from
her parents.  The petitioner also demanded to get a scooter and a gold chain.
For Sankranthi festival, 1990 her parents called the petitioner and herself to
their house.  At that time the petitioner demanded them to present a scooter and
a gold chain to him and he refused to visit the house of her parents unless the
demands are met.  When her parents expressed their inability to meet the
demands, the petitioner bet her and she bore the entire harassment with a hope
that the accused may change their attitude.  In 1990 the petitioner threatened
that he would marry another woman.  For Vinayakachavithi Festival, 1990 A.4 to
A.10 visited the house of A.1 to A.3 and all of them necked her out demanding to
bring the scooter and the gold chain.  As she was not having any alternative,
she went to her parents' house.  The efforts made by the mediators also failed
and all the accused declared that they would perform another marriage to the
petitioner.  On 30-3-1992 P.W.1 got issued a legal notice calling upon A.1 to
take her to his house for conjugal life and he gave a reply with false
allegations.  When she was thinking of giving a report to the police, the elders
intervened and at their instance the petitioner promised to take her back to
their house after construction of the house by representing that his parents are
not willing to bring her back to his house.  On 11-2-1993 the petitioner came to
her parents house and took her to his house.  She further deposed that the
petitioner set up a separate family in a hut in the premises of the house of his
parents.  During that period she underwent several troubles, but continued her
conjugal life.  During that period also the accused put her to mental and
physical harassment by demanding more dowry.   
11. P.W.2, the father of P.W.1 and a retired Assistant Sub-Inspector, Railway
Protection Force, Vijayawada deposed that he gave dowry at the time of marriage
and sent P.W.1 to the house of the petitioner.  But the petitioner tried to kill
P.W.1 on four occasions.  He further stated that the accused demanded additional
dowry and bet P.W.1 leading to abortion.  P.W.2 further stated that on two or
three occasions he took elders to the house of the petitioner and in the
presence of mediators, the petitioner demanded to give a scooter, a gold chain
and Rs.50,000/- in cash.  When he expressed his inability to meet the demand,
the accused used to harass P.W.1. 
12. The evidence of these witnesses clearly indicates that the petitioner
demanded scooter and gold chain and bet her before Vinaykachavithi of 1990.  The
petitioner also threatened that he would marry another woman if P.W.1 fails to
get scooter and gold chain from her parents.  Though P.Ws.1 and 2 asserted that
the petitioner married A.10 at the instigation of A.11 and A.12 and A.10 was
blessed with a son, their evidence is very specific that the petitioner went to
the house of P.W.2 for Vinayakachavithi Festival and informed them that he will
not come to their house unless his demand for scooter and gold chain are
fulfilled.  Though the evidence of P.Ws.1 and 2 was to the effect that the
petitioner started leading marital life with A.10 under one room and gave birth
to a child, the lower court referred to the specific instances of harassment by
the petitioner and accordingly concluded that the offence under Section 498-A
IPC is proved against the petitioner.  The appellate court also gave similar
finding by modifying only the sentence of imprisonment.  Though there are only
omnibus allegations against A.2 to A.12, there are specific allegations against
the petitioner regarding the harassment.  The appellate court was also right in
coming to a conclusion that the offence against the petitioner has been proved.
After carefully going through the evidence adduced by the prosecution, I am
convinced that the trial court as well as the appellate court rightly concluded
that there were specific allegations of harassment against the petitioner and
there were only omnibus allegations against the other accused.  The trial court
rightly found A.2 to A.12 not guilty of the charge.
13. The High Court has to exercise the revisional powers under Section 401
Cr.P.C. only in exceptional cases where interest of public justice requires
interference for the correction of manifest illegality or prevention of gross
miscarriage of justice.  In the case on hand, there is no manifest illegality or
gross miscarriage of justice.  It cannot ordinarily be invoked merely because
the lower court has taken a wrong view of the law or misappreciated the evidence
on record.  After going through the grounds of revision, I do not find any
compelling circumstances to interfere with the judgment of the trial court,
which was confirmed by the appellate court.
14. In the result, the criminal revision case is dismissed.

?1 2003 (3) LS 26

