

THE HONOURABLE SRI JUSTICE A.GOPAL REDDY            
Criminal Revision Case No.516 of 2004

18-1-2005 

Aramati Rama Devi  

Aramati Reddeppa Reddi @ Chinna Reddappa Reddi and others     

Counsel for the petitioner:  Sri  G. Ramachandra Reddy

Counsel for the Respondents1 to 6: Sri D.Kodandarami Reddy  
Counsel for the Respondent No.7:  Additional  Public Prosecutor

:ORDER:  
                This revision case has been filed by the defacto-complainant
challenging the acquittal of accused Nos.1 to 6 in Crl.A.No.42 of 2001 by the
III Additional Sessions Judge, (Fast Track Court) Cuddapah, preferred against
the conviction and sentence of imprisonment imposed by the Additional Judicial
Magistrate of First Class, Rayachoty in C.C.No.431 of 1996 dated 22-02-2001.
                The facts in nutshell are as under:
                The Petitioner/defacto-complainant filed a compliant before the
police alleging that A1 married her eight years prior to the date of occurrence
and demanded for more dowry apart from filing a petition under Section 125
Cr.P.C. for maintenance. She was granted maintenance of Rs.350/- per month. 
While so, accused No.1 without divorcing defacto-complainant married A2-daughter
of A3 at Tirumala on       05-06-1996 with the assistance of A3 to A12. On such
compliant being filed police registered a case in Cr.No.63 of 1996 under Section
494 IPC and after completion of investigation, a charge sheet has been laid
against the accused for the offence punishable under Section 494 IPC. On
appearance of the accused, the learned Magistrate framed charge under Section
494 IPC against A1, and Section 494 r/w 149 IPC against A2 to A12. The defacto-
complainant herself was examined as PW1; her father was examined as P.W.2.   
Sankarapu Vijayasekhar, who is the eye-witness to the incident, was examined as
PW.3; the Inspector who investigated the crime was examined as P.W.4; Purohit 
who performed the marriage of A1 and A2 was examined as P.W.5 and the   
superintendent of Purohit Sangam was examined as P.W.6. The lower Court after 
analyzing the oral and documentary evidence found that A1 is guilty for the
offence under Section 494 IPC, whereas A2 to A6 under Section 494 r/w 149 IPC 
and A7 to A12 are found not guilty of offence under Section 494 r/w 149 IPC and
they are accordingly acquitted. Aggrieved by the same accused Nos. 1 to 6
carried the matter in appeal. The lower appellate court by the impugned judgment
allowed the appeal setting aside the conviction and sentence passed against them
by the learned Additional Judicial Magistrate of First Class, Rayachoti
upholding the contentions and held that in view of bar envisaged under Section
198 Cr.P.C. the Magistrate ought not to have taken cognizance of offence under
Section 494 IPC except upon a compliant made by some person aggrieved by the   
offence.  Hence, this revision.
                 After notice on condone delay petition to the
respondent/accused delay was condoned.  With the consent of both sides the 
matter was taken up for final hearing.  Head both sides.
                It was vehemently argued by the learned counsel for the petitioner
that petitioner who is the wife of accused No.1 lodged a compliant with the
police, since she is the aggrieved party, on which police investigated into the
matter and lodged a charge sheet. In view of the same, lower Court is not
justified in allowing the appeal.
                On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondents submits that
Magistrate is not competent to take cognizance on the police report except on a
compliant made by the person aggrieved. In spite of citing the judgments
reported in D.VIJAYALAKSHMI v. D.SANJEEVA REDDY1 and DARLA SRINIVAS v. DARLA SRI             
DEVI2 the learned Magistrate committed palpable error in coming to the
conclusion that he can take cognizance of the offence. The conclusion arrived at
by the lower court that the said decisions have no application to the facts of
the case was rightly set aside by the lower appellate Court. It is convenient to
consider the above submissions in the context of Section 198 Cr.P.C., which
reads as under:
  "No court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under Chapter XX of
the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) except upon a compliant made by some person  
aggrieved by the offence."

(c) where the person aggrieved by an offence punishable under Section 494 or 495
of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) is the wife, complaint may be made on her
behalf by her father, mother, brother, sister, son or daughter or by her
father's or mother's brother or sister or, with the leave of the Court, by any
other person related to her by blood, marriage or adoption.

                In DARLA SRINIVAS's case (2 supra) this Court after considering the
amendment in the First Schedule of Cr.P.C. held that police had power to
investigate into the said crime, but in the teeth of specific provision under
Section     198 Cr.P.C. against taking of cognizance of offence by the
Magistrate on the basis of anything other than the compliant filed by the wife
or one of the relatives mentioned in Section 198 Cr.P.C., and in the absence of
any amendment made to Section 198 to that of Sections 494, 495 and 496, taking 
cognizance of the offence by the Magistrate on the basis of charge sheet is not
in consonance with the provisions of Cr.P.C.
                This Court in D.Vijayalakshmi's case (1supra) after considering the
bar under Section 198 Cr.P.C. for taking cognizance of the offence by the
Magistrate on the charge sheet filed by the police after investigation and
convicting them which was acquitted by the appellate Court held that in view of
State amendment, the investigating agency is entitled to investigate the
allegations under Section 494 IPC but there are some limitations for the Court
to take cognizance; one such limitation enshrined under Section 198 Cr.P.C. for
the Court is to take cognizance of the offence and hence initial cognizance
taken by the Court basing upon the charge sheet filed by the investigating
agency, namely, the Sub-Inspector of Police, itself is bad which vitiates the
entire trial and the eventual conviction by the trial Court. Though the same was
brought to the notice of the Magistrate he tried to distinguish the same stating
that aggrieved person herself filed the complaint and the said decision is not
applicable to the facts of the case which clearly indicates lack of
understanding of law declared by this Court.
                In G.NARASIMHAN v. T.V.CHOKKAPPA3 compliant was filed against the      
editors and publishers of three daily newspapers i.e. Dhinami, Hindu and Indian
Express under Sections 500 and 501 of the Penal Code by the member of D.M.K.   
party which was taken cognizance by the Magistrate after recording the
complainant's statement. The editors of the above newspapers who are
unsuccessful in challenging the cognizance taken by the Magistrate before the
High Court filed an appeal before the Supreme Court with special leave. On
granting leave the Supreme Court considered who is the aggrieved person entitled
to maintain the compliant within the meaning of Section 198 Cr.P.C. and held
that Section 198 lays down an exception to the general rule that a compliant can
be filed by any body whether he is an aggrieved person or not, and modifies that
rule by permitting only an aggrieved person to move a Magistrate in cases of
defamation. The section is mandatory, so that if a Magistrate were to take
cognizance of the offence of defamation on a complaint made by one who is not an
aggrieved person, the trial and conviction of accused in such a case by the
Magistrate would be void and illegal.
                Thus, it will be seen that throughout Section 198 Cr.P.C. the word
"compliant" is used as significant. It is only a "compliant" by aggrieved person
that a Magistrate may take cognizance and in no other manner.  "Complaint" is
defined under Section 2(d) of Cr.P.C. as under:
  "Compliant" means any allegation made orally or in writing to a Magistrate,
with a view to his taking
action under this Code, that some person, whether known or unknown, has 
committed an offence, but does not include a police report.

 Thus, the terms "complaint" and "police report" are mutually exclusive. One
cannot be the other and vice-versa. Therefore, on an investigation by police,
whether the police report was submitted in respect of the offence made under
Section 494 IPC, the Court could not take cognizance at all.
                Once it is seen that the accused cannot be convicted for any offence
under the Code whether they can be convicted under Section 149 IPC. Section 149 
IPC provides that if an offence is committed by any member of an unlawful
assembly in prosecution of the common object of that assembly, or such as the
members of that object, every person, who at the time of committing of that
offence is a member of the same assembly, is guilty of that offence. Section 149
created a constructive or vicarious liability of the members of the unlawful
assembly for the unlawful acts committed pursuant to the common object by any 
other member of that assembly. The basis of the constructive guilt under section
149 is mere membership of the unlawful assembly, with the requisite common 
object or knowledge. This section makes a member of the unlawful assembly 
responsible as a principal for the acts of each, and all, merely because he is a
member of an unlawful assembly.  While overt act and active participation may
indicate common intention of the person perpetrating the crime, the mere
presence in the unlawful assembly may fasten vicarious criminal liability under
Section 149. It is an inference to be deduced from the facts and circumstances
of each case.  When the accused cannot be convicted by the Magistrate for any
offence under the Code, namely, for the offence under Section 494 and no offence
is made out, accused cannot be convicted for the offence under Section 149.
There must be nexus between the common object and the offence committed under   
the code and if it is found that the same was committed to accomplish the common
object, then the every member of the assembly who has committed the offence can 
be charged for the offence under Section 149 IPC.  But once the accused cannot
be convicted for any of the offence under the Code and the Magistrate cannot
take cognizance of the offence under Section 494, they cannot be convicted for
the offence under Section 149 IPC.
              Having regard to the fact that the learned Magistrate cannot take
cognizance of the offence on a report filed by the police basing upon the charge
sheet filed by the investigating agency which vitiates the entire proceedings
including the conviction by the Magistrate, the lower appellate Court rightly
allowed the appeal setting aside the conviction and sentence imposed by the
magistrate, which do not suffer from any legal infirmity requiring interference
of this Court in exercise of revisional jurisdiction.
                Criminal Revision Case is accordingly dismissed.

?1 2000 (2) ALT (Crl.) 136 (AP)
2 2000 (1) ALT (Crl.) 265 (AP)
3 (1972) 2 SCC 680 = AIR 1972 SC 2609   

