

THE HONOURABLE SRI JUSTICE A.GOPAL REDDY            
Criminal Petition No.44 of 2005

22-2-2005 

Smt. D.Rajeswari 

State of Andhra Pradesh represented by Public Prosecutor and another 

Counsel for the petitioner:  Sri  E.V.Bhagiratha Rao

Counsel for the Respondents1: Additional Public Prosecutor
Counsel for the Respondent No.2: None appeared  

:ORDER:  
                In this petition filed under Section 482 Cr.P.C., the
petitioner/accused assails the correctness of the order dated             06-12-
2004 passed by the Judicial First Class Magistrate, Suryapet in Crl.M.P.No.5269
of 2004 in C.C.No.390 of 2002, impleading her as accused No.5 in C.C.No.390 of
2002 on an application filed by the prosecution.
                The relevant facts shorn of details and necessary for the disposal
of this case  lie in a narrow compass.
                Initially, the police registered a case in Cr.No.141 of 2002 for the
alleged offence under Section 420 IPC against A1 to A4 and A5 and after due
investigation into the said crime laid charge sheet on 21-08-2002 against four
persons only, namely, A1 to A4, which was taken cognizance by the Judicial First
Class Magistrate, Suryapet in C.C.No.390 of 2002 for the offence under Section
420 and Sections 3 and 4 of Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961. Basing upon statements
under Section 161 Cr.P.C. and other evidence in the chief examination of PW1
recorded on 30-08-2004 the prosecution filed the above petition stating that the
evidence recorded discloses that along with A1 to A4 petitioner herein-sister of
A2 abused PW1 and his mother in a most indecent manner and beat them when they    
requested to marry Sankoju sumathi who is the sister of PW1 and he also stated
that along with A1 to A4, petitioner cheated and ruined the life of LW1 and her
involvement is evident from the 161 statement recorded by the Investigating
Officer and by oversight petitioner has not been arrayed as accused.  The
learned Magistrate by the impugned order allowed the petition adding the
petitioner as A5 in C.C.  Questioning the validity and legality of the said
order present petition is filed contending that the learned Magistrate without
giving notice to the petitioner allowed Crl.M.P. filed by the prosecution; he
has not understood the scope of Section 319 Cr.P.C; the petition filed by the
Assistant Public Prosecutor to add the petitioner as accused No.5 under Section
319 Cr.P.C. is not maintainable and on filing the report the complainant if
aggrieved has to file an objection for the same but not a petition.
                Learned counsel for the petitioner contends once the defacto-
complainant has not chosen to file protest petition, it is not open for the
Assistant Public Prosecutor to file a petition under Section 319 Cr.P.C. when
the police laid the charge sheet which was accepted by the Magistrate, the same
would amount to discharge the petitioner of the charge and the said order cannot
be reviewed.
                Per contra, learned Additional Public Prosecutor contends that in
spite of mentioning the name of the petitioner in the complaint, and his
involvement in the crime, police by over sight has not shown her as accused and
the same can be added in view of evidence of P.W.1 recorded which clearly
establishes the involvement of the petitioner, therefore, she can be impleaded
and the Magistrate exercised the jurisdiction to implead her.  This Court cannot
quash the said order.
                Sub-section (1) of Section 319 makes it clear that it operates
in an ongoing inquiry into, or trial of, an offence. In order to apply Section
319, it is thus essential that the need to proceed against the person other than
the accused, appearing to be guilty of offence, arises only on evidence recorded
in the course of any inquiry or trial, wherefrom the court can prima facie
conclude that the person not arraigned before it is also involved in the
commission of the crime and can be tried along with other accused.
                The Supreme Court in MUNICIPAL CORPORATION OF DELHI VS. RAM KISHAN             
ROHTAGI1 held that the order under Section 319 Cr.P.C. summoning a person can be   
made on fulfillment of the conditions stipulated therein even when the
proceedings had earlier been quashed, a person can be proceeded with, a note of
caution was added that the power under Section 319 Cr.P.C. was discretionary and
had to be used sparingly only on the existence of compelling reasons.
                In MICHAEL MACHADO V. CENTRAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION2 construing              
the words "the court may proceed against such person" in Section 319 Cr.P.C. the
Supreme Court held that the power is discretionary and should be exercised only
to achieve criminal justice and that the court should not turn against another
person whenever it comes across evidence connecting that other person also with
the offence. It was further held that judicial exercise is called for, keeping a
conspectus of the case, including the stage at which the trial has already
proceeded and the quantum of evidence collected till then, and also the amount
of time which the court had spent for collecting such evidence. The Court while
examining an application under Section 319 Cr.P.C., has also to bear in mind
that there is no compelling duty on the court to proceeding against other
persons. In a nutshell, it means that for exercise of discretion under section
319 Cr.P.C. all relevant factors, including the one noticed above, have to be
kept in view and an order is not required to be made mechanically merely on the
ground that some evidence had come on record implicating the person sought to be
added as an accused. 
                In the light of the judgments as above, the facts in the present
case discloses involvement of the petitioner. LW1 stated in the complaint and
also in the statement recorded under Section 161 Cr.P.C. but the prosecution
while laying the charge sheet observed the reasoning for deletion of her name
which reads as under:
"The involvement of Rajeswari s/o Deenadayal whose name mentioned in FIR was  
deleted from the charge of offence since she is away from the family members of
the accused."

 As per the evidence/statement recorded by the police during the course of
investigation under section 161 and also examination of PW1 by the Court
discloses her participation.  Further it was stated that the video cassette,
which was produced clearly shows that Rajeswari presented a bangle watch to 
L.W.1-Sumathi. In view of the evidence available about her participation along
with A1 to A4 in cheating the complainant, the lower Court rightly added the
petitioner as A5.
                In RAKESH V STATE OF HARYANA3 on examination of prosecution        
witnesses and when her cross-examination has begun, public prosecutor moved an  
application under Section 319 Cr.P.C. for arraying Rakesh as additional accused,
which was allowed by the trial Judge and the revision filed against the said
order was dismissed by the High Court on further appeal the question which was
raised before the Supreme Court was whether the statement of a prosecution
witness without, the said witness having been cross-examined, constitutes
'evidence; within the meaning of Section 319 Cr.P.C.,1973. The Supreme Court
after noticing the clarification made by it in RANJIT SINGH V. STATE OF PUNJAB4 
ie., "of course, it is not necessary for the court to wait until the entire
evidence is collected for exercising the said powers." held that term 'evidence'
as used in Section 319, Criminal Procedure Code would mean evidence which is 
tested by cross-examination.  The question of testing the evidence by cross-
examination would arise only after addition of the accused and there is no
question of cross-examining the witness prior to adding such person as accused.
The word 'evidence' occurring in sub-section is used in comprehensive and broad
sense, which would also include the material collected by the Investigating
Officer and the material or evidence, which comes before the Court and from
which the Court can prima facie conclude that person not arraigned before it is
involved in the commission of the crime. Holding so dismissed the appeal
affirming the order passed by the trial judge. In view of the same, the
submission of the learned counsel for the petitioner that once the petitioner
has been omitted by the police while laying the charge sheet cannot be added
later stage, which amounts to discharge cannot be accepted. Since the crime was
taken cognizance on laying charge sheet by the police but not on the private
complaint, submission made by the learned counsel for the petitioner that
prosecution cannot file petition under Section 319 Cr.P.C., cannot be
countenanced. 
                Similarly, the submission of the learned counsel that the Magistrate
cannot allow the petition without issuing notice to the petitioner, is only a
fallacy, for the reason, as it is fairly well settled issue of a process is
preliminary stage, satisfaction may be done either by examination of complainant
under Section 200 or under enquiry under Section 201 and there is no requirement
of hearing before summoning the accused. 
                In view of the same, no illegality is discernable to the order
passed by the learned Magistrate in exercise of jurisdiction and arraying the
petitioner as accused No.5.
                 Criminal Petition is accordingly dismissed.

?1 (1983) 1 SCC 1 
2 (2000) 2 SCC 262 
3 AIR 2001 SC 2521  
4 (1998) 7 SCC 149 = AIR 1998 SC 3148   

