

THE HONOURABLE Dr. JUSTICE G. YETHIRAJULU          
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1366 OF 2002       

04-02-2005 

Smt. Kamala Bai & another  

State of Andhra Pradesh rep. By Public Prosecutor

Counsel for appellant:                  Mr.C. Praveen Kumar

Counsel for respondent:         The Public Prosecutor

:Judgment:(per the Hon'ble Dr.Justice G. Yethirajulu)

1. This appeal is directed against the judgment of the
I Metropolitan Sessions Judge, Hyderabad dated 11-11-2002 in S.C. No.489 of
2001.  The appellants are A.1 and A.2.  They were charged for the offences under
Sections 498-A, 304-B and 302 IPC.  They denied the charges and claimed for
trial.  The prosecution in order to prove the above charges examined P.Ws.1 to
12 and marked Exs.P.1 to P.13 and M.Os.1 to 3.  No oral evidence was adduced on  
defence side, but Ex.D.1-relevant portion of Section 161 Cr.P.C. statement of
P.W.1 was marked.  The learned Sessions Judge after taking into consideration
the oral and documentary evidence found both the accused guilty for the offence
under Section 302 IPC, convicted each of them and sentenced to undergo 
imprisonment for life and to pay a fine of Rs.200/- each, in default to suffer
simple imprisonment for one month.  The Sessions Court directed both the
sentences to run concurrently.  The appellants being aggrieved by the judgment
of the Sessions Court preferred this appeal challenging its validity and
legality.
2. The case of the prosecution leading to the conviction of the appellants is
briefly as follows:
The deceased Santoshi was married to the son of A.1 by name Narsing Rao about  
six months prior to the date of occurrence.  The offence took place during the
intervening night of 18/19-9-2000 at about 3 a.m.  A.1 being the mother-in-law
and A.2 being the sister-in-law of the deceased used to harass her for bringing
additional dowry.  During the fateful night both the accused poured kerosene on
the deceased and set fire to her at her residence, which resulted in severe
burns to the deceased.  She was admitted in Osmania General Hospital for
treatment and two dying declarations covered by Exs.P.5 and P.8 were recorded
from the deceased.  The deceased while undergoing treatment succumbed to the  
burns at about 3-45 p.m. on 19-9-2000. The police registered a crime for the
offence under Section 498-A, 304-B and 302 IPC and after conclusion of the
investigation laid the charge sheet.
3. The prosecution contended that both the accused are responsible for the death
of the deceased.  The accused generally denied the offence and did not take any
specific defence.
4. The point for consideration is:
Whether the prosecution proved the guilt of both the accused beyond reasonable
doubt and whether the convictions and the sentences imposed by the Sessions 
Court against the appellants are liable to be set aside?

Point:
5. A crime was registered by the concerned police on the basis of a statement
given by the deceased at about 7-45 a.m. on 19-9-2000.  The offence took place
at about 3 a.m. on 19-9-2000 at the house of the deceased.  Ex.P.5 is the
statement recorded by the Assistant Sub-Inspector of Kulsumpura P.S., Hyderabad, 
on the basis of which a crime was registered.  On the same day P.W.8, the then
VI Metropolitan Magistrate, Hyderabad recorded the statement of the deceased
(Ex.P.8) between 10-25 a.m. to 10-40 a.m.  In the said statement the deceased
stated that A.1 poured kerosene and set fire to her.
6. In addition to Exs.P.5 and P.8-statements of the deceased, the prosecution
relied on the evidence of P.Ws.1 to 12.  P.W.1 is the mother of the deceased who
is a native of Nuthujapur.  She stated that at the time of marriage they gave 12
tulas of gold, 10 tulas of silver and other household articles worth Rs.50,000/-
.  After the marriage the deceased was sent to Hyderabad to her in-laws' house
for marital life.  The deceased, her husband and A.1 used to reside in one
house.  A.2 was also staying by the side of the house of A.1.  She further
stated that sometime after the marriage, her husband fell ill.  When she
informed the deceased and her husband, they came along with A.2 to their house.
Subsequently her husband died.  After completion of the ceremonies the deceased 
informed her that A.1 and A.2 were harassing to bring Rs.50,000/- for business
purpose.  She informed the deceased that she was not in a position to pay that
much amount and she would adjust some amount after one month.  She was further   
informed by the deceased that A.1 and A.2 used to abuse in filthy language.  The
deceased also wrote a letter to her younger daughter about the demand of amount
and harassment.  Two days later, she received a telephone message that the
deceased was admitted in the hospital with burns.  Immediately she reached
Hyderabad and went to the hospital along with police.  By the time they reached
the hospital, the deceased died due to burns.  In the cross-examination she
stated that she reached Hyderabad at about 9-30 a.m. on the next day of the date
of offence and reached hospital at about 11 a.m.  The police recorded her
statement at about 2 p.m.
7. The evidence of P.W.1 is useful only to the extent that the accused used to
demand the deceased to bring Rs.50,000/- and used to abuse her in filthy
language.
8. P.W.2, the younger brother of the deceased deposed that on 6-4-2000 the
marriage of the deceased was performed.  After the marriage the deceased went to
her in-law's house to lead marital life.  A.1, the deceased and her husband used
to stay in one house and A.2 used to stay in the adjacent house.  About 12 days
after the marriage he went to the house of the deceased and remained there for
two days.  One month thereafter the deceased and her husband visited his house
and the deceased did not make any complaint to him.  Subsequently, his father
fell sick and later died.  The deceased, her husband and A.2 came to his house
and, after completion of the ceremonies, the deceased before leaving the house
informed P.W.1 about harassment and demand of money by the accused and P.W.1      
replied that she was not having that much money and would try to adjust some
amount.  On 19-9-2000 they received a telephone call that the deceased was
admitted in the hospital.  His mother went to Hyderabad and informed him about
the death of the deceased.  Three days later he came to Hyderabad and the police
recorded his statement.
9. P.W.3 is a panch to the observation of scene of offence.  P.W.4 is a
Professor working in the Department of Plastic Surgery.  He was examined to
speak about the admission of the deceased at about 
4-30 a.m. on 19-9-2000 in the casualty ward of Osmania General Hospital.
10. P.W.5, the then Mandal Revenue Officer mentioned about the holding of
inquest over the dead body of the deceased between 
1 p.m. to 2 p.m. on 20-9-2000 and he stated that the panchayatdars opined that
the deceased died due to burns.  P.Ws.6 and 9 are the photographers who took the
photos of the dead body of the deceased and the scene of offence respectively.
P.W.7, the then Assistant Sub-Inspector, stated that after hearing a telephonic
message from Osmania General Hospital, at about 7-15 a.m. he went to Osmania   
General Hospital and recorded Ex.P.5-statement from the deceased.  He gave a 
requisition to the VI Metropolitan Magistrate, Hyderabad for recording the dying
declaration of the deceased and after return to the police station at about 10
a.m. he registered the crime and handed over the file to the Sub-Inspector of
Police for investigation.  P.W.10, the then Inspector of Police mentioned about
the investigation, observation of the scene of offence, holding of inquest,
arrest of the accused etc.  P.W.11, the doctor who conducted post mortem over
the dead body of the deceased opined that the deceased died due to shock 
consequent to burns.  P.W.12 is the then Assistant Commissioner of Police who 
laid the charge sheet.  None of the above witnesses stated anything about the
offence proper.  P.Ws.1 and 2 had no personal knowledge about the harassment 
alleged to be caused by the accused to the deceased.  The prosecution did not
examine any other witnesses from the village of the accused to speak about the
alleged harassment.  The information said to be given by the deceased to P.Ws.1
and 2 was regarding the demand of Rs.50,000/- for business purpose and it was
not part of the dowry amount or additional dowry.  The evidence of P.Ws.1 and 2
further disclosed that the deceased informed them that A.1 and A.2 used to
harass her by abusing in filthy language.  P.Ws.1 and 2 belong to a far-off
place from the village of the accused.  There is no other evidence to prove that
there was harassment of the deceased by A.1 and A.2 demanding any amount towards    
dowry.
11. As per Ex.P.8-statement of the deceased, both the accused used to quarrel
with the deceased everyday.  A.1 used to abuse her on the ground that she was
not doing household work.  The cause mentioned by the deceased for harassment  
was different from the cause mentioned by P.Ws.1 and 2.  The deceased did not
state the above particulars in Ex.P.5-statement.  There is no supporting
material to show as to what type of harassment the accused used to cause to the
deceased and there is a doubt regarding the alleged harassment and the accused 
are entitled for the benefit of doubt regarding the offence under Section 498-A
of the Indian Penal Code.
12. Regarding the offence proper, the prosecution relied on the dying
declarations of the deceased.  Ex.P.5-statement of the deceased was recorded by
P.W.7, A.S.I of Police, Kulsumpura P.S. at about
7-45 a.m. on 19-9-2000 at Osmania General Hospital, Hyderabad and it reads as 
follows:
I am residing in the above said address along with my husband and my mother-in-
law.  I have married one Narsing about 6 months back at my village Murchpur,
Karnataka State.  On 19-9-2000 at about 0300 hours I woke up for urinal.
Meanwhile my mother-in-law called me to her room and poured the kerosene on my  
body and set fire with the assistance of my sister-in-law by name Fathu Bai who
was present in her room.  Later my husband extinguished the fire and shifted me
to Osmania General Hospital for treatment.

13. P.W.8, the then VI Metropolitan Magistrate, Hyderabad recorded Ex.P.8-
statement from the deceased on 19-9-2000 at about 10-25 a.m.  He received a
requisition from P.W.7 on 19-9-2000 and proceeded to the Osmania General 
Hospital to record the statement of the deceased.  The deceased was in the
female burns ward.  The duty doctor identified the deceased and certified that
she was conscious and coherent and was in a fit condition to give the statement.
He also elicited some information by putting preliminary questions to know her
state of mind and satisfied that she was in a fit condition to make a
declaration.  He recorded the dying declaration of the deceased.  At the time of
recording the dying declaration, the duty doctor and himself were only present.
After recording the statement, the doctor certified that the deceased was
conscious and coherent throughout recording the statement.  The deceased gave 
the declaration in Urdu and the doctor translated the same into Telugu.
14. In Ex.P.8-statement the deceased stated as follows:
My marriage was performed about six months back.  I went to my in-laws house 
after my marriage.  My mother-in-law, sister-in-law-Fattu used to quarrel with
me everyday.  My mother-in-law used to abuse me saying that I am not doing
household work.  Yesterday night at 6 p.m. my mother-in-law and sister-in-law
quarreled with me.  In the midnight at 1-30 a.m. my mother-in-law poured
kerosene on me and lit fire to me.  My sister-in-law beat me with hands.  At
that time my husband was sleeping in another room.  On hearing my cries, he came 
running and extinguished the fire.  Afterwards my husband brought me to
hospital.

15. The accused did not dispute the death of the deceased due to burns.  They
also did not dispute the date, time and place of offence and the time of the
death of the deceased.  The learned Senior Counsel Sri C.Padmanabha Reddy,  
representing the appellants submitted that the statement given by the deceased
in Ex.P.5 is contradictory to the statement covered by Ex.P.8, therefore, it is
not safe to rely on those statements to find the accused guilty of the offences.
He pointed out the following discrepancies in the statements of the deceased:
1) The time of offence was mentioned as 3 a.m. in Ex.P.5 whereas it was
mentioned as 1-30 a.m. in Ex.P.8.
2) In Ex.P.5 the deceased mentioned that A.2 assisted and A.1 poured kerosene 
and set fire to her.  In Ex.P.8 she mentioned that A.2 beat her with hands.
3) In Ex.P.5 the deceased mentioned that when she woke up to go to urinal, A.1
called her to her room and poured kerosene and set fire to her.  In Ex.P.8 she
did not mention about A.1 calling her to her room and simply stated that A.1
poured kerosene and set fire to her.
4) In Ex.P.5 the deceased mentioned that her husband extinguished the fire
without mentioning as to where from he came whereas in Ex.P.8 she mentioned that 
her husband who was sleeping in another room came running on hearing her cries 
and extinguished the fire.
5) In Ex.P.5 the deceased did not mention as to who took her to the hospital
whereas in Ex.P.8 she mentioned that her husband brought her to the hospital.

The learned Senior Counsel therefore submitted that it is not safe to accept the
statements of the deceased, which are contradictory to each other and as there
is no other evidence in support of the versions given by the deceased, it is not
safe to convict the accused for the offences covered by the charges.
16. The learned Public Prosecutor, on the other hand, submitted that the
statements of the deceased can be safely accepted as truthful versions on
account of the following common features in both the statements:
1) The date of offence is same in both the statements.
2) Though there was variation about the exact time of the commission of offence,
the offence took place in the early hours of 19-09-2000.
3) The offence took place in the house of the deceased, and there is no
variation in the scene of offence.
4) There was a specific version that A.1 poured kerosene and lit fire to her and
it is same in both the statements.
5) In both the statements the deceased stated that her husband extinguished the
fire.
6) It was the specific version of the deceased in Ex.P.8 that her husband took
her to the hospital and no contradictory version was given in Ex.P.5.
The learned Public Prosecutor, therefore, submitted that since the version of
the deceased is same on all material particulars, the lower Court was right in
accepting that the dying declarations are trustworthy and acceptable.
17. Sri C.Padmanabha Reddy, learned Senior Counsel representing the appellants, 
relied on the judgments of the Supreme Court in support of his contention
regarding the acceptability of the dying declarations to convict the accused.
18. In Chinnamma v. State of Kerala1 the Supreme Court considered the aspect 
regarding the reliability of the dying declarations in murder cases.  In the
case covered by the above decision, two dying declarations of the deceased were
recorded-one by the Head Constable and the other by the Judicial Magistrate of
First Class.  The Supreme Court after going through the contents of both the
dying declarations held that the contents of the dying declarations are highly
contradictory as to infliction of injury by the appellant.  The motive given in
two dying declarations are entirely different.  The possibility of the deceased
being influenced by her parents cannot be ruled out.  Therefore, the conviction
based on such dying declarations cannot be sustained.
18(a). In the case covered by the above decision, the offence took place on 8-7-
1989.  A Head Constable recorded the dying declaration on 10-7-1989 at about 10-
45 p.m. in the hospital and another dying declaration was recorded by the
Judicial Magistrate of First Class on 14-7-1989.  In the first dying declaration
the deceased stated that on 7-7-1989 when she wanted to go to her mother's
house, her husband did not allow her to go.  On 8-7-1989 she still wanted to go
to her mother's house, so she dressed up when she was attacked on the head by 
the appellant, and then the appellant took the kerosene oil which was kept in
the room and poured it on her chest.  She had not noticed the factum of the
appellant setting her on fire and when she felt heat, she ran outside the house
and fell unconscious.  In the first dying declaration the deceased stated that
the appellant who is the sister of her husband was annoyed with her because of a
property dispute.  On 7-7-1989 she wanted to go to her mother's house.  Hence,
she told her husband that she will be going there, to which her husband had told
her not to go.  Still she changed her dress to go.  At that point of time, the
appellant came to the house and asked her where are you going, but she did not
reply.  On 8-7-1989 at about 9 a.m. she got dressed up again to go to her
mother's house.  Then the appellant came inside the house and standing behind
her hit her on the back of her head once and she fell on the floor.  The
appellant then took the kerosene tin, which was kept in the room and poured it
on her chest.  When she felt heat on her chest, she got up and ran outside the
house and fell unconscious in the courtyard.
18(b). In the second dying declaration which was recorded six days after the
date of incident, the deceased stated that on 8-7-1989 she took food for
piglings from the kitchen of her husband's house and soon as she entered the
kitchen, she got a beating on the back of her head by her sister-in-law
(appellant).  She fell down and became unconscious.  While she was unconscious, 
the flames started and there is a smell of kerosene.  Her sister-in-law beat her
previously, therefore, she suspects that her sister-in-law set fire on her body.
Her father, mother, two brothers, two sisters and her husband were attending
her.  There was some talk that the appellant had done some evil magic on her
husband, therefore, her husband was not loving his sister after their marriage.
18(c). After examining both the dying declarations, the Supreme Court observed
that there were certain glaring contradictions in the dying declarations.  When
the deceased was certain in the first dying declaration that it was the
appellant who poured the kerosene on her and set her on fire whereas in the
second dying declaration she was not so sure because she says that she is only
suspecting the appellant as having set fire on her.  The motive given in the two
dying declarations are entirely different.  These contradictions created grave
suspicion in the mind of the Court whether the injury suffered by the deceased
was really because of the act of the appellant or was a figment of the
imagination of the deceased.  As per the evidence of P.W.11, who treated the
deceased at the first instance, the deceased told that she suffered the injury
due to accidental burning while preparing food for the piglings.
18(d). The Supreme Court by taking into consideration the above circumstances of
the case expressed that the above mentioned facts created a doubt in the mind of
the Court as to the truthfulness of the contents of the dying declaration and
the possibility of the deceased being influenced by her parents in making the
dying declaration cannot be ruled out.

19. In State of A.P. v. Shaik Moin2 the Supreme Court held that when there are
contradictions in multiple dying declarations, the accused is entitled for the
benefit of doubt.
19(a). In the case covered by the above decision, the prosecution alleged that
the accused poured kerosene on his wife and set her on fire.  She was taken to
the hospital by the accused and others.  The Sub-Inspector on receiving the
intimation came to the hospital and recorded the statement of the deceased.  The
prosecution also relied on oral dying declarations said to be made to P.W.5 and
another dying declaration made to the Judicial Magistrate on the same day.  The
trial court while relying upon the dying declaration made to the Judicial
Magistrate held the accused guilty of the offence punishable under Section 302
and sentenced him to undergo imprisonment for life.  On appeal preferred by the
accused, the High Court held that it is not safe to rely upon the dying
declarations to find the accused guilty of the offence on account of the
contradictory versions in the dying declarations.  In the first oral dying
declaration made to the neighbour who accompanied the deceased to the hospital 
the deceased told that the accused poured kerosene and set fire to her because
of the fact that he had an illicit relationship with another woman.  But, this
witness never told the police about the statement said to be made by the
deceased to him.  He did not mention in 161 Cr.P.C. statement also.  The second
dying declaration was given to the Sub-Inspector of Police in the presence of
mother and other relations and it was not certified by the doctor, therefore,
the Court doubted the genuineness of the said statement in view of an entry in
the Accident Register maintained by the hospital on the information given by the
deceased that she suffered burn injuries due to an accident while cooking.  The
third dying declaration given to the Magistrate was recorded in the presence of
the doctor and the doctor certified that the deceased was in a fit condition to
make the statement wherein she had implicated the accused of having caused the 
injuries to her by pouring kerosene and setting fire to her.  The court observed
that in the ordinary course this statement would have been sufficient to come to
the conclusion that it is the accused who had caused the injuries which led to
the death of the deceased, but the correctness of the said statement has to be
examined in the background of factual contradictions in the earlier statements
and the entry in the Accident Register that she suffered injuries due to an
accident while cooking.  The Court further observed that the prosecution has not
brought on record any material to show how the entry in the Accident Register
was made.  On the other hand, the doctor in his evidence specifically stated
that the entry was made on the information given by the deceased.  The Supreme
Court took into consideration another important factor that the deceased gave
her statement before the Magistrate in Urdu language, which was later translated
into Telugu as understood by the Magistrate.  The efficiency of the language of
the Magistrate was not such that he could translate the statement of the
deceased into Telugu language correctly.  The Supreme Court therefore held that
there being direct conflict in regard to the role played by the accused, the
benefit of doubt should be given to him.

20. In Dandu Lakshmi Reddy v. State of A.P.3 the Supreme Court held that when 
there are material contradictions between two dying declarations pertaining to
the context in which the deceased caught fire, it is not safe to rely on the
dying declarations to convict the accused for the offence under Section 302 IPC.
20(a). In the case covered by the above decision, the prosecution alleged that
the husband and mother-in-law of the deceased were indisposed to her as she was 
unable to give birth to a child.  She was subjected to harassment and threats.
They used to scare her by saying that they would throw her in a well or a canal
to get clearance for the husband to re-marry.  On the morning of the ill-fated
day, the husband caught hold of her hair from behind, the mother-in-law poured
kerosene on her and asked her husband to set her ablaze.  The husband obliged by
lighting a matchstick and she caught fire.  When she screamed out, the
assailants took to their heals.  The neighbours who reached the scene
extinguished the fire and on the same day the Judicial Magistrate recorded one
dying declaration and the S.I. of Police recorded another dying declaration in
the hospital.  In both the dying declarations she attributed to the husband and
his mother for the cause of her devastating burns.  Except the Judicial
Magistrate and the S.I. who recorded the dying declarations, all other witnesses
deposed that the deceased told him that her clothes were caught fire while
cooking milk.  Even her father and mother when examined in Court also said like
that.  In the dying declaration recorded by the S.I., the deceased stated as
follows:
Today morning i.e., 9-10-1994 when I was lighting the stove in the kitchen and
preparing coffee at about 6-00 a.m. my mother-in-law and husband came from 
behind.  After entering the kitchen, my husband caught hold of my hair and I was
unable to move.  My mother-in-law Narayanamma sprinkled kerosene on my body and    
clothes.  She asked her son to set fire, my husband lit the matchstick and threw
it on my clothes.  When my clothes caught fire I started shouting with fear.  My
mother-in-law Narayanamma and my husband Lakshmi Reddy ran away from there.     

20(b). In the dying declaration recorded by the Judicial Magistrate the deceased
stated as follows:
My mother-in-law's name is Narayanamma, my husband's name is Dandu Lakshmi      
Reddy.  In the morning at 6-00 a.m. when I was sweeping, my mother-in-law
Narayanamma and my husband Lakshmi Reddy both poured kerosene on me, lit the     
matchstick and set me to fire.

20(c). During the trial, the accused took a stand that the deceased had some
mental imbalance and suicide tendency.  On earlier occasions she made an attempt 
to electrocute herself, but it was averted with the intervention of others.
20(d). In the light of the above material, the Supreme Court did not concur with
the view of the Division Bench of the High Court by observing that the High
Court side-stepped the crucial evidence of the father and mother of the deceased
which diametrically went against the version of the deceased.  The Supreme Court
also took into consideration the version of father and mother that the deceased
was not mentally sound.  Under the above circumstances, the Supreme Court  
observed that if the Court has even a slight doubt of the mental soundness of
the author of the statement, it would be unsafe to base conviction on such
statement, albeit its inadmissibility under Section 32 of the Evidence Act.  The
Supreme Court therefore gave the benefit of doubt to the accused by holding that
the conviction cannot sustain.

21. The legal position regarding the conviction of the accused on the basis of
the dying declaration is well established, but when there are two contradictory
statements given by the deceased, it is not safe to base the conviction on the
basis of those dying declarations alone.  The Supreme Court recorded acquittals
in the cases covered by the above decisions by keeping in view the circumstances
mentioned therein.
22. In the case on hand, the factual position is different.  There is consistent
version from the prosecution witnesses and the dying declarations given by the
deceased regarding the offence proper, and the person who was responsible for
the commission of the offence.  When there is consistent version from all
corners pointing out the guilt of the accused, it is not desirable to throw away
the case on the ground of minor omissions or contradictions.  After carefully
going through the contents of the dying declarations, we are convinced that the
deceased was definite about the person who was responsible for the commission of
the offence, and we have no hesitation to accept the dying declarations of the
deceased and we do not find any ground to interfere with the judgment of the
court below.
23. In the result, the appeal is dismissed by confirming the conviction and the
sentences imposed by the court below in all respects.

?1 2004 Cri.L.J. 1447
2 (2004) 6 SCC 34 
3 1999 SCC (Cri.) 1176

