

THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE A. GOPAL REDDY and THE HONOURBLE Dr.JUSTICE G.YETHIRAJULU                  
Criminal Appeal No.700 of 2004

15.06.2006 

M.Shankar @ Chandra   

State of A.P.

Counsel for the Appellant: Smt.A.Gayatri Reddy

Counsel for the Respondent:  Public Prosecutor

:Judgment: (Per Hon'ble Dr.Justice G.Yethirajulu)


1.              This is an appeal preferred by the sole accused in S.C.No.346 of
2002 on the file of II Additional Subordinate Judge, Kurnool. The accused was
charged for the offence under Sections 498A and 302 IPC for allegedly pouring
kerosene and setting fire to his wife leading her to death on 04-04-2002 while
undergoing treatment. The accused denied the charge and claimed for trial.

2.              The case of the prosecution lead to the conviction of the appellant
is briefly as follows: The deceased is the second wife of the accused.  About 10
months prior to the date of occurrence, the accused married the deceased without
informing about his first marriage.  After the marriage, the deceased-Eramma
joined the accused and lived with accused in a hut. The accused addicted to
alcohol and after consuming liquor he used to beat the deceased now and then by
suspecting her character, whenever she asked him to allow to do coolie work of
weaving to meet their family expenditure. On 13-03-2002 at about 16 hours when
the deceased requested the accused to allow her to go for coolie work, accused
abused her in filthy language and by suspecting her character poured kerosene on
her and set fire with an intention to kill the deceased. The deceased was
engulfed with flames and due to that she sustained burn injuries all over the
body and raised cries. On hearing the cries, neighbours came to the hut and put
off the fire. On seeing the neighbours the accused ran away from the scene of
offence.  Later the deceased was shifted to Government Hospital, Yemmiganur and 
while undergoing treatment she succumbed to injuries on 04-04-2002. While
undergoing treatment a dying declaration was recorded by the Judicial Magistrate
of First Class, Yemmiganur, and statement was also recorded by the Assistant
Sub-Inspector of Police, Yemmiganur Town Police Station. After the death of the
deceased inquest was held over the dead body and autopsy was also conducted by  
the Medical Officer, who opined that death of the deceased was due to septicamia
with neurogenic shock due to burns all over the body. After conclusion of the
investigation police laid the charge sheet.

3.              The prosecution in order to prove the guilt of the accused examined
P.Ws.1 to 20 and marked Exs.P1 to P20 and M.Os.1 to 6. No oral or documentary   
evidence was let in on defence side.

4.              The learned Sessions Judge after considering the oral and
documentary evidence and dying declaration came to the conclusion that the
prosecution proved the guilt of the accused beyond reasonable doubt and
accordingly convicted him for the offence under Section 302 IPC and sentenced
him to undergo imprisonment for life and also to pay a fine of Rs.500/-, in
default to undergo simple imprisonment for three months. As the accused was also
convicted for the offence under Section 498A IPC, sentenced him to undergo
rigorous imprisonment for three years. He further directed that both the
sentences shall run concurrently.

5.              The accused being aggrieved by the judgment dated 27-06-2003 
preferred this appeal challenging the validity and legality of the sentence
imposed by the lower Court.

6.              The prosecution case is that the accused used to beat the deceased
when she attended the coolie work against his will. He scolded her, beat her and
poured kerosene and set fire due to which deceased died. The case of the defence
is that of total denial of the offence.

7.           In the above circumstances, the point for consideration is:
"Whether the prosecution proved the guilt of the accused beyond reasonable doubt
and whether the conviction and sentence imposed by the lower court are liable to
be set aside or modified."

8.              P.W.1 is the father of the deceased. He deposed that his daughter
died about one year back due to burns. He turned hostile and did not support the
prosecution case. P.Ws.2 to 6, 8, 9, 10, 12, 13 and also turned hostile and did
not support the prosecution case. The prosecution relied on three statements of
the deceased. Firstly, the entry in the accidents register regarding the cause
of death. Secondly, Ex.P24-statement recorded by the Assistant Sub-Inspector of
Police, Yemmiganur Town Police Station and thirdly, Ex.P8-dying declaration
recorded by the Judicial Magistrate of First Class, Yemmiganur.

9.              The learned counsel for the appellant submitted that as per the
prosecution witnesses the deceased was not in a fit state of mind. Therefore, it
is not safe to rely on her statements.

10.            It is true that there is no other evidence in support of the
prosecution, but the legal position is very clear that the dying declaration of
the deceased can be acted upon and conviction can be given to the accused, if
the version was believed to be true and acceptable. Therefore, we have to
examine the statements given by the deceased to trust the truthfulness of the
statement given by her. In Ex.P17 dated    13-03-2002 recorded at 5 P.M. it was
mentioned that the deceased informed that burns were caused by her husband at 
4 P.M. on 13-03-2002 at her husband's house, patient suffered 90% burns. Ex.P24
is the earliest statement recorded by P.W.20-Assistant Sub-Inspector of Police.
In the said statement the deceased gave a detailed information regarding her
marriage etc. and further stated "today on 13-03-2002 afternoon at about 3 P.M.
her husband came to the house and had meals. At that time she informed that she 
went to coolie work for that he scolded as 'lanja' and further saying that she
did not heed his words and went to coolie work. By so saying he abused and beat
her; took the kerosene tin and poured on her and lit fire with a match stick;
due to that fire engulfed on her polyster saree and her body was burnt: she
loudly raised cries and on hearing cries the neighbours came and on seeing them
accused ran away from the place. The neighbours put off the fire by pouring
water".

11.           The version in Ex.P24 is very specific that the accused poured
kerosene and set fire to her. Ex.P8 is another statement given by the deceased
to the Judicial Magistrate of First Class, Yemmiganur. When the Magistrate
questioned as to how she received fire she replied as follows:
"Due to pouring of kerosene by my husband for attending the handloom work. On 
hearing my cries people came and poured water." 

She further stated as follows:
"Since the marriage my mother-in-law and father-in law beat me due to meager
dowry."

This statement was recorded in the presence of the doctor and the doctor made an
endorsement on the dying declaration that the patient was conscious and coherent
at the time of recording the statement. This statement was recorded by the
Magistrate on 14-03-2002 i.e. on the next date of the incident. On a perusal of
the statement it is clear that the deceased pointed out that the accused was
responsible for the offence by pouring kerosene and setting fire to her. She was
also specific that except the accused nobody was there in the house. The version
given in the above statements is consistent and there are no variations to
create any kind of doubt in the mind of the Court regarding the truthfulness of
the version given by the deceased. Sofaras the mental condition is concerned,
the doctor is very specific that she was conscious and coherent. The learned
Magistrate after putting the preliminary questions satisfied that she was in fit
state of mind to give the statement. Therefore, the contention of the learned
counsel for the appellant that the deceased was not in a sound state of mind is
not acceptable, as it is only a contention without any supporting material from
the evidence placed before the Court.

12.             The learned counsel for the appellant also relied on the judgment of
this Court in EARAMALLA SRINU v. STATE OF A.P.1, wherein this Court held that if  
there is a doubt regarding the identity of the deceased: whether the Magistrate
recorded the dying declaration of the person who is alleged to have died of
burns in fact and whether the statement recorded by Sub-Inspector of police was
taken of the same person and whether the dead body of the same person was sent  
for post-mortem examination and whether the inquest was held of the same
person's body, it is not safe to rely on the dying declaration said to be
recorded by the Magistrate. Therefore, dying declaration said to have been
recorded at various times are doubtful and the conviction and sentence against
the accused is set aside.

13.         But the facts of the case covered by the above decision are
different from the present case. Therefore, the principle laid down in the above
case is not applicable to the present case.

14.          It is needless to mention in MUNNU RAJA v. STATE OF M.P.2 the
Supreme Court held as follows:

"There is neither rule of law nor of prudence that dying declaration cannot be
acted upon without corroboration."

15.             In STATE OF U.P. v. RAM SAGAR YADAV3 the Supreme Court held as        
follows:

"If the court is satisfied that the dying declaration is true and voluntary, it
can base conviction on it, without corroboration."

16.             P.W.15 the doctor who conducted autopsy over the dead body of the 
deceased mentioned that the deceased received burns to an extent of 90% and he 
opined that deceased appeared to have died of septicaemia with narogenic shock,
therefore, it has taken some time from the date of burns till the date of death.
But from the statement of the deceased the intention of the accused to kill the
deceased is very clear.

17.             The learned counsel for the appellant further submitted that if the
Court comes to a conclusion that dying declaration of the deceased is
acceptable, in view of time lag between the date of occurrence and the date of
death nearly bout 20 days, a lenient view may be taken for the offence and
prayed for lesser punishment. In support of his contention he relied on the
judgment of the Supreme Court in GANGA DASS v. STATE OF HARYANA4, wherein the         
Supreme Court held that the offence under Section 302 can be tried under Section
304 part II when there is single head injury and deceased dying 18 days later
due to septicaemia and other complications and the accused cannot be said to
have intended to cause death or that particular injury.

18.             In the present case, intention of the accused is very clear. He
poured kerosene and resorted to set fire to the deceased. Imminent danger is
anticipated and there is clear intention for the accused to do away with the
deceased. Therefore, the decision rendered by the Supreme Court in the above
case is not applicable to the facts of the present case.

19.             In view of the above circumstances, we are of the opinion that there
are no grounds to interfere with the judgment of the lower court and it is
liable to be confirmed in all respects.

20.             In the result, criminal appeal is dismissed by confirming the
conviction and sentence imposed by the lower Court.

21.             The advocate fees is fixed at Rs.1,000/-.

?1 2005(3) ALT (Crl.) 135 (D.B.) (A.P.)
2 (1976) 3 SCC 104 
3 (1985) 1 SCC 552 
4 1994 Supp (1) SCC 534  

