

THE HONOURABLE SRI JUSTICE A.GOPAL REDDY            
Crl.P.3934 of 2005

10-10-2006 

Vijaya Saradhi Vajja

Devi Sriropa Madapati and another

Counsel for the Petitioners: Sri C.Padmanabha Reddy 

Counsel for the respondent No.1: Sri Nooty Ram Mohan Rao  
Counsel for the respondent No.2: Public Prosecutor

:ORAL ORDER:    
                By means of filing this petition under Section 482 Cr.P.C.
petitioner seeks to quash the proceedings in Cr.No.410 of 2004 of Banjara Hills
Police Station, Hyderabad initiated against him for the offence under Sections
498A and 506 IPC. 

                Factual matrix leading to filing this petition briefly stated as
under:
                The complainant lodged a compliant alleging that her marriage was
performed with the petitioner-A1 on                16-08-1995 and they lived
happily in USA for 81/2 years and had a son-Raviteja on 06-04-2000; petitioner
developed illegal contact with Anju Kapoor for the last 3 years and tortured her
both mentally and physically since then. He threatened for her life and targeted
her son in his vicious threats and blackmailed her in every aspect and coerced
to sign a custody decree and also a divorce, which he has later used to get
married to Anju Kapoor. He also threatened that if she did not sign the papers,
he would drag her to the US courts, which is a very expensive affair. He also
took possession of her passport and blackmailed that he will not give the same
until she sign the divorce       papers. She signed those documents under great
pressure and mental agony. The same was happened in USA where she had  no    
support from family or friends. In view of the same, she has to left the States
and came to Hyderabad to protect herself.    Her mother-in-law-Pramila Vajja,
who resides in Siddam      Setty Apartments, Ashok Nagar, Hyderabad made threats  
that petitioner-A1 will take the child with him and he can visit Hyderabad at
any time. Apart from the same, she has been receiving calls from the US
Consulate in this regard for the     past few days. Therefore, she requires
protection from the petitioner and her in laws. On the basis of the said
complaint, police registered the above crime for the offence under Section 498A
and 506 IPC and proceded with the investigation, which    is now sought to be
quashed on the ground that the complaint under Section 498A IPC is inconsistent
with her application      filed in the Family Court for restitution of conjugal
rights and it was filed only with a view to prevent the petitioner from
participating in the proceedings before the Family Court filed    by her for
child custody and restitution of conjugal rights       under the threat of his
arrest whenever he visits India. The complainant made wild allegations against
the petitioner and    his mother, whereas in the civil proceedings she has
stated     that she wants the petitioner to live with her as husband. By    an
order dated 06-04-2005 in FCAMP.No.79 of 2005 in FCA No.33 of 2005 this court 
was pleased to permit the petitioner to visit the child, if he comes down to
India any time before the date of final hearing of the appeal. In view of the
same, continuation of investigation is nothing but harassment and
liable to be set aside. Further, the allegation of wild      harassment was in
USA and they never lived together in India much less Hyderabad and relate to the
period prior to decree    of divorce obtained on 04-01-2004. Since she is no
more a    wife on the date when the complaint was lodged, continuing the
proceedings is nothing but abuse of process and liable to be quashed.
        
               Sri C.Padmanabha Reddy, learned senior counsel appearing for the
petitioner would contend that once the     marital relationship is severed
between the petitioner and the complainant, registering the crime for the
offence under     Section 498A IPC is nothing but abuse of process.  Petitioner
being a qualified and established I.T. professional with     executive
responsibilities and working in a Multi National Company and also acquired
citizenship of United States of America in 2003, without prior sanction of the
Central Government as contemplated under proviso to Section 188 Cr.P.C., police
cannot register the crime and investigate into    the matter. The complainant
who came along with the child to India on 11-06-2004 filed O.P.No.326 of 2004 in
the Family Court to appoint her as sole guardian of her minor son, which    is
in violation of consent decree passed by the Circuit Court. Since the petitioner
and his son are American citizens, the    Courts at USA alone will have
jurisdiction in respect of matters relating to child custody; on petitioner
moving the Circuit    Court, it passed a decree on 18-06-2004 directing the
complainant to return the minor child to the petitioner at his resident in
Virginia, which resulted in maliciously instituting     the above complainant
which is nothing but abuse of process    and liable to be quashed.

                 Sri Nooty Ram Mohan Rao, learned counsel for the 1st respondent 
contended that under Section 498A IPC which   has been inserted by Act 46/83 the
word 'woman' is used but  not 'wife'; and Section 4 of IPC extends to extra-
territorial offences committed by any citizen of India in any place without and
beyond India and once the offence committed outside    India, will be treated as
if committed in India as per the explanation to the Section. Even otherwise, on
the date of offence alleged to have committed the relationship of wife and
husband subsists and police can investigate into the same and lay the charge
sheet. In support of his submission, he placed reliance on the judgments of this
Court in D.SURENDER  REDDY v. STATE OF A.P.1; PARUCHURI ASHOK KUMAR v. STATE OF                
A.P.2 and SHAIK KUSROUDDIN v. STATE OF    A.P.3. He further contended that FIR     
registered by the police cannot be quashed at the initial stage and prayed for
dismissal of the petition.
                
              Before considering the rival contentions, the facts which are not
in dispute have to be noticed are: That the petitioner married the complainant
on 06-08-1995 and since   then they lived in USA where a male child was born on
06-04-2000; later differences arose between the parties; the spouses approached
the Circuit Court of Fairfax Country, Virginia, USA and obtained a final decree
on 14-01-2004; while     granting divorce the said Court permitted the father
and    mother to share the custody of the child; the father become a citizen of
America in the year 2003 i.e. three years after the  birth of the child and
consequent upon the divorce, the     mother, not being a citizen of America,
returned back to India along with the child and later filed O.P.No.326 of 2004
under Section 9 of the Guardians and Wards Act, 1980 seeking    custody of the
child, in which petitioner filed I.A.No.845 of     2004 under Order XIV Rules 1
and 2 r/w 151 CPC to try the  issue of jurisdiction and maintainability of the
O.P. as a preliminary issue.  On dismissal of the said I.A. petitioner filed FCA
No.33 of 2005 wherein this court by order dated              24-02-2006
dismissed the appeal with a direction to the      Family Court to dispose of the
O.P. filed by the complainant expeditiously. Pending the above proceedings it
appears that   the petitioner obtained a decree on 18-06-2004 wherein the
Circuit Court directed the complainant to return the minor child to the
petitioner at his resident in Virginia, which triggered of filing the complaint.

                This court cannot go into the validity of the consent decree
obtained by the petitioner, suffice it to say that the 1st
respondent/complainant had not brought to my notice of her filing any OP to
nullify the consent decree passed by the Circuit Court nor it is disputed that
the petitioner has acquired American citizenship in the year 2003.

                The issue that falls for consideration is: "Whether the bar
contained in proviso to Section 188 Cr.P.C. is also extended to investigation?

                 Before I proceed to answer the question it is convenient to
consider the judgments on which reliance is placed.
                
                  This Court in the case of Surender Reddy              (1
supra) refused to quash the proceedings since the charge sheet does disclose
commission of offence under Section 498A IPC. 
        
                  This Court in PARUCHURI ASHOK KUMAR's case   (2 supra) held that 
Offences arising under Section 498A IPC     and the provisions of Dowry
Prohibition Act would usually be committed at the place of residence of the
husband and his parents and also at the place of residence of the parents of the
wife, as it is the parents of the wife that have to meet the demand for dowry by
the husband and his relatives as their demand would have to reach the parents of
the wife for its    being met. Having regard to the peculiar circumstances, this
Court in exercise of jurisdiction under Section 407 Cr.P.C. transferred
C.C.No.393 of 2003 pending on the file of V Additional Metropolitan Magistrate,
Guntur to the Court of IX Metropolitan Magistrate, Hyderabad.
                
                 In the case of SHAIK KUSROUDDIN (3 supra)     this Court held
that merely because divorce was obtained the marital crimes, if any, committed
by the husband during the subsistence of the marriage do not get vanished. If
divorce is   the panacea for marital crimes, or crimes committed by the spouses,
many marriages may not subsist and refused to quash the proceedings. 
                
                The judgments on which reliance is placed do not answer the
contentions raised by the learned senior counsel, namely, petitioner being an
American citizen cannot be    subjected to inquire into or to be tried in India
except as contemplated under proviso to Section 188 Cr.P.C.

                It is appropriate to mention the above section hereunder:
"188 Offence committed outside India
When an offence is committed outside India-
(a) by a citizen of India, whether on the high seas or elsewhere; or

(b) by a person, not being such citizen, on any ship or aircraft registered in
India,

he may be dealt with in respect of such offence as if it had been committed at
any place within India at which he may be found : Provided that, notwithstanding
anything in any of the preceding sections of this Chapter, no such offence shall
be inquired into or tried in India except with the previous sanction of the
Central Government. Corresponding old law.-S.188 of the Code Of Criminal
Procedure, 1898. 

Section 188 only deals with procedure and does not make it a substantive offence
to do an act, which would be an offence if committed in India. It confers extra-
territorial jurisdiction in respect of offences committed outside India by:
Indian citizens whether on the high seas or elsewhere-or (b) any person not a
citizen of Indian on any ship or aircraft registered in India. It is a corollary
to Section 4, Penal code and is its procedural counterpart and Section 188 are
extra-territorial in their operation in a restricted sense.

                It is also appropriate to notice Sections 3 and 4 IPC, which read
thus:

"Sec. 3: Any person liable by any Indian law to be tried for an offence
committed beyond India shall be dealt with according to the provisions of this
Code for any act committed beyond India in the same manner as if such act had
been committed within India.

Sec.4: The provisions of this Code apply also to any offence committed by-
(1) any citizen of India in any place without and beyond India;
(2) any person on any ship or aircraft registered in India wherever it may be.

Explanation:- In this Section the word "offence" includes every act committed
outside India which, if committed in India, would be punishable under this
code".

                The words notwithstanding in any of the preceding sections of
Chapter XIII clearly indicate that Sections 177 to 184 are controlled by Section
188 with regard to inquiry and such an inquiry cannot be undertaken without
there being the prior sanction by the Central Government as per the proviso to
it. Having regard to the said fact the word "inquiry" assumes importance, which
has been defined under Section 2(g) Cr.P.C. reads thus:
"Inquiry means every enquiry, other than a trial, conducted under this Code by a
Magistrate or Court.
whereas investigation has been defined under Section 2(h) which reads as under:
"Investigation includes all the proceedings under this code for the collection
of evidence conducted by a police officer or by any person other than a
Magistrate who is authorized by a Magistrate in this behalf.

The term 'inquiry' has a very wide connotation and it includes every inquiry
other than a trial. It is settled that a proceeding under Section 209 is in the
nature of an inquiry within the meaning of Section 2(g) (See AIR 1978 Patna 225
(FB))

                 The Supreme Court in STATE OF U.P. v. LAKSHMI BRAHMAN4 in para- 
13 of its judgment held as under:
"..under Section 207, the Magistrate is performing a judicial function of
ascertaining whether copies have been supplied or not, it would undoubtedly be
an inquiry for the purpose of satisfying himself that Section 207 has been
complied with in letter and spirit. That satisfaction has to be judicial
satisfaction. It is not a trial but something other than a trial and being
judicial function it would necessarily be an inquiry. The making of an order
committing the accused to the Court of Session will equally be a stage in the
inquiry and the inquiry culminates in making the order of commitment. Thus, from
the time the accused appears or is produced before the Magistrate with the
police report under Section 170 and the Magistrate proceeds to enquire whether
Section 207 has been complied with and then proceeds to commit the accused to  
the Court of Session, the proceeding before the Magistrate would be an inquiry
as contemplated by Section 2(g) of the Code. We find it difficult to agree with
the High Court that the function discharged by the Magistrate under Section 207
is something other than a judicial function and while discharging the function
the Magistrate is not holding an inquiry as contemplated by the Code".

                   In view of the same, "inquiry" relates to proceedings before
Magistrate prior to trial, while    "investigation" is confined to proceedings
taken by the police    or by any person other than a Magistrate who is
authorized in his behalf. The object of an investigation is the collection of
evidence and of an inquiry the taking of evidence for further action.
Investigation consists generally of-(i) Proceeding to   the spot; (ii)
Ascertainment of facts and circumstances; (iii) Discovery and arrest of
suspected offender; (iv) Collection of evidence which may consist of (a)
examination of persons (including accused) and recording statements if though
fit, (b) search of place and seizure of things; (v) consideration    whether the
materials are enough for submitting a charge    sheet before the court. (See
H.N.Rishbud v. State of Delhi, AIR 1955 SC 196; State of M.P. v. Mubarak Ali,
AIR 1959 SC 707; State of U.P. v. Bhagwant Kishore Joshi AIR 1964 SC 221). A 
police officer investigates a case by himself or under the order of a Magistrate
under Section 202. In view of the same, the word 'inquiry' used in proviso to
Section 188 Cr.P.C. is confined to proceedings before the Magistrate prior to
trial alone but cannot be extended to 'investigation' by the police. The bar, if
any, will operate to inquiry before the Magistrate after the police laid the
charge sheet for the offence.

                In Ajay AGGARWAL V. UNION OF INDIA5    Justice K.Ramaswamy in his       
separate judgment held that sanction under Section 188 is not a condition
precedent to    take cognizance of the offence. If need be it could be obtained
before trial begins. Justice R.M.Sahai while concurring             the above
view held that language of the section is plain and simple. It operates where an
offence is committed by a citizen   of India outside the country. Requirements
are, therefore, one  - commission of an offence; second - by an Indian citizen;
and third - that it should have been committed outside the country. Substantive
law of extra-territory in respect of    criminal offences is provided for by
Section 4 of the IPC and    the procedure to inquire and try it is contained in
Section 188 Cr.P.C. Effect of these sections is that an offence committed     by
an Indian citizen outside the country is deemed to have    been committed in
India. Proviso to Section 188 Cr.P.C. however provides the safeguard for the NRI
to guard against any unwarranted harassment by directing, "that, notwithstanding
anything in any of the preceding sections of  this Chapter, no such offence
shall be inquired into or tried in India except with the previous sanction of
the Central Government". Since the proviso begins with a non obstante clause its
observance is mandatory. But it would come into play only if the principal
clause is applicable, namely, it is established that an offence as defined in
clause (n) of Section 2 of the Cr.P.C. has been committed and it has been
committed outside the country.

                It was nextly argued that the petitioner acquired American
citizenship in the year 2003 therefore; prior sanction of the Central Government
is must.

                It is not in dispute that police registered a case for the alleged
offence under Sections 498A and 506 IPC. The allegations in the compliant goes
to show that the petitioner making threats to the complainant telephonically
through his friends and family; he also threatened that he will take the child
with him and he can visit Indian at any time for the said purpose, she is
receiving calls from the U.S.Consulate in this regard for the past few days.

                It is implicit under Section 3 of the Penal Code that a foreigner
who commits an offence within India is guilty and can be punished as such
without any limitation as to his corporeal presence in India at the time. For if
it were not so, the legal fiction implicit in the phrase "as if such act had
been committed within India" in Section 3 would not have been limited to the
supposition that such act had been committed within India, but would have
extended also a fiction as to his physical presence at the time in India. (See
Mobarik Ali Ahmed v State of Bombay (AIR 1957 SC 857)).  
Further, in the above case it was held as under:

"...The position is quite clear where the representations were made through the
trunk phone. The statement of the appellant at the Karachi-end of the telephone
becomes a representation to the complainant only when it reaches cognition of
the complainant at the Bombay-end.....Now there can be no doubt that prima facie
the Indian Penal Code is intended to deal with all unlawful acts and omissions
defined to be offences and committed within India and to provide for the
punishment thereof of the person or persons found guilty therefor. This is
implicit in the preamble and Section 2 of the Indian Penal Code. What is,
therefore, to be seen is whether there is any reason to think that a foreigner
not corporeally present at the time of the commission of the offence does not
fall within the range of persons punishable therefor under the Code. It appears
to us that the answer must be in the negative unless there is any recognised
legal principle on which such exclusion can be founded or the language of the
Code compels such a construction". 

                In view of the law as aforementioned once the allegations in the
complaint disclose that threats were received telephonically at India and crime
is registered for the offence under Section 506, it is not desirable to scuttle
the investigation at the prime stage.

                Since no other grounds have been urged for staying the
investigation, there is no bar for the police to investigate into the crime
registered for the alleged offence and filing of charge sheet. On filing the
charge sheet only when the Magistrate proceeds to make an inquiry into the
matter, having regard to the nature of allegations, petitioner can insist for
sanction of Central Government for collection of evidence during the course of
trial into the charges so framed.

                For the reasons abovementioned, this Court is not inclined to
scuttle the investigation into the crime by the police. The petitioner is
entitled to raise all the grounds during the course of inquiry by the Magistrate
before trial commences.

                 The Criminal Petition is accordingly dismissed.

?1 2002(1) ALD (Crl.) 351 (AP)
2 2004(1) ALD (Crl.) 196 (AP)
3 2005(1) ALT (Crl.) 132 (AP)
4 (1983) 3 SCC 372 
5 (1993) 3 SCC 609 

