

THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE RAMESH RANGANATHAN             
CRIMINAL PETITION No.446 of 2003   

06.03.2006 

Chancharapu Madhusudhan Reddy     

The State of A.P. rep. by its Public Prosecutor, High court of A.P.
Hyderabad and another 

Counsel for the petitioner              :   Sri T.V. Sridevi

^Counsel for respondent No.1                   Public Prosecutor.
Counsel for the respondent No.2 :   Sri A. Ravinder

:O R D E R: 
        
        The petitioner seeks to have the proceedings in C.C.No.552 of 2000 on the
file of the IV Additional Munsif Magistrate, Warangal, quashed.
        The petitioner is the father in law of the second respondent and is the
accused in C.C.No.552 of 2000. The allegations in the charge sheet are that the
marriage of the second respondent was performed with one Ch.Rajashekar Reddy,  
the son of the petitioner, on 20-12-1989 at karimnagar and at the time of
marriage, the parents of the second respondent had presented Rs.1,00,000/- in
cash and gold ornaments weighing 201/2  tulas.  After the marriage, the second
respondent joined her husband and they were blessed with one daughter. On 30-11-
1997, the second respondent's husband died due to Liver Lymphoma.  The second  
respondent's parents, after the death of her husband, on 14-12-1997, 04-07-1998
and 30-07-1998, demanded the accused to return the gold ornaments and cash,  
which was given by them at the time of marriage, but the accused had not given
them a single paise and is said to have misappropriated the cash and 201/2 tulas
of gold  ornaments.  Due to the harassment of the accused, the second respondent
returned to her parent's house.  It is alleged that on
14-12-1997, the petitioner herein came to the second respondent's house and
forcibly took away 10 silk sarees, 15 dresses of her daughter, 6 blankets, one
air cooler and photo albums belonging to her.  It is alleged that the second
respondent and her husband invested one lakh in shares in Vikas Bharathi
Vidyanikethan School, located near Madikonda, managed by one Sri K.Satyanarayana   
Reddy, and that after her husband's death, the second respondent requested Sri
K.Satyanarayana Reddy to return the share value. It is alleged that in the
meantime, the petitioner had brought, and is continuing to bring, pressure on
Sri K.Satyanarayana Reddy not to refund the amount to the second respondent.  It
is alleged that on 02-11-1999, at 12.45 p.m. the petitioner herein came to
Adarsha English Medium School, enticed her daughter to go with him on false
pretexts and attempted to kidnap her. The petitioner herein on 07-05-2000 and
09-05-2000, rang up the second respondent's parent's house and abused her in
vulgar language.  It is alleged that due to the acts of the petitioner herein,
the second respondent was suffering from mental agony. A case in Cr.No.128 of
2000, under Sections 498-A, 406 I.P.C. and Section 3 and 6 of the Dowry
Prohibition Act, was registered.  L.Ws.1 to 6 were examined and their statements
were recorded. Thereafter, the present charge sheet was filed against the
petitioner herein for the offences under Sections 498-A, 406 I.P.C. and Sections
3 and 6(2) of the Dowry Prohibition Act.
        Smt. T.V.Sridevi, learned counsel for the petitioner, would submit that
the ingredients of Section 498-A and 406 I.P.C. and Sections 3 and 6 of the
Dowry Prohibition Act are not satisfied and as such the proceedings, in
C.C.No.552 of 2000, are liable to be quashed.  Learned counsel would submit
that, even otherwise, the offences of which the petitioner was charged, is
barred by limitation.  According to the learned counsel, since the marriage of
the second respondent and the petitioner's son took place on
20-12-1989 and the complaint was filed on 11-05-2000, the complaint and the
subsequent charge sheet filed on 30-06-2000 are barred by limitation.  Learned
counsel would submit that the second respondent filed a partition suit in
O.S.No.25 of 1998 on the file of the First Additional District Judge, Warangal,
and the learned Judge, by judgment dated 03-06-2002, had directed partition of
'A' Schedule property.  Learned counsel would submit that the second
respondent's request for partition of 'B' and 'C' Schedule properties was
rejected by the Civil Court and in fact, 'C' Schedule properties relate to the
very same claim of having paid rupees one lakh in cash and 201/2 tulas of gold
as dowry.  Learned counsel would submit that since the Civil Court disbelieved
the second respondent's version and since the order of the Civil Court is
binding on the Criminal Court, the ingredients of Sections 498-A and 406 I.P.C.
and Sections 3 and 6(2) of the Dowry Prohibition Act are not attracted.  Learned
counsel would place reliance on V.M. Shah v. State of Maharashtra1   in this
regard.
        Sri A.Ravinder, learned counsel for the second respondent, would
vehemently contend that this Court, in proceedings under Section 482 Cr.P.C.,
was not entitled to examine the truth or otherwise of the allegations made in
the charge sheet. Learned counsel would contend that if the allegations in the
charge sheet are taken as true, the ingredients of Sections 498-A and 406 I.P.C.
and Sections 3 and 6(2) of the Dowry Prohibition Act would be attracted. Learned
counsel would submit that the judgment of the Civil Court is not automatically
binding on the Criminal Court and it is but one of the factors, which the
Criminal Court would take into consideration.  Learned counsel would place
reliance on
k.G. Premshanker v. Inspector of Police2.  Learned counsel would submit that
since the second respondent's Stridhan properties continue to remain in trust
with the petitioner herein, after the demise of her husband, Section 406 I.P.C.
is attracted.  Learned counsel would place reliance on Pratibha Rani v. Suraj
Kumar3.  Learned counsel would further contend that the question as to whether
the complaint was barred by limitation, in the facts and circumstances of the
present case, was a matter of evidence which could only be gone into by the
trial Court and it is not for this Court to examine these issues in proceedings
under Section 482 Cr.P.C.       Before examining the rival contentions, it is
necessary to take note of the relevant sections under which the petitioner was
charged. Sections 498-A, 406 I.P.C. and Sections 3 and 6 of the Dowry
Prohibition Act read thus:
498-A.  Husband or relative of husband of a woman subjecting her to cruelty:
        Whoever, being the husband or the relative of the husband of a woman,
subjects such woman to cruelty shall be punished with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine.
        Explanation: For the purpose of this section, "cruelty" means
(a) any willful conduct which is of such a nature as is likely to drive the
woman to commit suicide or to cause grave injury or danger to life, limb or
health (whether mental or physical) of the woman; or
(b) harassment of the woman where such harassment is with a view to coercing her
or any person related to her to meet any unlawful demand for any property or
valuable security or is on account of failure by her or any person related to
her to meet such demand. 
406. Punishment for criminal breach of trust:
        Whoever commits criminal breach of trust shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years,
or with fine, or with both.
3. Penalty for giving or taking dowry: (1) If any person, after the commencement
of this Act, gives or takes or abets the giving or taking of dowry, he shall be
punishable, with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five years
and with fine which shall not be less than fifteen thousand rupees or the amount
of the value of such dowry, whichever is more;
        Provided that Court may, for adequate and special reasons to be recorded
in the judgment, impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than five
years.
        (2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall apply to, or in relation to-
(a) presents which are given at the time of a marriage to the bride (without any
demand having been made in that behalf):
Provided that such presents are entered in a list maintained in accordance with
the rules made under this Act;
(b) presents which are given at the time of a marriage to the bridegroom
(without any demand having been made in that behalf
Provided that such presents are entered in a list maintained in accordance with
the rules made under this Act;
Provided further that where such presents are made by or on behalf of the bride
or any person related to the bride, such presents are of a customary nature and
the value thereof is not excessive having regard to the financial status of the
person by whom, or on whose behalf, such presents are given.

6.Dowry to be for the benefit of the wife or her heirs:-
(1) Where any dowry is received by any person other than the woman in connection
with whose marriage it is given, that person shall transfer it to the woman,
(a) if the dowry was received before marriage, within three months after the
date of marriage; or
(b) if the dowry was received at the time of or after the marriage, within three
months after the date of its receipt; and
(c) if the dowry was received when the woman was minor within three months after
she has attained the age of eighteen years;
and pending such, shall hold it in trust for the benefit of the woman.
(2)     If any person fails to transfer any property as required by sub-section
(1) within the time limit specified therefor, or as required by sub-section (3)
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than
six months, but which may extend to two years or with fine which shall not be
less than five thousand rupees, but which may extend to ten thousand rupees or
with both.
        (3)     Where the woman entitled to any property under sub-section (1) dies
before receiving it, the heirs of the woman shall be entitled to claim it from
the person holding it for the time being:
        Provided that where such woman dies within seven years of her marriage,
otherwise than due to natural causes, such property
(a) if she has no children, be transferred to her parents, or
(b) if she has children, be transferred to such children and pending such
transfer, be held in trust for such children.
(3-A)  Where a person convicted under sub-section (2) for failure to transfer
any property as required by sub-section (1) or
sub-section (3) has not, before his conviction under that sub-section,
transferred such property to the woman entitled thereto or, as the case may be
her heirs, parents  or children the court shall, in addition to awarding
punishment under that sub-section, direct, by order in writing, that such person
shall transfer the property to such woman or, as the case may be, her heirs,
parents or children within such period as may be specified in the order, and if
such person fails to comply with the direction within the period so specified,
an amount equal to the value of the property may be recovered from him as if it
were a fine imposed by such court and paid to such woman or, as the case may be, 
her heirs, parents or children.
(4) Nothing contained in this section shall affect the provisions of section 3
or section 4.

Insofar as Section 498-A I.P.C. is concerned, the relative of the husband of a
woman, if he subjects the woman to harassment with a view to coercing her or any
person related to her to meet any unlawful demand for any property or valuable
security or the harassment is on account of failure by her or any person related
to her to meet such demand, could it be said that the woman had been subjected
to cruelty and thereby an offence under Section 498-A I.P.C. to have been
committed.  The harassment alleged in the present charge sheet is not on account
of any unlawful demand of property or valuable security nor is it on account of
failure by the second respondent or any person related to her to such a demand.
There is no allegation in the charge sheet that the petitioner herein demanded
property or valuable security from the second respondent. On the other hand, it
is the second respondent, who is seeking return of her "Stridhan" and her share
in her husband's property from the petitioner herein.  The ingredients of
Section 498-A I.P.C. is clearly not attracted and the proceedings to the extent
the petitioner is charged of an offence under Section 498-A I.P.C. is quashed.
Insofar as the petitioner is alleged to have been committed an offence under
Section 406 I.P.C., the Supreme Court in Pratibha Rani (4 supra), held thus:
 "...........We are clearly of the opinion that the mere factum of the husband
and wife living together does not entitle either of them to commit a breach of
criminal law and if one does then he/she will be liable for all the consequences
of such breach. Criminal law and matrimonial home are not strangers. Crimes
committed in matrimonial home are as much punishable as anywhere else. In the 
case of stridhan property also, the title of which always remains with the wife
though possession of the same may sometimes be with the husband or other members    
of his family, if the husband or any other member of his family commits such an
offence, they, will be liable to punishment for the offence of criminal breach
of trust under Ss. 405 and 406, I. P. C.......
.............To sum up, the position seems to be that a pure and simple
entrustment of stridhan without creating any rights in the husband excepting
putting the articles in his possession does not entitle him to use the same to
the detriment of his wife without her consent. The husband has no justification
for not returning the same articles as and when demanded by the wife nor can he
burden her with losses of business by using the said property which was never
intended by her while entrusting possession of stridhan. On the allegations in
the complaint, the husband is no more and no less than a pure and simple
custodian acting on behalf of his wife and if he diverts the entrusted property
elsewhere or for different purposes he takes a clear risk of prosecution under
S. 406 of the IPC. On a parity of reasoning, it is manifest that the husband,
being only a custodian of the stridhan of his wife, cannot be said to be in
joint possession thereof and thus acquire a joint interest in the
property........
.........We now come to the question as to whether or not a clear allegation of
entrustment and misappropriation of properties was made by the appellant in her
complaint and, if so, was the High Court justified in quashing the complaint at
that stage. It is well settled by a long course of decisions of this Court that
for the purpose of exercising its power under S. 482, Cr. P. C. to quash a FIR
or a complaint the High Court would have to proceed entirely on the basis of the
allegations made in the complaint or the documents accompanying the same per se.  
It has no jurisdiction to examine the correctness or otherwise of the
allegations. In case no offence is committed on the allegation and the
ingredients of Ss. 405 and 406, I. P. C. are not made out, the High Court would
be justified in quashing the proceedings. In the present case, we shall show
that the allegations are both clear, specific and unambiguous and, therefore,
the complainant should have been given a chance to prove her case. It is, of
course, open to the accused at the trial to take whatever defences that were
open to him but that stage had not yet come and therefore, the High Court was
totally ill-advised to speculate on the merits of the case at that stage and
quash the proceedings. We have narrated the facts in detail in the earlier part
of our judgment but we might again, even at the risk of repetition, indicate the
bare facts which prima facie make out a clear case under S. 406, IPC against the
accused. The important. portions of the complaint may be spelt out thus :
l) that all the accused attended the marriage .of the appellant with the
respondent and demanded dowry from the parents of the appellant in consideration
of the marriage.
2) that the parents of the appellant spent Rs. 75,000/- on the marriage and
dowry articles worth Rs. 60,000/- (inclusive of jewellery, wearing apparel,
etc.) were given and entrusted to accused Nos. 1 to 6 at the time of the Doli on
5-2-1972.
3) that the articles entrusted to the accused were meant for the exclusive use
of the appellant,
4) that the dowry articles were never given by the accused to the appellant even
for her use and possession of the same was illegally, dishonestly and mala fide
retained by the accused in order to obtain a wrongful gain to themselves and
wrongful loss to the appellant,
5) that on 11-12-1980 in the morning, the accused brought the appellant to
Ludhiana in three clothes and refused to give the entrusted articles which were
the stridhan of the appellant."


It is clear therefrom that if a member of the husband's family retains
possession of the "Stridhan" property of a woman in trust, the title always
continues to remain with the woman though possession may be with the member of  
the family.  Accepting as true the allegations in the charge sheet, that the
petitioner had not returned the amount or gold received from the second
respondent  towards dowry despite a specific request in this regard, it cannot
be said that the ingredients of Section 406 I.P.C. are not attracted. Whether
these allegations are true or not are all matters of evidence, which the trial
Court is required to examine, and not for this Court to go into in proceedings
under Section 482 Cr.P.C.
Smt T.V.Sridevi, learned counsel for the petitioner, would place reliance on the
judgment of the Supreme Court in V.M. Shah 
(1 supra) in support of her submission that the findings recorded by the Civil
Court are binding on the Criminal Court.   The judgment in V.M. Shah (1 supra)
has been overruled by the Supreme Court in k.G. Premshanker (2 supra), wherein
the Supreme Court, while holding that the judgment and decree passed by the
Civil Court would be a relevant factor, held thus:
        "What emerges from the aforesaid discussion is -
(1) the previous judgment which is final can be relied upon as provided under
Sections 40 to 43 of the Evidence Act;
(2) in civil suits between the same parties, principle of res judicata may
apply; (3) in a criminal case, Section 300 CrPC makes provision that once a
person is convicted or acquitted, he may not be tried again for the same offence
if the conditions mentioned therein are satisfied; (4) if the criminal case and
the civil proceedings are for the same cause, judgment of the civil court would
be relevant if conditions of any of Sections 40 to 43 are satisfied, but it
cannot be said that the same would be conclusive except as provided in Section
41.  Section 41 provides which judgment would be conclusive proof of what is
stated therein.
        Further, the judgment, order or decree passed in a previous civil
proceeding, if relevant, as provided under Sections 40 and 42 or other
provisions of the Evidence Act then in each case, the court has to decide to
what extent it is binding or conclusive with regard to the matter(s) decided
therein.  Take for illustration, in a case of alleged trespass by A on B's
property, B filed a suit for declaration of its title and to recover possession
from A and suit is decreed.  Thereafter, in a criminal prosecution by B against
A for trespass, judgment passed between the parties in civil proceedings would
be relevant and the court may hold that it conclusively establishes the title as
well as possession of B over the property.  In such case, A may be convicted for
trespass.
The illustration to Section 42 which is quoted above makes the position clear.
Hence, in each and every case, the first question which would require
consideration is - whether  judgment, order or decree is relevant, if relevant-
its effect.  It may be relevant for a limited purpose, such as, motive or as a
fact in issue.  This would depend upon the facts of each case.
        In the present case, the decision rendered by the Constitution Bench in
M.S. Sheriff case (M.S. Sheriff v. State of Madras - AIR 1954 SC 397 : 1954
CriLJ 1019) would be binding, wherein it has been specifically held that no
hard-and-fast rule can be laid down and that possibility of conflicting decision
in civil and criminal courts is not a relevant consideration.  The law envisages

"such an eventuality when it expressly refrains from making the decision of one
court binding on the other, or even relevant, except for limited purpose such as
sentence or damages". 

        Hence, the observation made by this Court in V.M. Shah case (V.M. Shah v. 
State of Maharashtra - ( (1995) 5 SCC 767 : 1995 SCC (Cri) 1077) that the
finding recorded by the criminal court stands superseded by the finding recorded
by the civil court is not correct enunciation of law.  Further, the general
observations made in Karam Chand Case (Karam Chand Ganga Prasad v. Union of     
India - ( (1970) 3 SCC 694) are in context of the facts of the case stated
above.  The Court was not required to consider the earlier decision of the
Constitution Bench in M.S. Sheriff case as well as Sections 40 to 43 of the
Evidence Act.

        Whether the findings recorded by the Civil Court, in its judgment in
O.S.No.25 of 1996, dated 03-06-2002, is required to be accepted or not are all
matters to be examined by the trial Court, on the basis of evidence, and not for
this Court to go into in proceedings under Section 482 Cr.P.C.  Taking the
allegations in the charge sheet as true, it cannot be said that the ingredients
of Section 3 and 6 of the Dowry Prohibition Act and Section 406 I.P.C. are not
attracted.
Insofar as the question of limitation is concerned,
Smt T.V.Sridevi, learned counsel for the petitioner, would submit that since the
marriage of the second respondent took place on
20-12-1989 and the complaint was filed on 11-05-2000, more  than a decade
thereafter, the offences of which the petitioner  is alleged is clearly barred
by limitation.  Sri A.Ravinder, learned counsel for the second respondent, on
the other hand, would refer to the allegations in the charge sheet that on 14-
12-1997, 04-07-1998 and 30-07-1998, the second respondent and her parents 
demanded the accused for return of gold and cash given towards dowry, but was of
no avail, and contend that from the date of demand, the complaint and the charge
sheet filed are both within limitation.  Whether the offences of which the
petitioner is charged is within limitation is also for the trial Court, on the
basis of evidence on record, to determine.  Suffice to state that unless a clear
case of the charge sheet filed and cognizance taken therefrom being barred by
limitation is made out, the jurisdiction of this Court under Section 482 Cr.P.C.
cannot be invoked.
The criminal petition is allowed in part and the proceedings in C.C.No.552 of
2000 on the file of the IV Additional Munsif Magistrate, Warangal, insofar as
Section 498-A I.P.C. is concerned are quashed.  Except insofar as the charge
sheet relating to an offence under Section 498-A I.P.C. is concerned, the
criminal petition in all other respects is dismissed.

?1 (1995) 5 SCC 767 
2 2003 SCC (Cri) 223 
3 AIR 1985 SC 628  

