

THE HONOURABLE Dr. JUSTICE G. YETHIRAJULU          
Criminal Petition No.5702 of 2005

28-06-2006 

Atluri Ravindra, (A-4)
S/o. Satyanarayana, aged 30 years, 
Occ. Consultant, Bangalore,
N/o. Vijayawada and others.

The State of A.P. rep.by  its
Public Prosecutor, High Court,
Hyderabad and another. 

Counsel for petitioner:  Sri C. Praveen Kumar

Counsel for respondent: Public Prosecutor

:ORDER:  

This Criminal Petition is filed under Section 482 of Cr.P.C. to quash the
proceedings against A-4 to A-6 in C.C.No.304 of 2005 on the file of the
Additional Judicial First Class Magistrate, Kothapeta, registered for the
offence under Section 498-A read with 34 of I.P.C.
A-4 is the youngest brother of A-1 and according to the charge sheet, he was
staying at Bangalore to pursue his education.  A-5 is a married sister and A-6
is her husband.  The charge sheet was filed against these petitioners alleging
that they instigated by all ways and means and in pursuance of that A-1 harassed
the defacto complainant for additional dowry.  There is another allegation that
in Vijayawada also A-1 to A-6 harassed the complainant both mentally and
physically for the sake of additional dowry of Rs.5,00,000/-.  In the complaint
given to the police, it was mentioned that A-5 and A-6 along with A-2 and A-3
started demanding to bring more dowry and to sell the property promised to be
given by her parents. It is further mentioned that the complainant's in laws and
her husband started harassing her mentally and physically to bring more dowry
and necked out her from the house.
Except the above allegations, there were no specific overt acts as to whether
the harassment was mentally or physically, if so what was the kind of harassment
and when the harassment was caused etc. to rope up all the family members in 
this complaint.
In KANS RAJ v. STATE OF PUNJAB 1, the Supreme Court observed as follows:-     
"For the fault of the husband, the in-laws or the other relations cannot, in all
cases, be held to be involved in the demand of dowry. In cases where such
accusation are made, the overt acts attributed to persons other than husband are
required to be proved beyond reasonable doubt. By mere conjectures and
implications such relations cannot be held guilty for the offence relating to
dowry deaths. A tendency has, however, developed for roping in all relations of
the in-laws of the deceased wives in the matters of dowry deaths which, if not
discouraged, is likely to affect the case of the prosecution even against the
real culprits. In their over enthusiasm and anxiety to seek conviction for
maximum people, the parents of the deceased have been found to be making efforts 
for involving other relations which ultimately weaken the case of the
prosecution even against the real accused as appears to have happened in the
instant case."
        
        In view of the above decision and in view of
non-mentioning of any specific instances of harassment against the petitioners,
I find no prima facie case to prosecute them.
        In the result, the Criminal Petition is allowed.  The prosecution against
the petitioners, who are A-4 to A-6 in C.C.No.304 of 2005, is quashed.

?1 AIR 2000 SC 2324  

