

THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE GOPALA KRISHNA TAMADA            
Criminal Petition No.2412 of 2002

22-02-2006 

V.Mallikharjuna Sarma 

V.Rajyalakshmi and another 

Counsel for the Petitioner             :     Sri A.R.Samudralal

Counsel for  1st Respondent   :     Sri Narayan Pratap Sanghi

:ORAL ORDER:    


        The Criminal Petition is filed to quash the proceedings in C.C.No.164 of
2001 on the file of XXII Metropolitan Magistrate's Court, Hyderabad.
        The petitioner herein is the husband of the 1st respondent, who filed the
complaint against the petitioner for the offences punishable under Sections 498-
A and 406 I.P.C. and also Sections 4 and 6 of Dowry Prohibition Act.  As the
police, W.P.S.C.C.S, investigated the matter and submitted a final report
stating that the complaint is "false", the wife i.e. the 1st respondent filed a
protest petition.  After recording her and her father's sworn statements, the
Court below took cognizance of the complaint, which was numbered as C.C.No.164  
of 2001.
        The relevant facts of the complaint are as follows:
        The complainant is the legally wedded wife of the petitioner-A1, who is
the son of A2 and A3 and their marriage was solemnized on 9.8.1997, during which
time, the complainant's parents gave gold and silver ornaments in addition to
dowry of Rs.1,00,000/- to the accused.  After sometime, the accused developed
hatred towards the complainant and started ill-treating her.  A3 used to pick up
quarrels on petty and trivial issues, taunt her with the active support of A1
and A2 and demand the complainant to bring more money.  As she failed to comply  
with the alleged demands, the accused ill-treated her.   In the 1st week of
September, 1997, A1, at the instigation of A2 and A3, beat the complainant
mercilessly and necked out her from the house.  Further, all the accused
threatened her to do away her with life by pouring kerosene and setting her to
fire and would create an impression in the eye of public that it is a fire
accident.  Apprehending danger to her life, she left to her parents' house.
Then, her father took her back to the accused, convinced them to look after her
and left her there, but all the accused did not stop ill-treating her and told
her that they would relive her from ill-treatment if she signed on some stamped
papers.   When A1 categorically stated that he would not lead marital life with
her, she filed O.P. No.217 of 1997 for mutual consent for divorce, which was
dismissed.  When the complainant told A1 to A3 to return all the articles given
at the time of marriage and a cash of rupees one lakh, they failed to do so.
They all committed breach of trust in respect of her movable properties.
        Learned counsel for the petitioner, Sri Anantha Ram, has submitted across
the bar that no doubt a reading of the complaint definitely makes out a case,
but that alone is not sufficient to hold that the proceedings in C.C.No.164 of
2001 cannot be quashed under Section 482 Cr.P.C.  According to him, the Court 
has to look into the manifestly attended circumstances and also as envisaged by
the Apex Court in a decision reported in The State of Karnataka Vs.
M.Devendrappa & Another1.  He tried to argue before this Court stating that
though the marriage between the spouses took place on 9.8.1997, they were 
constrained to file a petition on 13.10.1997 in a span of just two months,
seeking divorce by mutual consent.  Thus, he tried to place so much of material
before this Court to establish that the entire exercise of filing the present
complaint is manifestly attended with mala fide intention.
        On the other hand, the learned counsel for the 1st respondent has opposed
the said submission stating that the record filed before this Court is not a
part of the record available in the Court below, and as such, it cannot be
looked into.
        Having heard the learned counsel for both the parties, this Court is of
the view that no doubt in the judgment cited supra, the Apex Court has given
certain illustrations indicating that the Courts can quash the proceedings under
certain categories and one of such illustrations is to the following effect:
"Where a criminal proceeding is manifestly attended with     mala fide and/or
where the proceeding is maliciously instituted with an ulterior motive for
wreaking vengeance on the accused and with a view to spite him due to private
and personal grudge".

From a reading of the above illustration, it is clear that no doubt, the Court
can definitely look into the manifestly attended with mala fide intention, but
this exercise shall not be done by looking into all those documents that are to
be looked into by the Court below during the course of trial.  If such an
exercise is accepted following the illustration laid by the Supreme Court, in my
considered view, the entire criminal judicial system gets frustrated, because in
any case, they can put forth this type of material and request the Court to
quash the proceedings invoking the jurisdiction under Section 482 Cr.P.C.  That
is not the purpose for which the Supreme Court gave such an illustration.
Manifestly, supposing the counsel for the petitioner is able to establish that
the complaint is filed with a mala fide intention, from a reading of the
complaint, then only the Court can quash the proceeding, but not by looking into
various documents which are basically to be looked into by the Court below
during the course of trial.  In fact, in the same judgment, the Apex Court also
observed to the following effect:

"It would not be proper for the High Court to analyze the case of the
complainant in the light of all probabilities in order to determine whether a
conviction would be sustainable and on such premises, arrive at a conclusion
that the proceedings are to be quashed.  It would be erroneous to assess the
material before it and conclude that the complaint cannot be proceeded with.  In
proceeding instituted on complaint, exercise of the inherent powers to quash the
proceedings is called for only in a case where the complaint does not disclose
any offence or is frivolous, vexatious or oppressive.  If the allegations set
out in the complaint do not constitute the offence of which cognizance has been
taken by the Magistrate, it is open to the High Court to quash the same in
exercise of the inherent powers under Section 482 of the Code".

From the above also, it is manifest that if the petitioner is able to establish
that the complaint is manifestly attended with mala fide intention, then only
the Court can interfere and quash the same under Section 482 Cr.P.C.  In my
considered view, the present one is not a case of that nature which requires
interference of this Court under Section 482 Cr.P.C.

        Accordingly, the Criminal Petition is dismissed.  However, taking into
consideration the fact that the complaint was filed as early as in the year
2001, the learned Magistrate is hereby directed to dispose of C.C.No.164 of 2001
as expeditiously as possible, preferably, within a period of six months.

?1 2002(1) Supreme 192  

