

THE HONOURABLE Dr. JUSTICE G. YETHIRAJULU          
Crl. Appeal No.1901 of 1999 and Crl.R.C.No.49 of 2002

07-06-2006 

Lella (Potla) Padmaja

Lella Koteswara Rao 
and 20 others

Counsel for appellant:  K. Balagopal

Counsel for respondent/petitioner: 1. Koona Reddy Anji Reddy
                                    2. Public Prosecutor

:COMMON JUDGMENT:       

Crl.A.No.1901 of 1999 was filed by the complainant.  The appellant filed a
private complaint against 21 accused alleging that they have committed offences
under Sections 494, 323, 506, 341 read with 34 I.P.C. and it was numbered as
C.C.No.56 of 1993 on the file of the IV Additional Judicial First Class
Magistrate, Guntur.  Charges for the offences are under Sections 498-A, 494,
323, 341, 506 (II) of I.P.C. and under Section 4 of the Dowry Prohibition Act,
1961 against all the accused.  They pleaded not guilty of the offences and
claimed for trail.   During the pendency of the case, A-20 died, therefore, the
case against him stood abated on 14-02-1996. 
2.      The complainant, in order to prove the guilt of the accused, examined
PWs.1 to 5 and did not mark any documents.  No oral or documentary evidence was  
adduced on defence side. 
3.      The learned Magistrate, after considering the evidence, found the accused
not guilty of the offences covered by the charges and recorded their acquittal
through the Judgment dated 05-10-1999.  The complainant, being aggrieved by the
Judgment of the lower Court, preferred this Appeal challenging the validity and
legality of the acquittal of the accused.
4.      The case of the prosecution leading to the acquittal of the accused in
C.C.169 of 1996 is briefly as follows:
The marriage of PW-1 was solemnized with A-1 according to Hindu rites and caste
custom on 26-05-1991 at Upalapadu village at the residence of A-1.  Subsequent
to the marriage, A-1 developed vices and started illicit intimacy with one
Tatineni Radha i.e., A-2 and declared that he want to marry A-2 for getting more
dowry from her.  On 14-02-1993, PW-1 and her father sent PW-3, PW-4 and one P.  
Ramana Rao to Uppalapadu village for mediation at about 6.00 PM and when they  
went to the house of A-1, they found the arrangements of Shamiyanas, white
washing of the house and new paint to the door frames.  They approached A-1, A-3
and A-4 and told them the purpose of their visit.  The accused replied that A-1
was going to marry A-2 who was already pregnant and the marriage Muhurtham was   
fixed at about 8.50 PM on the same night. The mediators returned to Macherla and
informed the same to her father.  Immediately PW-1, her father and the mediators
went to Uppalapadu at about 8.45 PM and on reaching the scene of offence, they
found a Puroit chanting mantras, A-3, A-4, A-7 and A-8 sitting behind A-1 and A-
2 along with other accused.  On seeing PW-1 and her father, A-3 to A-21
surrounded them and all of them abused her in filthy language and threatened
that they would beat her.  When PW-1 and her parents requested A-7 and A-8 not 
to destroy the life of PW-1, A-15 and A-20 asked them not to make any nuisance
and pushed them to a distance.  In the meanwhile, the marriage rites were
performed and A-1 came against her shouting at the top that he would do as he
likes and who are they to question him.   He also abused PW-1 as 'Lanja' by
stating that there was marital relationship between himself and her at any time.
He slapped her by questioning as to how she came to that place.  The other
accused also abused her and her father and they were restrained from proceeding
towards Shamiyanas.  Subsequently, a complaint was given at Veldurti Police
Station, but the Police did not take any action, therefore, they filed the
private complaint.
5.      The case of the defence is that he never married A-2 during the
subsistence of the marriage with PW-1. No arrangements have been made for the 
marriage and the complainant and PW-2 foisted the case against them. 
6.      In the light of the contentions, the point for consideration is whether
the prosecution proved the guilt of the accused beyond reasonable doubt for any
of the offences mentioned in the charges?
7.      The complainant as PW-1 deposed that her marriage was solemnized according   
to Hindu rites and caste customs.  During the subsistence of her marriage with
A-1, on 14-03-1993,
A-1 again married A-2 at Uppalapadu village at his house.  She also witnessed
the said second marriage.  By the date of the second marriage, she was at the
house of her parents at Macherla.  Her father called PW-3, PW-4 and one P.
Ramana Rao for mediation between herself and A-1.   On that date she has no
information about the marriage between the A-1 and A-2.  The mediators went to
the house of A-1 for mediation and returned to Macherla at 7.15 Pm and informed
that they saw the arrangements of marriage between A-1 and A-2 at the house of
A-1. They also found the white washing of the house and Shamiyanas in front of
the house.  They further informed that the marriage is going to be performed on
that day. Immediately she along with her parents and mediators went to he house
of  A-1 at Uppalapadu at about 8.45 PM.  By that time, A-1 to A-4, A-7 and A-8
were sitting in the marriage Mandapam.  One Purohit was also chanting mantras.
A-5, A-6, A-9 to A-21 were also present at the venue and participated in the
marriage ceremony.  Except A-1 and A-2 all other accused came to them, 
surrounded and threatened to leave the place without making any galata.  She and
her parents requested A-7 and A-8 not to spoil her life, but they did not bear
their request.  A-15 to A-20 surrounded her and threatened to kill if they do
not leave the house. They also pushed her and her men away, but in the meanwhile
A-1 tied Thali on the neck of A-2 and came against them with loud noise that he
has no connection with her and slapped her on her check and pushed her parents.
Later they went to Veldurti Police Station and lodged a complaint.
In the cross-examination, she stated that her parents are residents of Macherla.
As per the custom Zeera and jaggary will be mixed and put on the head of bride
and bridegroom.  But there is no fire ritual at the time of marriage.  According
to their custom, after tying the tali, black beed chain would also be tied.
There was a custom of seeing Arundhathi star and all the formalities were
performed in her marriage with A-1. She further deposed that the distance
between Uppalapadu and Macherla is 15 kilometres and there are number of buses  
plying in between Uppalapadu and Macherla.  The marriage between A-1 and A-2  
took place at the house of A-1.  About two to three hundred people gathered for
the said marriage.  At the time of the marriage, bajantris and one Purohit was
present. Pelli Mandapam was also arranged.  On 14-03-1993 she came to know about   
the proposed marriage between A-1 and A-2.  Immediately they proceeded to 
Upalapadu and reached to that place at 8.45 PM. On that day at about 10.00 PM, 
she visited Veldurthi Police Station and presented a complaint.  She did not
mention in her private complaint about the complaint in the Veldurthi Police
Station.  She did not approach any superior police officer to get her complaint
registered as crime.  She did not give any lawyer notice to A-1 for restitution
of conjugal rights at any time.  She denied a suggestion that the marriage
between A-1 and A-2 never took place and she never visited the alleged marriage
along with other mediators. She also denied a suggestion that the accused did
not commit the offence. She denied a further suggestion that in order to
inconvenience the accused, who is coming from Macherla to Guntur, and in order
to get over the jurisdiction, she foisted the present case against the accused
or that she unnecessarily implicated A-3 to A-21.  She also denied a suggestion
that A-1 did not marry A-2 at Uplapadu.
8.      PW-2, the father of PW-1 deposed that after the marriage, PW-1 and A-1
never lead conjugal life and A-1 developed extra marital relationship with A-2.
On 14-02-1993 A-1 married A-2 at Uppalapadu during the subsistence of the
marriage between PW-1 and A-1. He witnessed the marriage between A-1 and A-2.   
On 14-02-1993, he sent PWs.3 and 4 and P. Ramana Rao to Uppalapadu to mediate     
the matter in between PW-1 and A-1 and they left Macherla at about 4.00 PM. They 
returned from Macherla and informed that the arrangements for marriage were made
in front of the house of A-1. They requested A-1's parents, but they did not
agree and the marriage took place.  Later they all visited Uppalapadu at 8.45 PM
and by that time, A-1, A-2 and their parents were sitting in the pendal and one
Purohit chanting manthras.  A-5 to A-17 and A-19 to A-21 were present in the
pendal.  They were seen by all the accused and A-15 to A-17 and A-19 and other
accused pushed them except A-1 and A-2.  His wife, himself and PW-1 requested  
the parents of A-1 not to harass PW-1, but they did not heed to the request.  A-
15 to A-19 pushed them.  PW-1, his wife and himself and 3 other mediators came 
forward.  A-1 tied Tali to A-2's neck and later A-1 came down towards them and
stated that there is no relationship with his daughter and threatened them.  A-1
also slapped on the face of PW-1 and pushed them.  A-1 and other accused 
threatened to kill them.  Then he went to Veldurthi and lodged a complaint to
the Police.  But the police did not take any action.  Hence, the present
complaint.  In the cross-examination, he stated that he know PW-1's presenting
Section 498-A report before Macherla Police Station and the police registered
the case.  He know that A-1 was arrested and subsequently he was released on 
bail by Macherla Court.  Before registration of case under Section 498-A I.P.C.,
he sent the mediators for amicable settlement of taking PW-1 and leading
conjugal life.  PW-1's marriage was performed in temple and Homam was not 
arranged in the said marriage, but rest of the ceremonies were performed as per
Hindu Law and caste custom.  Four months after the marriage, he came to know  
that A-1 was having illicit intimacy with A-2. He was also present along with
PW-1 at the time of lodging complaint under Section 498-A I.P.C.  He came to
know that A-1 is proposing to marry
A-2.  A-2 is also residing at Macherla along with her family members.  He denied
a suggestion that the marriage between
A-1 and A-2 never took place and he never visited the marriage and the accused
never committed any offence including assault or criminal intimidation to them.
9.      PW-3, one of the mediators deposed that the marriage of A-1 was performed
with A-2 in the month of May, 1991.  He was present at the time of the marriage
and also acted as a marriage elder at the time of their marriage.  Subsequently,
he came to know that A-1, A-3 and A-4 drove PW-1 outside on the 
ground that she failed to bring the amount from her parents.
On 14-02-1993, PW-4, himself and one Ramana Rao were requested to act as   
mediators to solve the dispute between A-1 and PW-1. On the said day, all of
them visited Macherla at about 3.00 PM and took instructions from PWs.1 and 2.
On the same day at about 6.00 PM, they proceeded to Uppalapadu to the house of  
A-1 and they found arrangements of Shamiyanas, white washing of the walls. They
came to know that they are arranging marriage of A-1 with some other person and
the marriage took place at 8.52 PM with the daughter of A-7. They immediately
rushed to Macherla and gave the information to PW-2 and his wife and PW-1. Then 
PW-1, PW-2 and his wife and all the mediators visited Uppalapadu at 8.30 PM.  By
that time, the marriage ceremony was going on.  The accused questioned them as 
to why they came to stop the marriage and they threatened them if they stay any
more at that place.  About 20 persons gathered in support of A-3 and A-4 and
pushed them away from that place.  By that time A-1 came forward by saying that
he has no connection with PW-1 and why she has came to this place and beat PW-1   
and used filthy language towards her. At that time one person resisted the
attitude of A-1, but his efforts are futile.
10.     PW-4, another mediator deposed that on 15-12-1992, when one P. Ramana Rao    
and himself were proceeding to hospital, A-1 met them at Park Centre at
Macherla.  At that time A-1 informed that he has no connection with PW-1 and he
is going to marry another lady.  On 14-02-1993, PW-3 called him and One Ramana  
Rao and informed that they have to visit PW-2 to resolve the dispute between A-1
and PW-1. They all went to the house of PW-2 in the evening and as per the
instructions of the PW-2, they visited Uppalapadu at 6.00 PM and by that time A-
1, A-3 and A-4 were present.  They also observed putting of Shamiyana in front
of the house of A-1 and walls white washed. They informed A-3 and A-4 for the
purpose of their coming to Uppalapadu.  But A-3 and A-4 said that A-1 is going
to marry another lady on the same day night at about 8.52 PM.  They also
informed that the proposed lady who was intended to marry was already pregnant.
Then they all went to Macherla and informed to PW-1. Immediately all of them
along with PWs.1 and 2 visited Uppalapadu at 8.30 PM and by the time they 
visited the village, the marriage celebration was going on.  A-1, A-3, A-4, A-2
and her parents were sitting on the stage.  Some of the persons were also
gathered adjacent to the dais.  Except A-1 and A-2, all the other persons
surrounded them and questioned as to why they came to Uppalapadu to disturb the 
marriage and asked them to go away.  In the meanwhile, A-1 questioned PW-1 as to 
why they came to their village and also told that he has no relation with her.
At that time they also threatened them to kill unless they leave the place
immediately.  Immediately PWs.1 and 2 and his wife visited Veldurthi Police
Station and lodged a complaint.  Thereafter they all came to Macherla.  At that
time they were surrendered by A-3 and A-4 and other persons, and the marriage
celebration was going on.   He denied a suggestion that since PW-1 is related to
him, he is speaking falsehood.
11.     PW-5, a resident of Macherla, deposed that he knows A-7 belong to
Macherla.  He attended the marriage of A-1 with A-2 on 14-02-1993.  A-7 invited
him to attended the marriage and therefore, on his request he attended the
marriage. The Muhurtham was fixed at 8.52 PM. He attended the marriage at about 
7.45 PM.  The marriage of A-2 was performed as per their caste and custom.  All
the formalities performed in the marriage.  20 minutes before tying the thread,
PWs.1 and 2 and along with three person came there to the venue.  At that time
the parents of A-1 and A-7 and his wife and three persons approached PW-1 and 
their parents and a galata took place. About 30 to 40 persons were also
gathered.  At that time PW-2 requested A-7 not to harm to PW-1. The accused 
threatened PW-2 with dire consequences and pushed them away.  PW-2 and others    
trying to go forward.  At that time A-1 after tying the thread came to PW-1 and
beat her on cheeks.  He tried to pacify the matter, but nobody heed to his
words.  At present, A-1 and A-2 are living as husband and wife in the village.
At the time of marriage, A-2 has given the coloured rice in the hands of A-1 and
A-1 kept the rice in one plate and thereafter the parents of A-2 washed the legs
of A-1. The above said custom prevails the in the marriage of their community.
There are some differences in their marriage and the marriage of A-1 with A-2.
He did not see the formalities and the customs followed by A-2 and her family
members.  
12.     From the version of the prosecution witnesses, by the time they went to
the village and A-1's house, they found Shamiyana erected and white washing done
to the walls.  They were also informed that A-1 is going to marry A-2 at 8.52
PM.  Immediately, they informed to PW-2 and all of them came to the marriage
venue at about 8.40 PM.  When they proceeded towards dais, the accused  
obstructed them and questioned as to why they came to stop the marriage.  A-1
also came and stated that there is no relationship between himself and PW-1 any
more and he is going to marry.  They further stated that while the galata is
going on, the ceremonies also went on and as the accused obstructed them, they 
went away.  The evidence of PWs.1 to 5 did not disclose about the essential
ceremonies of Sapthapadi or Homam etc. which are the essential requirements of a
valid marriage. In order to attract the bigomy, the complainant has to prove
that she is the legally wedded wife and then A-1 committed bigomy during the
subsistence of the marriage by marrying A-2.  Unless the witnesses speak about
the ceremonies performed at the time of marriage, it cannot be recognized as a
valid marriage. The prosecution failed to prove the essentials ceremonies of a
valid marriage, therefore, the lower Court rightly came to a conclusion that the
prosecution failed to prove the offence under Section 494 I.P.C.   From the
evidence, there is a doubt about the presence of PWs.1 to 3 and others at the
scene of offence, therefore, there is any amount of doubt regarding the
commission of offences by any of the accused.
13.     In the light of the above circumstances, I find no grounds to interfere
with the Judgment of lower Court and accordingly, the Judgment of the lower
Court is confirmed.
14.     The learned counsel for the appellant submitted that though the offence
under Section 494 I.P.C. is not made out against the accused, they cannot escape
liability under Section 494 read with 511 I.P.C., therefore, A-1, A-2 and others
shall be convicted for the offence under Section 494 read with 511 I.P.C. though
not under Section 494 IPC, therefore it has to be examined whether under the
facts of this case, the attempt to commit bigomy is proved.
15.     In SARLA MUDGAL v. UNION OF INDIA 1, the Supreme Court, while dealing with    
Section 494 I.P.C., held as follows:-
"The necessary ingredients of Section 494 are: (1) having a husband or wife
living; (2) marries in any case; (3) which such marriage is void (4) by reason
of its taking place during the life of such husband or wife."
16.     In L. OBULAMMA v. L. VENKATA REDDY 2, the Supreme Court, while dealing      
with Section 494 I.P.C., held that:
"Where there was absolutely no evidence to prove that any of the two essentials
i.e. Datta Homa and Saptapadi had been performed at the time of second marriage
and the existence of the custom in the community to put the 'Yarn Thread'
instead of 'Mangal Sutra' was neither mentioned in the complaint nor proved in
the evidence, the conviction under S. 494, I.P.C. could not be sustained."

17.     The learned counsel for the appellant submitted that the accused committed
the offence under Section 494 I.P.C. by contracting the marriage with the second
respondent, therefore, he is liable to be convicted for the offence under
Section 494 I.P.C.  Even if the Court comes to a conclusion that the offence
under Section 494 I.P.C. is not made out, the provisions under Section 511
I.P.C. can be invoked for attempting to commit the offence under Section 494
I.P.C.   He further submitted that if an alliance for marriage is fixed, the
arrangements are made, the music party is brought, the invitations are extended
to the relations, the marriage feast is arranged, clothes are purchased, Thali
was also kept at the puja, the purohit was engaged, the marriage was performed
by tying Thali, then the provisions of Section 494 I.P.C. are attracted.  But if
one of the essential ceremonies of the marriage is not performed or not proved,
the offence under Section 494 I.P.C. is not made out.  In such a case, as there
is an unsuccessful attempt made by the accused and as the marriage was performed  
for all practical purposes by tying Thali, though the offence under Section 494
I.P.C. is not attracted, the offence under Section 494 read with 511 I.P.C. is
attracted, therefore, the accused must be punished at least for the offence
under Section 494 read with 511 I.P.C.
18.     In view of the arguments advanced by the learned   counsel for the
appellant, let us examine Section 511 I.P.C.  Section 511 I.P.C. reads as
follows:
"511. Punishment for attempting to commit offences punishable with
transportation of imprisonment.- Whoever, attempts to commit an offence
punishable by this Code with transportation or imprisonment, or to cause such an
offence to be committed, an in such attempt does any act towards the commission 
of the offence, shall, where no express provision is made by this Code for the
punishment of such attempt, be punished with transportation or imprisonment for
life or imprisonment which may extend to one half on the longest term provided
for that offence, or with such fine as is provided for the offence, or with
both."

19.     An attempt to commit an offence is discussed in detail in a decision
reported in STATE OF MAHARASHTRA v. MOHD.   YAKUB 3, wherein the Supreme Court         
held that:
  "What constitutes an "attempt" is a mixed question of law and fact, depending
largely on the circumstances of the particular case.  "Attempt" defines a
precise and exact definition.  Broadly speaking all crimes which consist of the
commission of affirmative acts are preceded by some covert or overt conduct
which may be divided into three stages. The first stage exists when the culprit
first entertains the idea or intention to commit an offence. In the second
stage, he makes preparations to commit it.  The third stage is reached when the
culprit takes deliberate overt steps to commit the offence.  Such overt act or
step in order to be 'criminal' need not be the penultimate act towards the
commission of the offence.  It is sufficient if such act or acts were
deliberately done, and manifest a clear intention to commit the offence aimed,
being reasonably proximate to the consummation of the offence."

The Supreme Court also observed as follows:-
"In order to constitute 'an attempt', first, there must be an intention to
commit a particular offence, second, some, act must have been done which would 
necessarily have to be done towards the commission of the offence, and, third,
such act must be 'proximate' to the intended result.  The measure of proximity
is not in relation to time and action but in relation to intention.  In other
words, the act must reveal, with reasonable certainty, in conjunction with other
facts and circumstances and not necessarily in isolation, an intention, as
distinguished from a mere desire or object, to commit the particular offence,
though the act by itself may be merely suggestive or indicative of such
intention, but, that it must be indicative or suggestive of the intention."

In the Digest of Criminal Law, it was mentioned as to what constitute an
attempt, which reads as follows:
"An attempt to commit a crime is an act done with intent to commit that crime
and forming part of a series of acts, which would constitute its actual
commission if it were not interrupted.  The point at which such a series of acts
begins cannot be defined; but depends upon the circumstances of each particular
case.

The Supreme Court further held as follows:
"25. Editing the 12th Edition of Russell on Crime and 18th Edition of Kenny's
Outlines of Criminal Law, Professor Turner explained his modified definition as
follows:-
"It is therefore suggested that practical test for the actus reus in attempt is
that the prosecution must prove that the steps taken by the accused must have
reached the point when they themselves clearly indicate what was the end towards
which they were directed. In other words the steps taken must themselves be
sufficient to show, prima facie, the offender's intention to commit the crime
which he is charged with attempting. That there may be abundant other evidence
to establish his mens rea (such as a confession) is irrelevant to the question
of whether he had done enough to constitute the actus reus."
26. In Haughten v. Smith, 1975 AC 476 at p. 492. Hailsham L. C. quoted Parke B
from the Eagleton case and Lord Parker, C. J. from Devey v. Lee and proceeded to
mention three propositions as emerging from the two definitions:
"(1) There is a distinction between the intention to commit a crime and an
attempt to commit it..... (2) in addition to the intention, or mens rea, there
must be an overt act of such a kind that it is intended to form and does form
part of a series of acts which would constitute the actual commission of the
offence if it were not interrupted ...... (3) The act relied on as constituting
the attempt must not be an act merely preparatory to commit the completed
offence, but must bear a relationship to the completion of the offence referred
to in Reg. v. Eagleton, as being 'proximate' to the completion of the offence in
Devey v. Lee, (1968) 1 QB 366, 370. as being 'immediately and not merely
remotely connected" with the completed offence...."
27. In Director of Public Prosecutions v. Stonehouse, (1977) 2 All ER 909, Lord
Diplok and Viscount Dilhorne, appeared to accept the 'proximity' test of Parke
B, while Lord Edmund-Davis accepted the statement of Lord Hailsham as to what 
were the true ingredients of a criminal attempt. Whatever test was applied, it
was held that the facts clearly disclosed an attempt in that case.
28. In India, while attempts to commit certain specified offences have
themselves been made specific offences (e.g. 307, 308 India Penal Code etc.), an
attempt to commit an offence punishable under the Penal Code, generally, is
dealt with under Section 511 India Penal Code. But the expression 'attempt' has
not been defined anywhere.
29. In Abhayanand Mishra v. The State of Bihar, (1962) 2 SCR 241 at p. 253.
Raghubar Dayal and Subba Rao, JJ., disapproved of the test of 'last act which if
un-interrupted and successful would constitute a criminal offence' and
summarised their views as follows:
"A person commits the offence of 'attempt to commit a particular offence when
(i) he intends to commit that particular offence; and (ii) he, having made
preparation and with the intention to commit the offence, does an act towards
its commission; such an act need not be the penultimate act towards the
commission of the offence but must be an act during the course of committing
that offence".
20.     In LAXMI DEVI v. SATYA NARAYAN 4, the Supreme Court while considering     
Section 494 I.P.C. held that the absence of saptapadi and datta Homa as required
under Hindu law and caste custom, the factum of second marriage is not made out.
21.     In ABHAYANAND v. STATE OF BIHAR 5, the Supreme Court observed as follows:-      
        "The question whether a certain act amounts to an attempt to commit a
particular offence is a question of fact dependent on the nature of the offence
and the steps necessary to take in order to commit it. No exhaustive precise
definition of what would amount to an attempt to commit an offence is possible.
There is a thin line between the preparation for and an attempt to commit an
offence. Undoubtedly, a culprit first intends to commit the offence, then makes
preparation for committing it and thereafter attempts to commit the offence. If
the attempt succeeds, he has committed the offence; if it fails due to reasons
beyond his control, he is said to have attempted to commit the offence. Attempt
to commit an offence, therefore, can be said to begin when the preparations are
complete and the culprit commences to do something with the intention of
committing the offence and which is a step towards the commission of the
offence. The moment he commences to do an act with the necessary intention, he 
commences his attempt to commit the offence." 
22.     In QUEEN v. PETERSON 6, Mr. Justice Pearson presiding over a Bench of High   
court of Allahabad considered Section 494 and 511 I.P.C. and held that where a
man having a wife caused the banns of marriage between himself and a woman to be 
published, he could not be punished for an attempt to marry again during the
lifetime of his wife as the act of causing the publication of banns of marriage
is an act done in the preparation to marry but does not amount to an attempt to
marry.
In the case covered by the above decision, one person by name Peter Peterson, a
European, was charged for the offence under Sections 494 and 511 I.P.C. for
attempting to marry Ethel Amanda Guise by causing the publication of the banns
of marriage between them, when he, being a Christian, had a wife alive, and that
he had thereby committed an offence under Sections 494 and 511 I.P.C. The 
Sessions Judge, Agra, convicted him with that charge and sentenced to three
years rigorous imprisonment.  Peterson appealled to the High Court.  The High
Court, while considering the question whether the publication of banns of
marriage is an attempt to marry, held as follows:-
"An attempt to commit a crime is to be distinguished from an intention to commit
it and from preparation made for its commission.  "Preparation consists in
devising or arranging the means or measures necessary for the commission of the
offence; the attempt is the direct movement towards the commission after the
preparations have been made"- Mayne's Commentaries on s. 511, Indian Penal Code.  
In one of the cases cited by Mr. Mayne in his Commentaries on the Indian Penal
Code in illustration of the above doctrine, it was ruled that there could be no
attempt to contract a marriage until the parties stood before the Magistrate
about to begin the ceremony.  It would follow in the present case that the
publication of the banns was not an attempt on the prisoner's part to marry Miss
Guise, but only a preparation for such an attempt. The publication of banns may
or may not be, in cases in which a special license is not obtained, a condition
essential to the validity of a marriage, but common sense forbids us to regard
either the publication of the banns or the procuring of the license as a part of
the marriage ceremony.  If the rule laid down in America, that an attempt can
only be manifested by acts which would end in the consummation of the offence
but for the intervention of circumstances independent of the will of the party,
be accepted, it is clear that the prisoner's act in causing the banns of
marriage between himself and Miss Guise to be published was not, in the eye of
the law, an attempt to marry her, inasmuch as he might, before any ceremony of
marriage was commenced, have willed not to carry out his criminal intention of
marrying her.  For the reasons above stated the verdict of the jury by which the
prisoner is convicted of an offence punishable under ss.511, 494, Indian Penal
Code, and the sentence passed on him under those sections by the Sessions Court  
must be and hereby are annulled."

23.     From the above legal principles and pronouncements, it is clear that if an
attempt to marry again during the subsistence of the first marriage is made, the
accused is punishable for the offence under Section 494 read with 511 I.P.C.
Section 494 I.P.C. reads as follows:
"494. Marrying again during lifetime of husband or wife:- Whoever, having a
husband or wife living, marries in any case in which such marriage is void by
reason of its taking place during the life of such husband or wife, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
        Exception.- This section does not extend to any person whose marriage with
such husband or wife has been declared void by a Court of competent
jurisdiction, nor to any person who contracts a marriage during the life of a
former husband or wife, if such husband or wife, at the time of the subsequent
marriage, shall have been continually absent from such person for the space of
seven years, and shall not have been heard of by such person as being alive
within that time, provided the person contracting such subsequent marriage
shall, before such marriage takes place, inform the person with whom such
marriage is contracted of the real state of facts so far as the same are within
his or her knowledge."
        
24.     The prosecution failed to prove that the second marriage was performed
according to Hindu law and caste custom.  Though there is failure of performing
one or two essential ceremonies, still the accused can be punished for the
offence under Section 494 read with 511 I.P.C. for attempting to get the second
marriage.  The intention to marry for the second time during the subsistence of
the first marriage is not sufficient and it does not amount to an offence.
There must be an intentional act which a person does towards the commission of
an offence, but if fails in its object through circumstances of the volition of
that person amounts to an attempt, therefore, the intention is not sufficient to
attract the offence.  The next stage of the commission of offence is the
preparation. While examining the question whether the act amounts to attempt,
merely a preparation is must in some cases depending upon the surrounding 
circumstances which must be taken into consideration.  For instance, if the
accused in order to commit the offence, distributes the wedding cards, purchases
new clothes, engages purohit and music party and book the persons for arranging
feast, this is only a preparation to commit the offence and it does not amount
to attempt to commit the offence.  He may change his mind to commit the offence
or some other factors may intervene preventing him from committing the offence,
therefore, mere preparation to commit the offence is also not an attempt to
commit the offence, therefore, there must be an unsuccessful attempt to commit
the offence.  For instance, if the bride, bridegroom, relations, purohit and the
music party gathered at the pendal at the scheduled time and after gathering, if
they performed the ceremony of the marriage and if the bridegroom ties Thali to
the bride to complete the essential ceremonies of marriage, it is a clear
intention on the part of the accused to commit the offence.  But when the
prosecution failed to prove one or two essential ceremonies after completion of
the marriage ceremony, it may not be a marriage as contemplated under Section 
494 I.P.C., but it definitely amounts to an attempt to commit bigomy attracting
the punishment under Section 494 read with 511 I.P.C. After completing the
ceremony, the accused cannot say that they never intended to marry again.  The
process of indicating and completing the marriage ceremonies is an indication
that the accused attempted to commit the offence of bigomy.
25.     In the case on hand, the complainant failed to prove that the bridegroom
tied Thali to the bride in addition to the other ceremonies as required under
law, therefore, the accused cannot be punished for the attempt to commit the
offence of bigomy under Section 494 read with 511 I.P.C.  Though it is made
clear that a man or woman, who is having a husband or wife living, marries again
during the subsistence of the first marriage and in that process of undergoing
ceremonies, if the Court finds that one or two essential ceremonies are not
performed, the marriage is not proved.  On proving the remaining ceremonies, it
can be said that the man or woman have committed the offence of attempting to
marry for the second time during the subsistence of the first marriage, which is
punishable under Section 494 read with 511 I.P.C.
26.     But, in the present case, as the complainant failed to prove the tying of
Thali in addition to other ceremonies, she also failed to prove the attempt to
marriage also, therefore, the accused cannot be punished for the attempt to
commit bigomy and the Appeal must fail. 
Crl.R.C.No.49 of 2002
27.     This Revision Case is filed by the accused in C.C.No.169 of 2002 on the
file of the IV Additional Judicial Magistrate of First Class, Guntur.  At the
instance of the defacto complainant by name Lella Padmaja, Crime No.114 of 1992 
was registered by the Macherla Police for the offence under Section 498-A of
I.P.C. against three accused and the police after thorough investigation laid
the charge sheet against the three accused for the offence under Section 498-A
of I.P.C.
28.     After securing the appearance of the accused, they were examined under
Section 239 of I.P.C. and a charge for the offence under Section 498-A of I.P.C.
was framed.  The accused denied the charge and claimed for trial.
29.     The prosecution, in order to prove the guilt of the accused, examined
PWs.1 to 4 and marked Exs.P-1 and P-2.  No oral or documentary evidence was   
adduced on defence side. 
30.     The learned Magistrate, after considering the evidence placed by the
prosecution, found the accused guilty of the offence under Section 498-A of
I.P.C. and convicted and sentenced each of them to undergo simple imprisonment 
for one year and also to pay a fine of Rs.500/-, in default to suffer simple
imprisonment for two months each, through the Judgment dated 05-10-1999. The  
accused, being aggrieved by the conviction and sentences imposed by the trial
Court, preferred Criminal Appeal No.542 of 1999 before the IV Additional
Sessions Court, Guntur and the Sessions Court, after considering the evidence
available on record and after hearing both parties, confirmed the Judgment of
the lower Court and dismissed the Appeal through its Judgment dated 21-01-2002.
The accused, being aggrieved by the confirmation of the conviction and sentences
imposed by the appellate Court, preferred the Revision Case challenging their
validity and legality.
31.     The point for consideration is whether the prosecution proved the guilt of
the accused beyond reasonable doubt and whether the conviction and sentences  
imposed by the lower Court are liable to be set aside or modified?
32.     The case of the prosecution leading to the conviction of the revision
petitioners is briefly, as follows:-
        A-1 is the husband of the defacto complainant, who was examined as PW-1.  
Their marriage was solemnized according to Hindu rites and caste custom on 26-
05-1991.  A-2 and A-3 are the parents of A-1.  At the time of marriage, PW-2,
the father of PW-1, paid Rs.40,000/- in cash and 10 sovereigns of gold to the
accused for the benefit of PW-1.  The maternal grand mother of PW-1 agreed to
give 2 acres of land to PW-1, therefore, the accused demanded PWs.1 and 2 to 
sell away the land and pay the sale consideration.  PW-2 agreed to pay
Rs.1,00,000/- being the market value of the land @ Rs.50,000/- per acre.  Since
there was no offer from anybody to purchase the land, they could not sell the
same, therefore, PW-2 could not pay the amount of Rs.1,00,000/- to the accused.
Immediately after the marriage, PW-1 joined A-1 and they remained at Uppalapadu
village for five days.  Later A-1 took PW-1 to Macherla and put up the family in
a rented house.  One month thereafter, A-1 vacated the house and took another
house near E.S.I. Hospital, Macherla.  A-1 developed illicit intimacy with one
Tatineni Radha, who was living nearer to their house and used to go to her house
everyday and return home during odd hours. When PW-1 questioned his conduct, A-1  
proclaimed that if he marries the said Radha, he would get more dowry.  A-2 and
A-3 used to visit the house of PW-1 once in a week and during their stay for two
or three days, they used to assault PW-1 and insist her to bring more dowry from
her parents.  Two months after the marriage in the month of July, Ashadamasam
intervened, therefore, the mother of PW-1 took her to their house and after
Ashadamasam, the accused did not come to their house to take PW-1.  PW-1    
informed her parents about the conduct of A-1 and ill-treatment meted out to her
in the hands of all the accused.  The parents of PW-1 brought her to the house
of the accused and left her.  The accused intensified their harassment by
demanding PW-1 to bring additional dowry and A-1 neglected PW-1 in all respects.
While so, on 05-10-2001, the accused drove away PW-1 from their house stating 
that unless she brings a Colour T.V., a Refrigerator, a scooter and cash of
Rs.1,00,000/-, they will not allow her to live in their house.  Subsequently, A-
1 issued a legal notice to PW-1 seeking divorce.  When there was mediation, A-1
attempted to beat the mother of PW-1 during that mediation.  Subsequently, the
mother of PW-1 took her to the house of A-2 and A-3 at Uppalapadu and paid cash 
of Rs.15,000/- promising to pay the balance amount at a later stage.  Till 05-
11-1992, PW-1 stayed with A-2 and A-3 and during that period A-2 and  A-3 caused
harassment to her.  PW-1 on apprehending danger to her life in the hands of the
accused, reached her parents house.  On 19-12-1992, A-1 came to the house of PW-  
2 in a drunken state and demanded PW-1 to give divorce, therefore, PW-1
presented Ex.P-1 complaint to the Station 0House Officer, Macherla Police
Station, which culminated into this case.
33.     PW-1, the complainant deposed that on 26-05-1991, her marriage took place 
with A-1 as per caste custom and religious rites. At the time of marriage, her
parents paid Rs.40,000/- towards dowry to A-1 besides gold and other ornaments
and also paid Rs.3,000/- towards clothes.  Immediately after marriage she joined
her husband to lead marital life at Macherla.
Her parents undertook to pay Rs.1,00,000/- cash to the accused subsequently.
Within one month from the date of marriage, A-1 started demanding money and 
insisting on her to get the money from her parents.  After one month, they
shifted the residence to another house situated near E.S.I. Hospital.  After
shifting of the house, A-1 used to come in the late hours in drunken state and
used to illiterate her for the purpose of money.  A-1 used to spend most of his
time with one Tatineni Radha, whose house is situated behind their house.  A-1
used to inform her that if he marries that woman, he would get more dowry. A-1
and A-3 used to visit their house every week and used to abuse and assault her
and insist to bring the money.  Her parents took her to their house for
Ashadamasam.  She informed about the harassment and ill-treatment meted by her  
by the accused.  After Ashadamasam, A-1 failed to take her back. Her parents
approached A-1 and requested him to take back her promising to fulfill the
earlier promise.  As he agreed for the said arrangements, her parents dropped
her in the house of the accused.  The accused again started harassing her to get
the money.  A-1 took away her gold ornaments and spent the money for gambling. 
He failed to maintain and neglected her.  A-1 got illicit intimacy with Tatineni
Radha.  On 05-10-1991, the accused necked her out of the house saying that
unless she gets Colour T.V., Fridge and cash, they are not going to allow her to
their house. Having no other way, she reached her parents house and informed the
same.  The request of the parents also refused by the accused to take her back.
The accused did not change his attitude despite mediations through elders. A-1
assaulted her mother with belt when she questioned about his conduct. On 26-11-
1992, she was taken by her mother to Uppalapadu and paid Rs.15,000/- to A-2 and 
A-3 promising to pay the balance amount later and dropped her.  She stayed there
upto 05-12-1992.  During that period also, A-2 and A-3 harassed and ill-treated
her.  On 05-12-1992, A-1 came to his house and all the accused assaulted and
necked her out. She came to Macherla to her parents' house.  On 19-12-1992, A-1
came to her parents' house along with two other persons and demanded for divorce
with her.  Having no other alternative, she gave Ex.B-1 complaint to the police.
        In the cross-examination, she stated that after the marriage, she spent
five days at Uppalapadu along with A-1 and thereafter she stayed at Macherla.
A-1 and A-3 are living at Uppalapadu.  At the time of the talks, her parents
agreed to provide two acres of land and 40,000/- cash, 10 sovereigns of gold to
A-1 and paid the same.  The gold ornaments are in her possession. There was no
document executed with regard to the transfer of two acres of land either in her
favour or in favour of A-1.  After her joining the husband, her parents did not
visit the house of A-1, but she used to visit her parents' house once in a week.
A-1 is not amicable with her during the period of three months and there were
quarrels in between A-1 and herself.  During that period, though she visited her
parents' house, she did not reveal about the quarrels to them.  After the
marriage, she came to know that A-1 is having illicit intimacy with Radha.  She
denied a suggestion that the accused never demanded any dowry from them and she   
gave a false complaint against the accused being accustomed to the city life.
34.     PW-2, the father of PW-1 deposed that on 26-05-1991, he performed the
marriage of his daughter with A-1. He gave Rs.40,000/- towards dowry in addition
to 10 sovereigns of gold and Rs.2,000/- towards clothes. He sent his daughter to
the house of A-1 for marital life.  For about one month PW-1 and A-1 lived
happily.  Later PW-1 informed him that the accused causing harassment to her for
the purpose of getting Colour T.V., Fridge etc. all worth Rs.1,00,000/-.  He
used to inform PW-1 that he would talk to the accused and settle the same.  He
could not meet to the demand of the accused as he could not disposed of the
property for want of fair price.  The accused also used to insist on him to give
the money and used to harass PW-1.  On 05-10-1991, the accused sent away PW-1     
from their house.  PW-1 came to his house.  Later, he deputed three person to
the accused to settle the matter, but in vain.  A-1 got issued a registered
notice to him.  As they are not going to take back   PW-1, a panchayat was held
at the house of PW-3.  At the time of panchayat, A-1 abused him in filthy
language and tried to assault.  Ultimately, it was agreed before the elders that
he has to pay Rs.1,00,000/- to the accused and the accused has to take back PW- 
1.  On 26-11-1992, his wife took PW-1 to the house of the accused and paid
Rs.15,000/- to A-2 and informed
that the remaining amount will be paid within short time.
On 05-12-1992, A-1 necked PW-1 out of his house in consultation with his
parents.  On 19-12-1992, the henchmen of A-2 came in a drunken state and 
threatened them.
        In the cross-examination, he stated that no property stand in the name of
his wife or himself.  He gave the amount of Rs.40,000/- and 10 sovereigns of
gold to A-1 as Stridhana property. He never agreed to pay Rs.2,00,000/- as dowry
payable on the date of marriage.  For some time, PW-1 and A-1 lived happily and
later disputes arose between them. A-2 and   A-3 used to come to their house and
stay for one or two days and later returned to Uppalapadu.  He sent mediators to
the house of A-1, when he was staying at Macherla.  The mediators never
instructed him to deposit Rs.1,00,000/- and PW-1's necked out.
35.     PW-3, a resident of Macherla Village deposed that he knows the family of
PW-1.  The marriage of PW-1 was performed with A-1.  PW-2 gave an amount of  
Rs.40,000/- towards  marriage expenditure apart from gold ornaments weighing
about 10 sovereigns. Soon after the marriage, PW-1 joined her husband A-1 and
began to reside with him in a separate house in Macherla. PW-2 promised to the
accused that he would give two acres of land and the accused asked him to sell
the land and give Rs.1,00,000/-.  PW-2 undertook to give the lease amount on the
said land to the accused.  A-1 demanded PW-1 to get the Colour T.V. Refrigerator
etc. from her parents' house.  As PW-2 failed to give the required articles, A-1
used to harass PW-1.  A-2 and A-3 used to instigate PW-1 to get the articles.
Ultimately A-1 to A-3 necked out PW-1 from their house.  As there was no other
way, PW-1 reached her parents' house at Macherla.  He called A-1 and advised him 
to lead happy marital life. A-1 paid dear ear for the advise given by him.
During the course of mediation, A-1 to    A-3 picket up quarrels with PW-2 and
his wife and tried to beat them. A-1 to A-3 also abused PW-2 and his wife. The
mediations are failed and PW-2 and his wife and the accused left the place to
their houses. A-1 got issued a notice to PWs.1 and 2 through advocate.  A-1
married again during the subsistence of the first marriage with PW-1.
        In the cross-examination, he stated that at the time of mediation, he
requested the accused to receive the lease amount over the land since there is
no value for the land at that juncture.  He denied a suggestion that as he is
close relation to PW-2, he is speaking falsehood.
36.     PW-4, the Sub-Inspector of Police deposed about the receiving of the
complaint, registering the case, conducting the investigation and filing charge
sheet etc.
37.     By taking into consideration the above evidence, the accused were found
guilty by the trial court and imposed sentences accordingly.
38.     The trial Court, after considering the oral evidence adduced by the
prosecution and as no oral evidence was adduced on behalf of the accused, found
A-1 to A-3 guilty for the offence under Section 498-A of I.P.C. by observing
that A-1 harassed the deceased for bringing additional dowry and A-2 and A-3
instigated him.  The appellate Court confirmed the Judgment of the trial Court
including the conviction and sentences against the all the accused.
39.     The appellate court observed that the disputes between PW-1 and A-1 are
internal affairs.  Villagers are not expected to observe those quarrels. The
evidence of PWs.1 to 3 clearly establishes that there is demand of additional
dowry and when PW-2 failed to pay the same, they harassed PW-1 and necked her   
out.  Though A-1 stated that he issued a notice to PW-1, he did not produce the
same at any time of the trial to show his bona fides that he did not harass PW-
1.  The mediations also failed.  PW-3 also stated about the mediations and
demands made by A-1.   
40.     In view of the totality of the circumstances, I find no grounds to
interfere with the order of the lower Court.  The orders of both the Courts
finding the accused guilty of the offences, convicting and sentencing them for
imprisonment and fine are, therefore, confirmed.
41.     In the result, Crl.A.No.1901 of 1999 is dismissed and Crl.R.C.No.49 of
2002 is also dismissed.

?1 1995 SCC (Crl) 569 
2 AIR 1979 SC 848  
3 AIR 1980 SC 1111  
4 (1994) 5 SCC 545 
5 AIR 1961 SC 1698  
6 1876 (1) Allahabad Series 316

