

THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE P.LAKSHMANA REDDY           
Criminal Petition No.3844 OF 2002 

03-03-2006 

T. Balaji Rao

The State of Andhra Pradesh represented by its Public Prosecutor
2.   P.Radha Rani

COUNSEL FOR THE PETITIONER: Sri T.Balaji     

COUNSEL FOR THE RESPONDENT No.1: PUBLIC PROSECUTOR                
COUNSEL FOR THE RESPONDENT No.2: Ms.N.Vijaya Sree          

:O R D E R :

        This Criminal Petition is filed to quash the proceedings in Calendar Case
No.1319 of 2000 on the file of the III Additional Munsif Magistrate, Tirupathi.
        The petitioner herein is the accused and the second respondent herein is
the de facto complainant in the said C.C.No.1319 of 2000 and they will
hereinafter be referred in this order as accused and the de facto complainant.
        The relevant facts in brief are as follows:
        The marriage between the accused and the de facto complainant took place 
on 12.08.1998 at Tirupathi and after the marriage on the same day the accused
took the de facto complainant to Chennai.  On 22.10.1998 the de facto
complainant Radha Rani filed a report in Alipiri Police Station alleging that on
the date of the marriage an amount of Rs.10,000/- and 13 sovereigns of gold were
given to the accused by the mother of the de facto complainant besides bearing
marriage expenses and from next day onwards the accused, his mother Devaki Bai,  
his brother Srinu and his relatives Ramdas, Sarojini Bai, Kasturibai, Krishnabai
and Sonabai harassed her and also beat her saying that she is illiterate and she
brought less dowry and that if she dies they can perform another marriage to the
accused No.1 and get more dowry.  She further alleged in the said report that
when her mother came to Chennai and invited her to Tirupathi for Brahmotsvam of
Lord Venkateswara, the accused and his relatives quarrelled with her and that in
the presence of her mother she was beaten and was abused vulgarly and that the
accused and his relatives threatened her and took her signatures on some papers
and that later they sent her to Tirupathi along with police.
        Alipiri Police regisetered the said case as Crime No.177 of 1998 under
Section 498-A I.P.C.  Thereafter, Alipiri police submitted final report before
the Judicial Magistrate of First Class, Tirupathi referring the case as mistake
of fact on 22.01.1999. While the final report was pending consideration before
the Magistrate, the de facto complainant approached the Additional
Superintendent of Police, Tirupathi and submitted a representation and
thereafter the Additional Superintendent of Police made endorsement to the
effect that the dowry cases should not be referred on flimsy grounds without
permission from the Additional Superintendent of Police, whereupon Alipiri
police moved the Magistrate for permission to reopen the investigation and
obtained permission and thereafter further investigated and filed charge sheet
against the present petitioner and 7 others including his mother and brother
arraying them as A-1 to A-8 alleging that they harassed the de facto complainant
for dowry and subjected the de facto complainant to cruelty and thereby
committed the offence punishable under Section 498-A I.P.C.
        On the said further report, the learned Magistrate took the cognizance of
the case against A-1 to A-8.  Aggrieved by taking cognizance of the case, the
first accused who is the husband of the de facto complainant filed the present
application before this Court under Section 482 Cr.P.C. praying this Court to
call for the records in C.C.No.1319 of 2000 from the file of the III Additional
Munsif Magistrate, Tirupathi and to quash the same.
        The accused pleaded in the grounds of petition that it is evident from the
complaint lodged by Radharani dated 30.10.1998 that the alleged incident took
place at No.1106, Thendral Colony, Anna Nagar (West), Chennai in Tamil Nadu.  It
is well settled law of Criminal Jurisprudence that there can be no second F.I.R.
on the same incident after making a first information report in Thirumangalam
Police Station in Tamil Nadu.  The first respondent-Alipiri Police Station has
no jurisdiction to register a complaint on 22.110.1998 on the alleged incident
that took place before 21.10.1998 at Chennai.  Nothing is stated about the
action taken by the Thirumangalam Police Station at Madras.  If no action was
taken and if the complaint was genuine, nothing prevented the affected party to
move the High Court of Madras under Section 482 Cr.P.C.  Without taking any
action on the complaint given by her mother, she could not be allowed to file a
report in Tirupathi in respect of the same cause of action.  It is further
submitted that the III Additional Munsif Magistrate, Tirupathi has no
jurisdiction to try the case as the alleged incident took place at Chennai. It
is further stated in the petition that Radharani was brought to Tirupathi at her
request with police protection on 20.10.1998 with all her articles and jewels
and she went to the house of her uncle P.C.Venugopal Rao residing at No.90-A,
Bazaar Street, Tirupathi and the said Venugopal Rao agreed to take care of
Radharani. It is further stated that Radharani's mother Smt.Varalakshmi Bai had
filed a Habeas Corpus Petition NO.1544 of 1998 in the High Court of Madras and
in that petition the Inspector of Police, Law and Order, Thirumangalam Police
Station, Chennai filed counter on 20.10.1998 and thereafter the Habeas Corpus
Petition was dismissed by the Court on 11.01.1999. The III Additional Munsif
Magistrate,Tirupathi cannot go into the matter that was decided by the High
Court of Madras nor sit in judgment on the order of Madras High Court dated
12.10.1998 in W.P.No.15579 of 1998.  Only under the orders of Madras High Court
dated 12.10.1998 Radharani was sent back to Tirupathi with adequate police
protection.  Radharani had availed the benefits of the order-dated 12.10.1998 of
the Madras High Court and she brought all belongings to Tirupathi at the time of
leaving Madras with police protection.  Therefore, the allegation under Section
498-A I.P.C. could not made out.  All averments were made in the complaint of
Radharani.  Alipiri Police without applying their mind acted at the behest of
the Additional Superintendent of Police, Tirupathi and reopened the matter,
which was already referred as mistake of fact just to satisfy the higher
officials.  It is further pleaded in the petition grounds that any trial by the
III Additional Munsif Magistrate, Tirupathi would result in wasting the valuable
time of the Court besides harassment to the accused affecting his life and
liberty without the authority of law.
        During the course of hearing of the petition, the learned counsel for the
petitioner reiterated the contentions raised in the grounds mentioned in the
petition.  It is submitted that the alleged acts which constitute the offence
took place only at Chennai and none of the ingredients of the offence took place
at Tirupathi and therefore Tirupathi police or the Magistrate at Tirupathi has
no jurisdiction over the matter and on that ground alone the criminal
proceedings are to be quashed.  He further submitted that when once the Alipiri
police investigated the matter and filed the final report referring it as
mistake of fact it has no jurisdiction to reopen the matter at the instance of
the Additional Superintendent of Police and file the charge sheet alleging that
the accused committed the offence punishable under Section 
498-A I.P.C. and Alipiri police at the time of filing charge sheet did not apply
their mind and they appear to have filed the charge sheet only to satisfy his
superior the Additional Superintendent of Police         whom the complainant and
her mother influenced.  The learned counsel submitted that the mother of
Radharani performed the marriage with the accused against her wishes and
therefore Radharani filed the writ petition in the High Court of Madras stating
that her foster mother Varalaxmi introduced her in prostitution and exploited
her and later one Srinivasan contated her and married her and that after
marriage Srinivasan lived with her in Hyderabad for 3 days and thereafter
Varalaxmi Bai sent her with the accused without her consent and she was not
allowed to tell the truth to the accused and his family members and a fake
marriage was performed  without her consent on 12.08.1998 and when she had an  
opportunity to tell the truth on 24.08.1998 in first night she told the accused
the truth and requested him to send her to her husband Srinivasan and requested
him not to hand over to her mother Varalaxmi Bai and then the accused did not
touch her in the first night and that Varalaxmi Bai came to Chennai on
24.09.1998 and threatened the accused and filed a false complaint in
Thirumangalam Police Station and then she appeared in the police station and
stated the truth and that she has to be restored to her husband Srinivasan of
Tirupathi with police protection and the said writ petition was allowed and
Radharani was sent back to Tirupathi. He further submitted that later the mother
again prevailed upon Radharani and got a false complaint filed and therefore
there is no truth in the allegations made in the complaint and that the police
Alipiri without applying their mind revived their earlier stand and filed the
charge sheet at the instance of Additional Superintendent of Police without
making any further investigation.
        On the other hand, the learned counsel for the second respondent contended
that Radharani the de facto complainant is an illiterate and that the writ
petition filed on her behalf was stage managed by the accused in order to save
themselves from the allegations of harassment alleged against them by the mother
of the de facto complainant in Tirumangalam police station and that the accused
and his relatives put the illiterate complainant in fear of death and obtained
her signatures on blank papers and filed the writ petition on her behalf making
all false allegations therein and that the very same advocate Sri S.Krishnaswamy
who is appearing on behalf of the accused had filed the writ petition and
therefore the averments of the affidavit filed along with that writ petition
cannot at all be given any credence.  Regarding the jurisdiction, the counsel
submitted that the 164 Cr.P.C. statement of mother of the de facto complainant
discloses that on the very date of the marriage the accused and his relatives
made further demand for dowry and till the mother of the de facto complainant
promised to comply their demand later, the accused did not take her to Chennai
and that the very demand for dowry also amounts to harassment and it amounts to
cruelty and thus the harassment started at Tirupathi and continued and therefore
the Court at Tirupathi has got jurisdiction to entertain the charge sheet filed
by the police.  She further submitted that Alipiri police after filing the final
report and before it was accepted by the Court filed an application seeking
permission of the Court for further investigation on account of some material
came to light subsequently and the magistrate granted permission and the police
made further investigation and filed charge sheet and that the police have got
every power to reopen the case for further investigation and then file the
charge sheet and that merely because the Additional Superintendent of Police
made an endorsement that the dowry harassment cases shall not be referred 
without his permission, it cannot be said that Alipiri police acted under the
influence of Additional Superintendent of Police and without applying their
mind, filed the charge sheet.  The learned counsel relied upon the following
decisions:
1. SATVINDER KAUR v. STATE1     

2. SHOBHA RANI v. MADHUKAR REDDI2        
The counsel further submitted the de facto complainant is an illiterate woman
having no father and her mother is very old and that there is no safety for them
to prosecute their case in Tamil Nadu and that as the harassment started at
Tirupathi, Tirupathi police have got jurisdiction to investigate and file the
charge sheet and the Magistrate Court at Tirupathi has got jurisdiction to try
the case and there are no merits in the petition and the petition is liable to
be dismissed. 
        The points that arise for determination in this petition are :
1. Whether the Magistrate Court at Tiruapthi has got jurisdiction to try the
case of alleged harassment punishable under Section 498-A I.P.C.?
2. If so, whether Alipiri police are not entitled to reopen the investigation
after submitting the final report to the Magistrate and then filing the charge
sheet revising their earlier stand?
3. Whether the writ petition filed on behalf of the de facto complainant in
Madras High Court disentitles the de facto complainant the very filing the
report before the Alipiri police alleging harassment?
4. Whether the proceedings before the III Additional Munsiff Magistrate,
Tirupathi are liable to be quashed?
5. To what result?
POINT NO.1:  
        The III Additional Munsif Magistrate, Tirupathi took cognizance of the
offence punishable under Section 498-A I.P.C. on the report submitted by the
Inspector of Police, Tirupathi (Rural) in Cr.No.177 of 1998 on the file of
Alipiri Police Station under Section 190(b) Cr.P.C.  In the said report it is
alleged that the marriage between A-1 and the de facto complainant was
celebrated at Tiruchanur on 12.08.1998 and on demand by A-1 and his relatives,
the mother of de facto complainant gave cash of Rs.10,000/- and 13 sovereigns of
gold towards dowry and that after the marriage A-1 and the de facto complainant
along with their relatives went to Chennai to the house of A-1 to lead
matrimonial life and immediately after reaching the house of A-1, all the
accused started illtreating and harassing the de facto complainant stating that
the dowry given to them is very very less and further demanded to get additional
dowry of Rs.50,000/- from her parents and that the de facto complainant unable
to bear the harassment and illtreatment contacted her mother by phone and when
her mother went to the house of A-1 at Chennai to pacify the issue, A-1 to A-8
did not agree to receive the de facto complainant unless she brought additional
dowry of Rs.50,000/- and further the accused beat the de facto complainant in
the presence of her mother and that observing all those happenings, the mother
of the de facto complainant went to Tirumangalam Police Station and further
reported the matter to the Commissioner of Police, Chennai but they did not take
any action. It is further alleged that A-1 to A-8 decided to get rid of the de
facto complainant from the house one way or the other, conspired together
threatened with dire consequences by putting her in fear of death, obtained
signatures on several papers and later used those papers by filling the contents
as they like through advocate and filed the same in the police station and also
in the High Court of Madras and basing on the manipulated documents obtained 
directions from the High Court of Madras and basing on the orders of the High
Court at Chennai, the de facto complainant was sent back to Tirupathi to the
custody of her uncle and thus A-1 to A-8 harassed physically and mentally by
putting the de facto complainant in fear of death and succeeded in sending her
out from the house of A-1 and damaged the matrimonial life of the de facto
complainant mercilessly and that after reaching Tirupathi the de facto
complainant narrated to her mother and also to her kith and kin as to what
happened at her in-law's house during her stay and with the advise of her mother
and relatives she gave report in Alipiri Police Station, Tirupathi and it was
registered as Cr.No.177 of 1998 under Section 498-A I.P.C. and investigated into
and that after investigation, the investigating officer basing on the complaint
and orders of the High Court of Chennai, the case was referred as mistake of
fact on 22.01.1999.  It is further alleged that the de facto complainant and her
mother waited for some time and as they did not get any justice either from
Tamil Nadu Government or from Alipiri Police, approached higher officials for
justice and that after considering the difficult condition of the de facto
complainant, the Additional Superintendent of Police, Tirupathi issued
instructions on 18.05.2000 to reopen the case for further investigation and that
as the case was not closed by the Magistrate, with the permission of the Court
the further investigation was started and that during the further investigation,
the Inspector of Police, Tirupathi (Rural) secured the presence of the de facto
complainant and her witnesses (LWs.1 to 8) and got the statements of LWs.1 and 2 
recorded under Section 164 Cr.P.C. on 13.10.2000 and that the investigation
revealed that A-1 to A-8 being husband of de facto complainant and relatives
subjected her physically and mentally and also harassed her demanding further
dowry of Rs.50,000/- and thereby rendered themselves liable for punishment under
Section 498-A I.P.C.
        So, as seen from the above said allegations, it is clear that the
harassment, cruelty and demand for additional dowry etc. by the accused took
place only at Chennai and no part of the alleged harassment and cruelty took
place at Tirupathi because it is the admitted case of the de facto complainant
that the marriage took place on 12.08.1998 and on the same day she was taken to 
Chennai and that she was sent back to Tirupathi after the alleged harassment and
cruelty on 20.10.1998 and on the very next day on 21.10.1998 she gave report in
Alipiri Police Station.  Even in the report given to the police on 21.10.1998 it
is nowhere stated that any acts of harassment or cruelty took place at
Tirupathi.  It is clearly stated therein that the marriage took place on
12.08.1998 and on the very same day of the marriage she was sent to Chennai and 
that on the next day onwards her husband and her husband's relatives started
illtreating her on the ground that she brought less dowry and acted cruelly
towards her.  The learned counsel for the second respondent-de facto complainant
invited my attention to the 164 Cr.P.C. statements of the de facto complainant's
mother wherein she stated that after the marriage the accused demanded dowry and 
then she replied that she performed the marriage spending huge amount as
demanded by them and therefore she is unable to give any further amount and that
she will try to adjust later and thereafter the de facto complainant was taken
to Chennai.  Replying on that statement the counsel contended that on 12.08.1998
at Tirupathi itself they made further demand for dowry and the said demand
amounts to cruelty and therefore the harassment started at Tirupathi and hence
the magistrate at Tirupathi has got jurisdiction. As seen from Section 498-A
I.P.C. mere demand for dowry is not an offence punishable under Section 498-A
I.P.C. and Section
498-A I.P.C. attracts only when harassment was made on account of non-compliance  
of the dowry.  There is no such allegation of harassment at Tirupathi.  In fact,
according to the statement of PW-2 under Section 164 Cr.P.C. that after her
inability to pay and promise to try later, the accused took the bridegroom to
Chennai and reached there on the same day.  Therefore, it cannot be said that
any cause of action relating to the offence punishable under Section 498-A
I.P.C. commenced at Tirupathi.  In a similar case in Mr.RAJARAM VENKATESH AND      
OTHERS v. THE STATE OF A.P. AND OTHERS3 this Court considered about the        
territorial jurisdiction in respect of the offence punishable under Section 498-
A I.P.C.  This Court observed that the de facto complainant resides at Kakinada
cannot give jurisdiction to the Magistrate at Kakinada to take cognizance for
the offence under Section 498-A I.P.C. in the absence of some act subjecting her
to cruelty have occurred or taken place at Kakinada.   With such observation,
this Court held that the Court at Kakinada has no jurisdiction to entertain the
case filed under Section 498-A I.P.C. The Apex Court also in a case of similar
nature in Y.ABRAHAM AJITHAND OTHERS v. INSPECTOR OF POLICE, CHENNAI & ANOTHER4                 
discussed about the venue and place of trial in respect of offence punishable
under Section
498-A I.P.C.  The facts of that case are that the complainant filed the
complaint in the magistrate Court alleging commission of offence punishable
under Section 498-A, 406 I.P.C. and Section 4 of Dowry Prohibition Act and the
magistrate directed the police to investigate and after investigation charge
sheet was filed by the police, then the accused filed an application under
Section 482 Cr.P.C. before the High Court contending that the concerned
Magistrate has no jurisdiction to entertain the complaint even if the
allegations contained therein are accepted in toto, as no part of cause of
action arose within the jurisdiction of the concerned Court at Chennai and that
once the complaint itself disclosed that after 15.04.1997 the respondent left
Nagercoil and came to Chennai and was staying there and that all the alleged
acts of cruelty took place according to the complainant at Nagercoil and
therefore the Courts at Chennai did not have jurisdiction to deal with the
matter.  The second respondent complainant in that quash petition opposed the
said application contending that some of the offences were continuing offences.
The High Court dismissed the petition without considering the contention
regarding the lack of jurisdiction observing that legal parametres have to be
considered after thorough trial after giving due opportunity to the parties.
Aggrieved by the dismissal of the quash petition, the accused approached the
Supreme Court and the Supreme Court considered in detail the provisions
contained in Section 177 and 178 of Cr.P.C. more particularly Section 178(c)
Cr.P.C. and also the expression 'cause of action' in criminal cases which deals
with continuing offences and held in the cited case that no part of cause of
action in Chennai arose and therefore the concerned magistrate had no
jurisdiction to deal with the matter and the proceedings are liable to be
quashed and observed that if the complainant so chooses, may file the same in
the appropriate Court to be dealt with in accordance with law.  While dealing
with the continuing offence, the Apex Court referred with approval its
observations in STATE OF BIHAR v. DEOKARAN NENSHI AND ANOTHER5 wherein it is          
held that continuing offence is one which is susceptible of continuance and is
distinguishable from the one which is committed once and for all, that it is one
of those offences which arises out of the failure to obey or comply with a rule
or its requirement and which involves a penalty, liability continues till
compliance, that on every occasion such disobedience or non-compliance occurs or 
recurs, there is the offence committed.
Here in the instant case, as observed supra, all the acts of alleged cruelty and
harassment took place only at Chennai and that immediately after return from
Chennai, report was given in the police station. The offence alleged is complete
even at Chennai. Therefore, no part of cause of action arose at Tirupathi.
Section 178 (c) Cr.P.C. has no application to the facts of this case.
        In a latest case in RAMESH AND OTHERS v. STATE OF TAMIL NADU6 the Apex         
Court again considered about the territorial jurisdiction of the magistrate in
respect of the offence of cruelty to the wife and demand of dowry and held that
most of the acts were committed at Chennai and none of the acts were committed 
at Trichy where the wife was residing with her parents and therefore Trichy
Court has no jurisdiction to try the case.
In the instant case also, no acts of alleged harassment and cruelty took place
at Tirupathi and therefore the Court at Tirupathi has no jurisdiction.
        The learned counsel for the second respondent-complainant relied upon the
decision of the Apex Court in SHOBHA RANI's case (2 SUPRA) wherein it is held 
that the demand of dowry by husband or his parents amounts to cruelty.  I have
gone through the facts of the cited case.  It was a civil case and the wife
moved the Court for divorce on the ground of cruelty.  The Apex Court considered
Section 13 of the Hindu Marriage Act and held that the cruelty simplicitor is
now a ground for divorce under Section 13 of the Hindu Marriage Act. The Apex
Court at paragraph 10 clearly observed that they are not concerned with criminal
offence either under Dowry Prohibition Act or under the Indian Penal Code and
they are concerned only with a matrimonial conduct that constitutes cruelty,
which is a ground for dissolution of marriage.  Further, the Apex Court
categorically held that in their opinion demand for dowry amounts to cruelty,
which enables the wife to get a decree for dissolution of marriage.  The Apex
Court nowhere stated therein that the mere demand of dowry amounts to 'cruelty'
defined in Section 498-A I.P.C.  Therefore, the said decision is not applicable
to the facts of this case.  The learned counsel relied upon another decision of
the Apex Court in SATVINDER KAUR'S CASE (1 SUPRA) wherein it was held that first    
information report cannot be quashed on the ground that the police station has
no territorial jurisdiction to investigate the offence and the police cannot
refuse to record F.I.R. or investigate it for want of territorial jurisdiction.
The facts of the cited case are entirely different from the facts on hand.  The
Apex Court in the cited case categorically observed that at the stage of
investigation, the F.I.R. cannot be quashed on the ground that the Station House
Officer, Police Station was not having territorial jurisdiction and that the
material collected by the investing officer cannot be judicially scrutinized for
arriving at a conclusion that station house officer of particular police station
would not have territorial jurisdiction.
 In the instant case, the investigation is already completed and even as per
investigation all the acts of alleged cruelty and harassment took place only at
Chennai.  Therefore, the said decision also does not help the contention of the
second respondent-de facto complainant.  Even if all the acts alleged in the
report and also in the charge sheet are taken as true, no part of cause of
action relating to the offence punishable under Section 498-A I.P.C. arose
within the jurisdiction of the Court at Tirupathi.  Hence, I find considerable
force in the contention raised on behalf of the petitioner that the Magistrate
Court at Tirupathi has no jurisdiction to try the case.  Thus, this point is
held accordingly.
POINT NO. 2: 
        In view of the finding on point No.1, there is no need to answer this
point.  A perusal of the record discloses that the magistrate has not accepted
the final report and further the police reopened the investigation only after
obtaining permission from the magistrate.  Therefore, it cannot be said that the
police have no jurisdiction to reopen the investigation.  Thus, this point is
answered accordingly. 
POINT NO. 3: 
        In view of the finding on point No.1 that the Court at Tirupathi has no
jurisdiction to try the case, the de facto complainant is to be given
opportunity to proceed against the accused if she is so advised, at Chennai
where the acts constituting the offence took place.  Therefore, it is not
desirable for this Court to discuss about the merits of the case.  There is no
need to consider about he orders in the writ petition by the Madras High Court.
According to the complainant taking advantage of her illiteracy and by putting
her in fear of death obtained her signatures on some papers by the accused and
that those papers appears to have been pressed into service to file the writ
petition before the Madras High Court on her behalf. In view of the said
allegations, it cannot be said that filing of writ petition disentitles the
second respondent-complainant to complain in appropriate court about the alleged
acts of cruelty and harassment.  Ultimately it is for the court concerned having
jurisdiction to determine the genuineness or otherwise of the allegations made
by the second respondent-complainant against her husband even in respect of the
alleged filing of the writ petition after obtaining her signatures by coercion
on papers. Thus, this point is found accordingly.
POINT NO. 4: 
        In view of the findings on point No.1, the proceedings before the III
Additional Munsif Magistrate, Tirupathi are liable to be quashed giving liberty
to the second respondent-de facto complainant to move the appropriate Court for
redressal of her grievance.  Thus, this point is held accordingly.
POINT NO. 5: 
        In the result, the criminal petition is allowed. The proceedings in
Calendar Case No.1319 of 2000 on the file of the III Additional Munsif
Magistrate, Tirupathi are hereby quashed only on the ground of lack of
territorial jurisdiction giving liberty to the second respondent-de facto
complainant to move the appropriate Court for redressal of her grievance.

?1 AIR 1999 SC 3596  
2 AIR 1988 SC 121  
3 1993 Crl.L.J. 707
4 2004(3) CRIMES 227 (SC)  
5 AIR 1973 SC 908  
6 2005 Crl.L.J. 1732

