

THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE C.Y.SOMAYAJULU         
Civil Miscellaneous Appeal No.2456 of 2000

07-12-2006 

Shamsunder Tiwari @ Shamlal Tiwari and two others. 

1. Narsimha Reddy S/o. Ram Reddy, Owner of the lorry R/o. 
H.No.17-2-62, Saidabad, Hyderabd & another  

!COUNSEL FOR THE APPELLANTS: Sri N.Mohan Rao         

^COUNSEL FOR THE RESPONDENT No.2:Sri Kota Subba Rao           

:JUDGMENT:   

Appellants filed a claim petition under Section 166 of the Motor Vehicles Act,
1988 (the Act) seeking compensation of Rs.2,00,000/- for the death of their
unmarried son Ramesh Kumari Tiwari (the deceased) said to be aged 22 years  
earning about Rs.4,000/- p.m. as a cashier in Geetha Trading Company, alleging
that when the deceased along with his friend was proceeding on a scooter, a
lorry belonging to the first respondent and insured with the second respondent
being driven in a rash and negligent manner came in the opposite direction of
the scooter and dashed the scooter resulting in the death of the deceased.

2.      First respondent chose to remain ex parte.

3.      Second respondent filed its counter inter alia putting the appellants to
proof of the averments in the petition.

4.      The claim petition filed by the appellants and another claim petition
filed by the legal representatives of another victim were clubbed and common
evidence was recorded. In support of the case of the appellants, first appellant
was examined as P.W.2 and the first claimant in another claim petition filed by
the legal representative of the other victim was examined as P.W.1 and another
witness was examined as P.W.3 and Exs.A.1 to A.8 were marked on behalf of the  
claimants.  No evidence either oral or documentary was adduced on behalf of the
second respondent. 

5.      The Tribunal held that the accident resulting in the death of two victims
occurred due to the rash and negligent driving of the lorry of the first
respondent and awarded Rs.1,00,000/- as compensation to the claimants. 
Dissatisfied with the compensation awarded to them, the claimants preferred this
appeal.

6.      Since this appeal is by the claimants seeking higher compensation than
that was awarded and since the finding of the Tribunal that the accident
occurred due to the rash and negligent driving of the driver of the lorry of the
first respondent has become final, the only point for consideration is to what
compensation are the appellants entitled to.

7.      The contention of the learned counsel for appellants is that inasmuch as
the deceased was unmarried and since the evidence of P.W.2, the father of the
deceased, that the deceased was earning Rs.4,000/- p.m. stands unrebutted the 
Tribunal was in error in not awarding adequate compensation.  Relying on
Nidamanuri Ramana Kumari v. Erukula Sesha Rao1, he contended that the   
contribution of the deceased should be taken at least at Rs.10,000/- p.a. and in
view of Schedule II of the Act, the appropriate multiplier as mentioned in
Schedule II of the Act has to be adopted and if it is so done, the appellants
would be entitled to the compensation claimed.

8.      The contention of the learned counsel for second respondent is that since
the Apex Court in Bijoy Kumar Dugar v. Bidyadhar Dutt2, held that dependency has
to be worked out on the basis of the earnings of the deceased at the time of the
accident and that the claimants have to prove that the deceased could have
earned more amount from time to time or had special merits or qualifications or
opportunity which would have improved his income in future, and as it was also
observed that in case of unmarried victims, the dependency has to be calculated
on the basis that he would get married and will have to raise a family and the
monthly allowances he would be giving to his parents would be cut down, the
compensation arrived at by the Tribunal cannot be said to be erroneous.

9.      Since appellants are the parents of unmarried deceased, it is not the age
of the deceased, but it is the age of the mother of the deceased i.e. second
appellant, is relevant for fixing the appropriate multiplier. Appellants did not
adduce any reliable evidence to show their ages.  Unfortunately, the Tribunal
without mentioning as to how it has arrived at the figure of Rs.1,00,000/-
granted a lump sum compensation of Rs.1,00,000/- to the appellants. So, the
basis on which that figure was fixed by the Tribunal is not known. The Tribunals
while awarding compensation should state under what head it is awarding what
amount of compensation to the claimants so that the appellate forum can find out
the entitlement or otherwise of the claimants for the amount awarded by the
Tribunal.

10.     The evidence of P.W.2 is that the deceased was 22 years by the time of his
death and was not married and was a cashier earning Rs.4,000/- p.m. and so, the
appellants  are entitled to Rs.2,00,000/- because they were dependents on him.
During cross-examination, he admitted that he did not produce any certificate to
show the income of the deceased and denied the suggestion that the deceased was  
not earning Rs.4,000/- p.m.

11.     The evidence of P.Ws.1 and 3 is not relevant for deciding the point.

12.     Nidamanuri Ramana Kumari case (1 supra) relied on by the learned counsel 
for the appellants is a case relating to the death of an unmarried girl. The
contribution made by her parents to the claimants was taken as Rs.10,000/- per
annum.  In that case, the decision of the Apex Court in Bijoy Kumar Dugar case
(2 supra) as to how the compensation in respect of unmarried have to be arrived
at i.e. dependency has to be calculated on the basis that the deceased would get
married and will have a family and so the monthly allowances to their parents
would be cut down was not taken into consideration.  So, I do not wish to take
that decision into consideration and would follow the principles laid down by
the Apex Court in Bijoy Kumar Dugar case (2 supra).

13.     P.W.2 is silent as to the number of children he has.  There is nothing on
record to show that the deceased was the only son of the claimants. Why the
first appellant (P.W.2) who is said to be aged 50 years has shown his occupation
as nil is not known.  While giving evidence as P.W.2 he did not state why he is
not taking up any work to earn his livelihood.  Probably to make it appear that
he and his wife were depending on the income of the deceased, P.W.2 might have 
shown his occupation as Nil.

14.     As per Section 166 of the Act, the legal representatives of a deceased
victim only would be entitled to compensation.  Mother being the legal heir to
the estate of a deceased son, as per Hindu Succession Act, would only be his
heir.  So second appellant only would be entitled to make a claim for
compensation.  It is well know that wife has to be maintained by the husband and
during the lifetime of an able bodied father, son is not bound to maintain his
mother.  So, the primary duty to maintain the second appellant is on the first
appellant.  So first appellant cannot, on the basis that the deceased was
earning, refuse to maintain and take care of the second appellant.

15.     Be that as it may, even assuming that the deceased was a hawker and was  
contributing some amount to the appellants for their maintenance, as observed by
the Apex Court, the contribution that was being made by the deceased to the
appellants would be reduced in due course, after he gets married and begets
children.  So the average contribution of the deceased to the appellants can be
taken as around Rs.800/- per month or Rs.10,000/- per annum. 

16.     keeping in view the age of the deceased, the age of the second appellant
can be taken as around 47 years. Learned counsel for the second respondent 
relying on Tamil Nadu State Transport Corporation v. S.Rajapriya3 contended that
since the Apex Court adopted the multiplier of 12 for a person of 38 years, the
multiplier for a person aged 47 years should be far less.  Since the Apex court
in Uttar Pradesh State Road Transport Corporation v. Krishna Bala4 held that the
multiplier in
Schedule II is only a guide and is not invariable rule, the multiplier can be
taken as '12' and so the pecuniary damages payable to the appellants due to the
death of the deceased would come to Rs.1,20,000/- (Rs.10,000 x 12).  As per
Schedule II of the Act appellants are entitled to funeral expenses of Rs.2,000/-
and loss of estate of Rs.2,500/- also.

17.     Thus, the appellants are entitled to Rs.1,20,000 + Rs.2,000/- + Rs.2,500 =
Rs.1,24,500/- as compensation for the death of the deceased.

18.     The contention of the learned counsel for second respondent is that
inasmuch as the driver of the offending vehicle was not having a valid driving
licence, the Tribunal was in error in making the second respondent also liable
for payment of compensation.  It is his contention that the second respondent
filed an appeal questioning the award with a delay condonation petition and the
appeal is not yet numbered and so, it is not listed with this appeal.  The Apex
Court in National Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Swaran Singh5 clearly held that breach
of policy condition i.e. like driver not having a valid driving licence has to
be proved by the insurer for avoiding its liability. So in order to avoid its
liability the insurer has to prove that the insured was guilty of negligence and
failed to exercise reasonable care in the matter of fulfilling the conditions of
the policy regarding use of vehicle by duly licensed driver etc. As there is no
such evidence in this case, the second respondent cannot be exempted from 
liability.  Second respondent by establishing that the first respondent was
guilty of negligence, and had knowingly entrusted the vehicle to a person who is
not having a valid licence, can recover the amount paid by it to the claimants
from the owner in separate proceedings, but in this appeal no relief can be
given to the second respondent.

19.     In the result, the appeal is allowed in part and an award is passed for
Rs.1,24,500/- with interest at 12% p.a on Rs.1,00,000/- from the date of
petition till the date of deposit as awarded by the Tribunal and with interest
at 9% p.a., on Rs.24,500/-, awarded in this Court, from this date till the date
of deposit into the Court with proportionate costs in the Tribunal. Rest of the
claim of appellants is dismissed without costs. Parties are directed to bear
their own costs in this appeal.

?1 2006(4) ALD 689 
2 2006 ACJ 1058  
3 2005 ACJ 1441  
4 2006(6) SCC 249 
5 AIR 2004 SC 1531  


*THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE GOPALA KRISHNA TAMADA            

+Criminal Appeal No.1597 of 2001 

%15-11-2006  

#Angirekula Ramakrishna S/o Vuyyuru  

State of A.P., represented by Public Prosecutor

Counsel for Appellant:  Sri C.Praveen Kumar

Counsel for Respondent:  Additional Public Prosecutor

:JUDGMENT:   

This Criminal Appeal is preferred by appellant - A1 questioning the judgment,
dated 12.10.2001, passed in Sessions Case No.160 of 1998 on the file of the
Court of the II Additional Sessions Judge, Guntur, wherein learned Additional
Sessions Judge while acquitting A-2 to A-4 of the offence punishable under
Section 304-B IPC and A-1 to A-4 of the offence punishable under Section 302
IPC, found the appellant - A-1 guilty of the offence punishable under Section
304-B IPC. 

The case of the prosecution, in brief, is as follows: The appellant is the
husband of one Angirekula Nagamani (hereinafter referred to as
'the deceased').  A2 is the brother and A4 is the mother of A1.  A3 is the wife
of A2.  P.Ws.1 and 2 are the parents and P.W.4 is the sister of the deceased.
The deceased was married to A1 at Ramaswami Kalyanamandapam, Repalle. At the      
time of marriage P.W.1 gave Rs.1,00,000/- as dowry and one gold ring to A1, one
gold bangle weighing about 1 1/4 sovereign, gold ear studs weighing about 3/4
sovereign and ear studs weighing about 1/2 sovereign to the deceased.  After
marriage, the deceased and A1 were residing at Guntur.  In the month of January
1996, the appellant beat the deceased to bring money from P.W.1. The deceased 
informed the same to P.W.1, who in turn, handed over the said amount to the
deceased and asked her not to demand any amount further. Again in the month of 
March 1996, the deceased came to P.W.1 and requested him to pay Rs.10,000/- for  
repairing photostat machine and he paid the same in the presence of P.W.8.
Thereafter,
in the month of May, 1996 A1 beat the deceased and burnt her thighs and hands 
with cigarette butts and sent her to P.W.1 demanding Rs.50,000/- for purchase of
new photostat machine. Thereafter, P.W.1 sent the deceased and P.W.2 to  
Angalakuduru to his elder brother-in-law's house to stay for some days.  Ten
days thereafter, A1 went there and made the deceased to believe that he would
not ill-treat her and took her to Guntur.  On 31.05.1997 at about 7 or 8.00
A.M., P.W.8 informed P.W.1 that the deceased died, upon which P.W.1 gave Ex.P1   
report to the police, which was registered as a case in Crime No.56 of 1997 for
the offence punishable under Section 304-B IPC.  The Sub-Inspector of Police,
Repalle, who was examined as P.W.18 sent Ex.P10 express FIR to all concerned.   
Thereafter, on 01.06.1997 the Inspector of Police, Repalle, took up
investigation.  On requisition, the Mandal Revenue Officer, Repalle conducted
inquest over the dead body of the deceased. Later the case was transferred to
Arundalpet Law & Order Police Station on the point of jurisdiction, where the
case was reregistered as Crime No.87 of 1997.  The Deputy Civil surgeon,
Government Hospital, Repalle, who was examined as P.W.17 conducted autopsy over    
the dead body of the deceased and issued postmortem certificate opining that the
deceased died of shock and haemorrhage, due to injury to the spleen. On
06.06.1997 the Inspector of Police Law & Order Police Station, Guntur (P.W.20)
conducted further investigation.  He visited the scene of offence and prepared
rough sketch of the house of A1 and after completion of entire investigation,
charge sheet was laid against the accused.

On appearance of accused and on hearing both sides, learned Additional Sessions 
Judge framed a charge under Section 304-B IPC or in the alternative, a charge
under Section 302 of IPC against A-1 to A-4, read over and explained to them in
Telugu, for which they pleaded not guilty and claimed to be tried.

To bring home the guilt of accused, prosecution examined
P.Ws.1 to 21 and marked Exs.P1 to P11 and M.Os.1 to 9.  On behalf of defence, no 
witness was examined, but Exs.D1 to D9 were marked.   

On an analysis of the entire oral and documentary evidence, the trial Court
while acquitting A-1 to A-4 of the offence punishable under Section 302 IPC, and
A2 to A4 of the offence punishable under Section 304-B IPC, however, convicted
and sentenced the appellant - A-1 for the offence punishable under Section 304-B
IPC as stated supra.  Hence, this appeal by the appellant.

Heard learned counsel for appellant and learned Additional Public Prosecutor.

        Learned counsel for appellant vociferously contended that there is
absolutely no evidence to hold that there was demand for dowry, for, or in
connection with the marriage and on account of which the deceased died.  He
further contended that at the time of death of the deceased she was pregnant and
her death was natural as she died due to some injury to spleen, which might have
occurred while she was traveling, as spoken by the doctor, who was examined as
PW-3.   He further contended that except the interested and discrepant
testimonies of PWs.1, 2, 4, 7, 8, 10 and 11, there is no independent evidence
available on record, to show that there was any harassment by the appellant
within the meaning of cruelty as defined under Section 304-B IPC read with
Section 113-B of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872.   He also contended that simply
because the death of the deceased occurred within seven years of her marriage it
cannot be concluded that A-1 is guilty of the offence punishable under Section
304-B IPC. 

Per contra, learned Additional Public Prosecutor while supporting the impugned
judgment contended that even though PWs.1, 2, 4, 7, 8, 10 and 11 are interested
witnesses, their evidence is consistent and cogent and based on their evidence
conviction can be maintained.  He further contended that in the absence of
pointing out any illegality or irregularity either on facts or on law, well
considered judgment of the trial Court cannot be disturbed.

In a case of this nature, in order to bring home the guilt of the accused,
prosecution has to establish the following ingredients, namely: 1) the death of
the deceased must be within seven years of her marriage; 2) it must be unnatural
death; and 3) soon before her death there must be harassment for dowry by the
accused to the deceased. 

It is an undisputed fact that the marriage between the deceased and the
appellant was performed on 08-10-1995 and the death of the deceased had taken 
place on 31-05-1997.  Since the deceased, who was aged 27 yeas, died within 
seven years of her marriage, the prosecution has established the first
ingredient.

Coming to the aspect whether the death of the deceased was unnatural or not,
prosecution mainly relied on the evidence of the interested witnesses i.e.
PWs.1, 2, 4, 5, 7, 8 and also the medical evidence of P.W.3 and P.W.17.

P.W.1 is the father, P.W.2 is the mother, and P.W.4 is the sister of the
deceased. P.Ws.5, 7 and 8 are also closely related to the deceased.  Their
evidence is to the effect that the deceased died on account of the harassment by
the appellant, and they also suspect that the appellant might have murdered the
deceased. Except the interested and discrepant testimony of PWs.1, 2, 4, 5, 7
and 8, no independent witness was examined to speak that the death of the
deceased was due to injuries sustained by her allegedly in the hands of the
accused and thus it was unnatural. Obviously, in a case of this nature, parents
and other relatives of the deceased would definitely blame the husband of the
deceased for the death of the deceased. In such circumstances, medical evidence
plays crucial role.  In this case, as soon as the deceased complained of
stomachache, appellant took her to PW-3 and thereafter on the advise of PW-3, he
took the deceased to Government General Hospital, Guntur. 

According to PW-3, appellant along with the owner of his house brought the
deceased to her hospital. She further spoke that the deceased was complaining
about severe abdominal pain, and when she questioned the deceased, the deceased  
told her that she had taken injection at Repalle from a doctor and attended a
marriage at her relative's house at Ponnur one day prior to her examination.
She further spoke that the owner of the house of appellant left the hospital at
about midnight and then she advised appellant to shift the deceased to
Government General Hospital, Guntur as she was cyanosed and shock.  She further  
spoke in her cross-examination that if a woman having pregnancy of below five
months travels in RTC Bus, due to jerks, there is possibility of bleeding and
termination of pregnancy.
According to PW-17, who conducted autopsy over the dead body of the deceased, he  
issued Ex.P8 postmortem report opining that the deceased died due to shock and 
haemorrhage due to injury to the spleen.  In his cross-examination, he further
spoke that he did not find any injuries on the ribs and that the contusions and
abrasions noted in EX.P8 are nothing to do with the rupture to spleen.  He
further spoke that the rupture to the spleen can be caused with a blunt
projected object and also fall and the fall must be violent fall.  There are no
external injuries corresponding to the rupture to the spleen.

From a perusal of the evidence of PWs.3 and 17 coupled with Ex.P8, postmortem  
report, it is clear that the deceased died due to injury to the spleen.  As
rightly contended by learned counsel for the appellant since the deceased had
taken injection at Repalle and attended a marriage at Ponnur, one day prior to
her treatment from PW-3 at Guntur, it leads to an inference that the death of
the deceased was natural as the rupture to the spleen of the deceased might be
caused while she was travelling.  Therefore, it can be safely held that the
death of the deceased is natural and the prosecution could not establish the
second ingredient.

Insofar as the crucial ingredient as to whether the death of deceased was solely
on account of the harassment meted out to her at the hands of the appellant
'soon before her death' for, or in connection with demand for dowry is
concerned, prosecution mainly relied on Ex.P1 and the oral evidence of the
interested witnesses i.e. PWs.1, 2, 4, 5, 7, 8 and 11 to 13.

It is a settled proposition of law that to establish demand within the meaning
of dowry, any property or valuable security must have been given or agreed to be
given either directly or indirectly a) at the time of marriage, or b) before the
marriage, or c) at any time after the marriage in connection with agreement of
the parties to the marriage.  If there has been no agreement between the parties
to a marriage to give or take property or valuable security or where the
property or valuable security has been given and taken, but thereafter further
amounts are demanded after the marriage such demand will not fall within the
meaning of dowry and even if all other requirements of Section 304-B of IPC are
satisfied,
it will not be dowry death.

From a perusal of the oral and documentary evidence, it is clear that there is
no such agreement between the parties to the marriage with regard to dowry. In
the absence of any agreement to pay dowry at or after the time of marriage, it
cannot be said that the appellant harassed and demanded the deceased to bring
dowry in connection with the marriage, from her parents.  PWs.1 and 2 in their
evidence as well as in Ex.P1 stated that the appellant used to demand the
deceased to bring amount from them and they used to pay the same whenever she   
asked.  Even assuming for a moment that the appellant had demanded as alleged by  
PW-1 and if really PW-1 paid the said amounts to the appellant, they would not
constitute dowry and the alleged demand does not fall within the ambit of
Section 304-B of IPC. Therefore, their evidence does not help the prosecution to
establish that the appellant harassed the deceased demanding dowry.

Though P.W.10, the owner of the house where the deceased and the appellant 
resided prior to residing in the house of P.W.6, spoke that the deceased and the
appellant used to quarrel with each other, his evidence is falsified by the
evidence of P.W.6, in whose house the deceased and the appellant last resided.
According to P.W.6, the deceased and the appellant were residing in his house
from 01.05.1997 and in that period they lived happily.  He further spoke that on
30.05.1997 between 8.30 and 9.00 P.M., in the absence of the appellant when the
deceased complained of abdominal pain, he contacted the appellant and after his
arrival, himself, his wife and the appellant took the deceased to P.W.3, and
P.W.3 provided treatment to the deceased.   Therefore, as rightly contended by
the learned counsel for the appellant that the appellant has nothing to do even
with the abdominal pain and in fact he took the deceased to P.W.3, on receiving
phone call from P.W.6. From this it can be said that the appellant and the
deceased had cordial terms.

PW-9 is the driver of a car engaged by the appellant to take the deceased from
Government General Hospital, Guntur, to Repalle through Kovelamudi.  According
to him the appellant asked him to stop the car in front of the house of P.W.1 at
Kovilamudi and the parents of the deceased came and saw the dead body of the 
deceased. If really the appellant was responsible for the death of the deceased,
he would not have taken the deceased to her parents' house directly from the
hospital.  This circumstance also probablises the defence that the appellant has
nothing to do with the death of the deceased.

On the other hand, the parents and other interested witnesses spoke that the
parents of the deceased were not interested in getting their daughter married
with the appellant.  So, as rightly contended by the learned counsel for the
appellant due to frustration on the death of their daughter, the parents of the
deceased might have foisted a false case against the appellant, as they were not
interested in the appellant.

From the totality of the facts and circumstances of the case, the inevitable
conclusion would be that there was no harassment by the appellant to the
deceased demanding dowry for or in connection with marriage, and as a
consequence of non-payment of the alleged dowry the death of the deceased had 
taken place.  In that view of the matter, this Court is of the view that the
conviction and sentence imposed on the appellant for the offence punishable
under Section 304-B IPC is not sustainable and the same is liable to be set
aside.

Accordingly, the Criminal Appeal is allowed setting aside the conviction and
sentence imposed on the appellant for the offence punishable under Section 304-B
IPC by the learned II Additional Sessions Judge, Guntur, in Sessions Case No.160
of 1998, vide judgment dated 12.10.2001.


