

THE HON'BLE SHRI G.S. SINGHVI, THE CHIEF JUSTICE        
Writ Petition No. 16779 of 2005

17.8.2006 

P.Raghavender  

The Hon'ble High Court of Andhra Pradesh,
Through its Registrar (Vigilance) and others

Counsel for the Petitioner:  Sri D.Prakash Reddy
                                Senior Advocate assisted by 
                                Sri A.K.Jayaprakash Rao 

Counsel for the Respondent No.1: Sri C.V.Nagarjuna Reddy 
Counsel for Respondent Nos.2 and 3: Government Pleader for Home   

:Per G.S. Singhvi, CJ

This petition is directed against G.O.Ms.No.99, Law (LA & J.SC.F) Department,
dated 25-7-2005 as amended on  
30-7-2005, whereby the Government of Andhra Pradesh retired the petitioner, who
was a member of the Andhra Pradesh State Higher Judicial Service, on attaining
the age of 58 years by invoking proviso to Section 3 (1-A) of the Andhra Pradesh
Public Employment (Regulation of Age of Superannuation) Act, 1984 (for short,
the Act').
        The petitioner's date of birth is 11-7-1947.  He joined judicial service
of the State of Andhra Pradesh as District Munsif on 16-8-1976.  He was promoted
as Sub-Judge on 31-8-1987, as District and Sessions Judge Grade-II with effect
from
6-1-1992 and as District and Sessions Judge, Grade-I with effect from 8-4-2002.
In terms of the substantive part of Section 3 (1A) of the Act, as amended on 22-
7-1998, he would have retired from service on 31-7-2007, but, on the
recommendations made by High Court, the State Government issued G.O.Ms.No.99     
dated 25-7-2005 for his compulsory retirement with effect from 31-7-2005.
Subsequently, that G.O. was amended by another G.O. dated 30-7-2005.   
        The petitioner has challenged the order of retirement on the following
grounds:
1) In terms of Article 235 of the Constitution, the decision to retire a member
of the Andhra Pradesh State Higher Judicial Service can be taken only by the
Full Court of the High Court and not by the Committee of Judges and, therefore,
the G.O. issued by the State Government on the recommendations of the  
Administrative Committee of the High Court is liable to be declared as nullity.
2) The recommendations made by the Administrative Committee of the High Court, 
which led to the issuance of the impugned G.O. are liable to be quashed because
the procedure prescribed under Rule 9 read with Rule 20 of the Andhra Pradesh
Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1991 (for short, 'the
1991 Rules') was not followed.
3) There is no adverse remark in his service record and no tangible material was
available before the Administrative Committee which could justify formation of
an opinion that he was not fit to be continued in service till the attaining of
60 years age.
        
        In the counter-affidavit filed on behalf of the High Court by Shri S.
Sivaiah Naidu, Registrar (Vigilance), it has been averred that the Committee of
Judges recommended the petitioner's retirement at the age of 58 years because on
an overall assessment of his service record, he was not found fit to be
continued in service up to the age of 60 years.  Accordingly, the State
Government issued G.O.Ms.No.99 dated 25-7-2005, which was subsequently amended      
by G.O.Ms.No.103, dated  
30-7-2005.  The stand of the High Court is that non-extension of the
petitioner's service beyond 58 years age on the ground of lack of continued
utility cannot be equated with compulsory retirement imposed as a measure of
penalty under the 1991 Rules and, therefore, it was not necessary to follow the
procedure prescribed under Rule 20 read with Rule 9 of those Rules.  In the
counter-affidavit, a reference has been made to Resolution dated 12-6-1974
passed by the Full Court of the High Court whereby the Chief Justice was
authorized to constitute committees for convenience of administration to deal
with every subject and it has been averred that in furtherance of that
resolution, the Chief Justice constituted the Committees of Judges to review the
records of the officers for the purpose of determining their continued utility
for service and, therefore, the recommendations of the Committee of Judges will
be deemed to be the recommendations of the High Court. 
        In a separate affidavit filed on behalf of Government of Andhra Pradesh,
Shri T. Madan Mohan Reddy, Secretary to Government, Law (LA & J SC. F)   
Department, has averred that the State Government issued G.O.Ms.No.99 dated 25-  
7-2005 as per the recommendations of the High Court.
        At this stage, we consider it proper to mention that during the course of
hearing of the writ petition, Shri C.V. Nagarjuna Reddy, Advocate appearing on
behalf of the High Court made a request on 14-2-2006 for grant of time to seek
instructions.  On the next date i.e. 22-2-2006, he made a statement that if the
petitioner makes fresh representation for review of his premature retirement
from service, the High Court will objectively re-consider the same and take
appropriate decision.  After taking cognizance of his statement, the Court
passed the following order:

        "Sri A.K. Jayaprakash Rao for the petitioner.
        Sri C.V. Nagarjuna Reddy for respondent No.1.
        Sri C.V. Nagarjuna Reddy, learned counsel for the respondent - High Court,
who had sought adjournment on the last date of hearing to seek instructions,
says that if the petitioner makes a fresh representation for review of his
premature retirement from service, the High Court will objectively re-consider
the same and take appropriate action.
In view of the statement made by Sri C.V. Nagarjuna Reddy, we direct the
petitioner to make appropriate representation to the High Court for
reconsideration of his case of premature retirement, and hope that the same
would be dealt with and decided within a period of one month of its
presentation.
List the case for further consideration on April 3, 2006."

        In furtherance of the aforementioned order, the petitioner made
representation for reconsideration of his case for compulsory retirement, but
the same was rejected by the Committee of Judges.  The decision of the committee 
was conveyed to the petitioner vide Roc.No.4048/2005-B.Spl. dated 12-4-2006. He
then amended the writ petition and prayed for quashing that communication.      
        Shri D. Prakash Reddy, Senior Advocate appearing for the petitioner argued
that the recommendations made by the Administrative Committee cannot be treated  
as the recommendations made by the High Court and, therefore, the entire
exercise undertaken by the respondents for compulsory retirement of the
petitioner is liable to be nullified on the ground of violation of Article 235
of the Constitution.   He pointed out that in terms of the proviso to Section
3(1-A) of the Act, a member of the Andhra Pradesh State Higher Judicial Service
can be retired at the age of 58 years only after following the procedure
prescribed under the 1991 Rules for compulsory retirement and argued that the
impugned G.Os. are liable to be quashed because neither any enquiry was held 
against the petitioner under the 1991 Rules nor he was given opportunity of
hearing. Sri Reddy submitted that compulsory retirement is one of the major
penalties specified in Rule 9 and argued that the petitioner could not have been
retired without following the procedure prescribed under Rule 20 of the 1991
Rules, which envisages issuance of charge sheet, appointment of enquiry officer,
recording of evidence of the parties, submission of enquiry report,
consideration thereof by the disciplinary authority, supply of copy of enquiry
report to the delinquent with an opportunity to him to make a representation
against the procedure of enquiry as well as the merits of the findings recorded
by the enquiring authority.  Learned counsel then argued that even if the court
comes to the conclusion that the procedure prescribed under the 1991 Rules is
not required to be followed for compulsorily retiring a member of the State
Higher Judicial Service at the age of 58 years, the recommendations made by the
Administrative Committee and the consequential G.Os. issued by the State 
Government should be declared illegal and quashed because there is no adversity
in the service record of the petitioner and his annual confidential reports,
which could justify formation of an opinion that he was not fit to be continued
in service beyond the age of 58 years.  In support of this argument, Shri Reddy
relied on the judgments of the Supreme Court in Baldev Raj Chadha v. Union of
India1, Brij Bihari Lal Agarwal v. High Court of M.P.2, The Registrar, High
Court of Madras v. R. Rajaiah3 and Ramesh Chandra Acharya v. Registrar, High 
Court of Orissa and another4.  Shri Reddy also assailed the rejection of the
petitioner's representation by arguing that the decision conveyed to his client
vide proceedings dated 12-4-2006 is totally bereft of reasons.  He emphasised
that while deciding the representation made by the petitioner, the High Court
was duty bound to objectively consider his entire record and assign reasons for
not accepting his prayer for reinstatement.
        Shri C.V. Nagarjuna Reddy, learned counsel for the High Court relied on
the judgment of the Supreme Court in High Court of Judicature at Bombay v.
Shirish Kumar Rangrao Patil and another5 and argued that the recommendations  
made by the Administrative Committee of the High Court will be deemed to be the
recommendations of the Full Court because in furtherance of the authorization
given by the Full Court, the Chief Justice had constituted separate committees
to look into the records of the officers of the Andhra Pradesh State Higher
Judicial Service as well as Andhra Pradesh State Judicial Service for the
purpose of determination of their continued utility.  On merits, Shri C.V.
Nagarjuna Reddy submitted that the Administrative Committee had, after making a
comprehensive evaluation of the service record of the petitioner including the
annual confidential reports, recommended his retirement at the age of 58 years
and then argued that such decision cannot be annulled merely because on judicial
side there is a possibility of forming a different opinion.   He further argued
that in exercise of power under Article 226 of the Constitution, the High Court
cannot sit in appeal over the recommendations made by the Administrative
Committee not to continue the petitioner in service beyond the age of 58 years.
Learned counsel pointed out that there were several complaints against the
petitioner casting adverse reflection on his integrity and conduct and submitted
that the same were rightly considered by the Administrative Committee while
recommending his compulsory retirement at the age of 58 years and also for
rejecting his representation.
        We have given serious thought to the respective arguments and carefully
perused the record produced by              Sri C.V. Nagarjuna Reddy.
At the outset, we deem it proper to take cognizance of Resolution dated 12-6-
1974 passed by the Full Court of the High Court whereby the Chief Justice was
authorized to constitute Committees of Judges to deal with various subjects.
The same reads as under: 
        "Resolved that the Hon'ble the Chief Justice be authorized to constitute
committees, for the convenient administration, to deal with the several subjects
and also to reconstitute them as and when he deems it necessary."
        
In furtherance of the aforementioned resolution, the Chief Justice has, from
time to time, constituted and re-constituted Committees of Judges to assess the
records of the officers of the Andhra Pradesh State Higher Judicial Service and
the Andhra Pradesh State Judicial Service for the purpose of determining their
continued utility.
In the backdrop of the above facts, we shall now determine whether the
recommendations made by the Administrative Committee could be treated as  
recommenda-tions of the High Court for the purpose of Article 235 of the
Constitution and whether the State Government committed any illegality by
accepting the recommendations of the Administrative Committee. 
        Article 235 which finds place in Chapter VI of the Constitution and which
the control over the subordinate judiciary vests in the High Court reads as
under:
"235. Control over subordinate Courts:
        The control over district Courts and Courts subordinate thereto including
the posting and promotion of. and the grant of leave to, persons belonging to
the judicial service of a State and holding any post inferior to the post of
District Judge shall be vested in the High Court, but nothing in this article
shall be construed as taking away from any such person any right of appeal which
he may have under the law regulating the conditions of his service or as
authorising the High Court to deal with him otherwise than in accordance with
the conditions of his service prescribed under such law."

        The width and amplitude of the word 'control' appearing in Article 235 of
the Constitution has been considered in various cases and it has been held that
transfers, promotions, confirmation, fixation of pay, grant of Selection Grade,
retirement from service including compulsory/premature retirement, and various
disciplinary matters fall within the ambit and reach of Article 235 of the
Constitution.  In Chief Justice, A.P. v. L.V.A. Dikshitulu6, the Constitution
Bench of the Supreme Court referred to several judicial precedents on the
subject and culled out the following propositions:

"(a)
(i) Disciplinary jurisdiction and a complete control subject only to the power
of the Governor in the matter of appointment, dismissal, removal, reduction in
rank of District Judges, the initial posting and promotion   to   the cadre of
District Judges. In the exercise of this control, the High Court can hold
inquiries against a member of the subordinate judiciary, impose punishment other
than dismissal or removal, subject, however, to the conditions of service, and a
right of appeal, if any, granted thereby and to the giving of an opportunity of
showing cause as required by Article 311(2).

(ii) In Article 235, the word 'control' is accompanied by the word "vest" which
shows that the High Court alone is made the sole custodian of the control over
the judiciary. The control vested in the High Court being exclusive, and not
dual, an inquiry into the conduct of a member of the judiciary can be held by
the High Court alone and no other authority. {State of West Bengal v. Nripendra
Nath Bagchi (AIR 1966 SC 447), Shamsher Singh v. State of Punjab, (1975) 1 SCR  
814 = AIR 1974 SC 2192); Punjab and Haryana High Court v. State of Haryana 
(subnom Narendra Singh Rao) (1975) 3 SCR 365 : (AIR 1975 SC 613)}   

(iii)   Suspension from service of a member of the judiciary with a view to hold a
disciplinary inquiry.

(b) Transfers, promotions and confirmation of such promotions, of persons
holding posts in the judicial service inferior to that of District Judge. {State
of Assam v. S.N.Sen (1971)2 SCC 889: (AIR 1972 SC 1028) State of Assam v.   
Kuseswar Saikia (1970) 2 SCR 928 : (AIR 1970 SC 1616)}.  
(c) Transfer of District Judges (State of Assam v. Ranga Muhammad (AIR 1967 SC 
903); Chandra Mouleshwar v.Patna High Court (AIR 1970 SC 370).  
(d) Recall of District Judges posted on ex-cadre posts or on deputation on
administrative posts, (State of Orissa v. Sudhansu Sekhar Misra (1968) 2 SCR 154
: (AIR 1968 SC 647).
(e) Award of selection grade to the members of the judicial service, including
District Judges, being their further promotion after their initial appointment
to the cadre, (State of Assam v. Kuseswar Saikia {AIR 1970 SC 1616}.
(f) Confirmation of District Judges, who have been on probation or are
officiating, after their initial appointment or promotion by the Governor to the
cadre of District Judges under Article 233, (Punjab and Haryana High Court v.
State of Haryana - AIR 1975 SC 613).
(g) Premature or compulsory retirement of Judges of the District Courts and of
Subordinate Courts {State of U.P. v. Batuk Deo Pati Tripathi {(1978) 2 SCC
102}."

In view of the aforementioned judgments, it must be held that premature or
compulsory retirement of the members of the Andhra Pradesh State Higher Judicial
Service and the Andhra Pradesh State Judicial Service fall within the ambit of
Article 235 of the Constitution and the High Court can legitimately recommend
compulsory retirement of an officer before attaining the age of superannuation.
A reading of the plain language of Article 235 suggests that control over
district courts and courts subordinate thereto envisaged under that Article is
to be exercised by the High Court as a body corporate, there is nothing in the
scheme of Chapter VI of the Constitution generally and Article 235 in particular
from which it can be inferred that assignment/ delegation of High Court's
functions in relation to various matters concerning the officers of the courts
subordinate to the High Court to a smaller body or Committee of Judges is
impermissible. The involvement of all Judges in the decision making process and
administrative matters relating to judicial officers may have been possible in
the formative period and developing stages of judicial hierarchy, but in the
changed scenario, it is extremely difficult, if not impossible, for all the
Judges to frequently meet as a body corporate to deal with such matters.  The
proliferation of litigation in the Courts at various levels and consequential
increase in the strength of judicial manpower at the grassroot level and
district level necessary to meet the ever growing demand for quick dispensation
of justice has made the task of effective exercise of control by the High Courts
over the subordinate judiciary extremely complicated and difficult.  Within the
High Court also, the administrative work has increased manifold. For effective
functioning of the institution, the Chief Justice and all other Judges have to
devote considerable time after Court hours to deal with different aspects of
administration. Therefore, the High Court, as a body corporate, cannot deal with
all administrative matters relating to the members of judicial services.  As a
result of this, assignment/delegation of administrative functions of the High
Court to smaller constituents or Committees of Judges has become absolutely 
imperative for effective and efficient exercise of control envisaged under
Article 235 of the Constitution.
In State of U.P. v. Batuk Deo Pati Tripathi7, the Constitution Bench of the
Supreme Court considered the question whether the power to prematurely retire a
member of the Higher Judicial Service could be assigned to a Committee of
Judges. The facts of that case were that Batuk Deo Pati Tripathi who had joined
the judicial service of the State of Uttar Pradesh as Munsif in 1948 and was
promoted up to the rank of District Judge, was retired on attaining the age of
50 years. He challenged the same on various grounds including the one that the
recommendation made by a Committee of Judges could not have been made basis for    
his premature retirement. The Division Bench of the High Court, which heard the
matter, made a reference to the Larger Bench to consider the question relating
to interpretation of Article 233 read with Article 235 of the Constitution. The
majority of the Full Bench held that the recommendation made by the Committee of
Judge cannot be treated as decision of the High Court and, therefore, the same
could not be made basis for premature retirement of the appellant. The majority
further held that circulation of recommendation of the Committee did not amount
to consultation with the Full Court. On appeal, the Constitution Bench of the
Supreme Court framed various questions including the one whether the control of
the High Court envisaged under Article 235 can be exercised through Committee of
Judges. The Constitution Bench referred to provisions of the Constitution,
Chapter III of the Allahabad High Court Rules, 1952 and the provisions of
Government of India Acts, 1919 and 1935 and observed as under: 
        "For answering this question it is necessary in the first place to bear in
mind that the power of control over the subordinate courts which is vested in
the High Courts comprises such numerous matters, often involving consideration
of details of the minutest nature, that if the whole High Court is required to
consider every one of those matters, the exercise of control instead of becoming
effective will tend to cause delay and confusion in the administration of
justice in the State. A construction which will frustrate the very object of the
salient provisions contained in Article 235 ought, is so far as possible, to be
avoided. The control vested in the High Courts by that article comprehends,
according to our decisions, a large variety of matters like transfers,
subsequent postings, leave, promotions other than initial promotions, imposition
of minor penalties which do not fall within Article 311, decisions regarding
compulsory retirements, recommendations of imposition of major penalties which
fall within Article 311, entries in character rolls and so forth. If every Judge
is to be associated personally and directly with the decision on every one of
these matters, several important matters pertaining to the High Court's
administrative affairs will pile into arrears like court arrears. In fact, it is
no exaggeration to say that the control will be better and more effectively
exercised if a smaller committee of Judges has the authority of the court to
consider the manifold matters falling within the purview of Article 235. Bearing
in mind therefore the nature of the power which that article confers on the High
Courts, we are of the opinion that it is wrong to characterize as 'delegation'
the process whereby the entire High Court authorizes a Judge or some of the
Judges of the Court to act on behalf of the whole Court. Such an authorisation
effectuates the purpose of Article 235 and indeed without it the control vested
in the High Courts over the subordinate courts will tend gradually to become lax
and ineffective. Administrative functions are only a part, though an important
part, of the High Court's constitutional functions. Judicial functions ought to
occupy and do in fact consume the best part of a Judge's time. For balancing
these two-fold functions it is inevitable that the administrative duties should
be left to be discharged by some on behalf of all the Judges. Judicial functions
brook no such sharing of responsibilities by any instrumentality."
                                                  (emphasis supplied)


        The Constitution Bench then referred to Judicial Review of Administrative
Action by S.A. De Smith and observed: 
        "We have pointed out above that the amplitude of the power conferred by
Article 235, the imperative need that the High Courts must be enabled to
transact their administrative business more conveniently and an awareness of the
realities of the situation, particularly of the practical difficulties involved
in a consideration by the whole court, even by circulation, of every day-to-day
matter pertaining to control over the District and subordinate Courts, lead to
the conclusion that by rules framed under Article 235 of the Constitution the
High Courts ought to be conceded the power to authorize an Administrative Judge
or an Administrative Committee of Judges to act on behalf of the Court.
Accordingly, we uphold the minority judgment of the Full Bench that
Rule 1 of Chapter III of the 1952 Rules framed by the Allahabad High Court is
within the framework of Article 235. The recommendation made by the
Administrative Committee that the respondent should be compulsorily retired
cannot therefore be said to suffer from any legal or constitutional infirmity."

        In High Court of Judicature at Bombay v. Sirish Kumar Rangrao Patil
(supra), the Supreme Court examined challenge to the constitutionality of
resolution passed by the Bombay High Court whereby the power of taking 
disciplinary action was delegated to the Committee of Judges.  The factual
matrix of that case shows that a departmental enquiry was instituted against the
respondent on the charge of having demanded illegal gratification for passing an
order of injunction. The enquiry was conducted under the supervision of a
Committee of five Judges. The Committee accepted report of the Enquiry Officer,
who found the respondent guilty of the charge and recommended to the Government  
that he may be dismissed from service. On receipt of the recommendation of the
Committee, the Government issued the necessary order. One of the grounds on  
which the respondent challenged the order of dismissal and which found favour of
the Division Bench of the High Court was that the High Court's power of control
envisaged under Article 235 could not have been exercised by the Committee of
Judges. The Supreme Court reversed the decision of the High Court and laid down
the following propositions:
"a) It would thus be settled law that the
control of the subordinate judiciary under Article 235 is vested in the High
Court. After the appointment of the judicial officers by the Governor, the power
to transfer, maintain discipline and keep control over them vests in the High
Court. The Chief Justice of the High Court is first among the Judges of the High
Court. The action taken is by the High Court and not by the Chief Justice in his
individual capacity, nor by the Committee of Judges. For the convenient
transaction of administrative business in the Court, the Full Court of the
Judges of the High Court generally passes a resolution authorising the Chief
Justice to constitute various committees including the committee to deal with
disciplinary matters pertaining to the subordinate judiciary or the ministerial
staff working therein. Article 235, therefore, relates to the power of taking a
decision by the High Court against a member of the subordinate judiciary. Such a
decision either to hold an enquiry into the conduct of a judicial officer,
subordinate or higher judiciary, or to have the enquiry conducted through a
District or Additional District Judge etc. and to consider the report of the
enquiry officer and to take follow-up action and to make appropriate
recommendation to the Disciplinary Committee or to
the Governor, is entirely of the High Court which acts through the Committee of
Judges authorised by the Full Court. Once a resolution is passed by the Full
Court of the High Court, there is no further necessity to refer the matter again
to the Full Court while taking such procedural steps relating to control of the
subordinate judiciary.

b)      The delegation of the functions of the High Court in respect of punishment
of judicial officers' is an exception of width and of wide amplitude to cover
within its ambit the power to take a decision by the Committee from the stage of
initiation of disciplinary proceedings, if necessary, till its logical end, viz.
recommendation is by the High Court, the controlling authority under Article 235
of the Constitution. Therefore, it is difficult to accept the contention of Shri
Batra that the delegation is only for imposition of punishment on judicial
officers. In fact, the High Court has no power to impose any punishment by
itself. The appointing authority, viz., the Governor is the competent authority
under the Constitution to impose punishment in accordance with the rules framed
for the purpose. Therefore, the entire gamut of procedural steps of disciplinary
action is by the High Court which is the controlling authority through the
Committee constituted in that behalf by the Chief Justice of the High Court."

        The same view has been expressed in Nawal Singh v. State of U.P.8. 
        Following the ratio of the aforementioned judgments, we hold that the
recommendations made by the Administrative Committee, which was constituted by   
the Chief Justice in furtherance of resolution dated 12-6-1974, for compulsory
retirement of the petitioner will be deemed to have been made by the High Court
as a body corporate for the purpose of Article 235 of the Constitution and the
State Government did not commit any illegality by issuing G.O.Ms.No.99, dated
25-7-2005 and G.O.Ms.No.103 dated 30-7-2005.  
        The next question which needs to be decided is whether the petitioner's
compulsory retirement from service is liable to be nullified on the ground of
violation of Section 3(1-A) of the Act.
        For deciding the aforementioned question, it will be useful to notice the
background in which Section 3 (1-A) was inserted in the Act, which in its
unamended form provided for retirement of all officers including the judicial
officers at the age of 58 years.  In All India Judges' Assn. v. Union of India9,
the Supreme Court considered various issues relating to conditions of services
of judicial officers and gave the following directions:
"(i)    An All India Judicial Service should be set up and the Union of India
should take appropriate steps in this regard.
        (ii)    Steps should be taken to bring about uniformity in designation of
officers both in civil and the criminal side by March 31, 1993.
        (iii)   Retirement age of judicial officers be raised to 60 years and
appropriate steps are to be taken by December 31, 1992.
        (iv)    As and when the Pay Commissions/Committees are set up in the States   
and Union territories, the question of appropriate pay scales of judicial
officers be specifically referred and considered.
        (v)     A working library at the residence of every judicial officer has to
be provided by June 30, 1992. Provision for sumptuary allowance as stated has to
be made. 
        (vi)    Residential accommodation to every judicial officer has to
beprovided and until State accommodation is available, government should provide
requisitioned accommodation for them in the manner indicated by December 31, 
1992. In providing residential accommodation, availability of an office room
should be kept in view.
        (vii)   Every District Judge and Chief Judicial Magistrate should have a
State vehicle, judicial officers in sets of five should have a pool vehicle and
others would be entitled to suitable loans to acquire two wheeler automobiles
within different time limits as specified.
        (viii)  In-service Institute should be set up within one year at the
Central and State or Union territory level."

        Feeling aggrieved by the aforementioned directions given by the Supreme
Court, the Union of India and various State Governments filed review petitions.
On the issue of enhancement of superannuation age, it was pleaded that the
Supreme Court had erred in drawing distinction between the members of the
judicial service and those of other services and further that the Court was not
justified in giving direction in a policy matter which lay within the exclusive
domain of the executive.  A three Judges Bench of the Supreme Court considered
various objections in All India Judges' Assn. v. Union of India10.  While
reiterating that the judicial services were not comparable with other services
and confirming the directions given in the earlier judgment for enhancing the
age of superannuation of the judicial officers to 60 years, the Supreme Court
administered the following words of caution:
        "There is, however, one aspect we should emphasise here. To that extent
the direction contained in the main judgment under review shall stand modified.
The benefit of the increase of the retirement age to 60 years, shall not be
available automatically to all judicial officers irrespective of their past
record of service and evidence of their continued utility to the judicial
system. The benefit will be available to those who, in the opinion of the
respective High Courts, have a potential for continued useful service. It is not
intended as a windfall for the indolent, the infirm and those of doubtful
integrity, reputation and utility. The potential for continued utility shall be
assessed and evaluated by appropriate Committees of Judges of the respective
High Courts constituted and headed by the Chief Justices of the High Courts and
the evaluation shall be made on the basis of the judicial officer's past record
of service, character rolls, quality of judgments and other relevant matters."

The Supreme Court then gave the following directions regarding the procedure to
be followed by the High Courts in the matter of extension of the age of
superannuation of the judicial officers up to the age of 60 years:
        "The High Court should undertake and complete the exercise in case of
officers about to attain the age of 58 years well within time by following the
procedure for compulsory retirement as laid down in the respective Service Rules
applicable to the judicial officers. Those who will not be found fit and
eligible by this standard should not be given the benefit of the higher
retirement age and should be compulsorily retired at the age of 58 by following
the said procedure for compulsory retirement. The exercise should be undertaken
before the attainment of the age of 58 years even in cases where earlier the age
of superannuation was less than 58 years. It is necessary to make it clear that
this assessment is for the purpose of finding out the suitability of the
concerned officers for the entitlement of the benefit of the increased age of
superannuation from 58 years to 60 years. It is in addition to the assessment to
be undertaken for compulsory retirement and the compulsory retirement at the
earlier stage/s under the respective Service Rules."

        After taking note of the two judgments of the Supreme Court, the
Government of Andhra Pradesh amended Section 3 (1-A) of the Act.  The same reads  
as under:
        "Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), every member of
the Andhra Pradesh State Higher Judicial Service or the Andhra Pradesh State
Judicial Service shall retire from service on the afternoon of the last day of
the month in which he attains the age of sixty years:
        Provided that any such member of the Andhra Pradesh State Higher Judicial
Service or the Andhra Pradesh State Judicial Service may be compulsorily retired
from service on the afternoon of the last day of the month in which he attains
the age of fifty eight years if he is not found fit and eligible to be continued
in service by the High Court of Andhra Pradesh State Judicial Service may be
compulsorily retired from service on the afternoon of the last day of the month
in which he attains the age of fifty-eight years if he is not found fit and
eligible to be continued in service by the High Court of Andhra Pradesh on an
assessment and evaluation of the record of such member for his continued utility
well within time before he attains the age of fifty-eight years by following the
procedure for compulsory retirement under the rules applicable to him;
Explanation:- The assessment and evaluation by the High Court of Andhra Pradesh 
for the purpose of this sub-section is in addition to and independent of the
assessment for compulsory retirement that may have to be undertaken at any other
time under the relevant rules applicable to such members of the Andhra Pradesh
State Higher Judicial Service or the Andhra Pradesh State Judicial Service".

        On a reading of the plain language of the above reproduced provision, the
argument of Sri Prakash Reddy that the petitioner could have been retired under
proviso to Section 3(1-A) of the Act only after following the procedure
prescribed under the 1991 Rules for imposing the penalty of compulsory
retirement appears attractive, but on a deeper examination, we do not find any
merit in it.
        In terms of substantive part of Section 3 (1-A), a member of the Andhra
Pradesh State Higher Judicial Service or the Andhra Pradesh State Judicial
Service is entitled to continue in service up to the age of 60 years.  Proviso
to this section postulates retirement of a member of service at the age of 58
years if, on an assessment and evaluation of his record, the High Court comes to
the conclusion that he is not fit and eligible to be continued in service beyond
the age of 58 years.  Explanation to this rule clarifies that the assessment and
evaluation by the High Court for the purpose of sub-section (1-A) of Section 3
is in addition to and independent of the assessment for compulsory retirement
which may be undertaken at any other time under the relevant rules.
        In service jurisprudence, the expression "compulsory retirement" has two
connotations.  Under various disciplinary rules, compulsory retirement is one of
the penalties which can be inflicted on a delinquent employee if he is found
guilty of misconduct.  Such penalty cannot be inflicted only after following the
procedure prescribed under the relevant rules and the principles of natural
justice.  The Central Government/ State Government/appropriate authority can
also retire an employee on attaining a particular age or after completing the
specified period of qualifying service, if the competent authority, on an
evaluation and assessment of the record of the employee forms an opinion that he
is no longer fit to be continued in service or that he has become deadwood or
that his retention in service is no longer in public interest.  The latter
category of retirement cannot be treated as punitive
per se.  In Bishwanath Prasad Singh v. State of Bihar11, the Supreme Court
highlighted the distinction between two concepts of compulsory retirement in the
following words:
        "Compulsory retirement in service jurisprudence has two meanings. Under
the various disciplinary rules, compulsory retirement is one of the penalties
inflicted on a delinquent government servant consequent upon a finding of guilt
being recorded in disciplinary proceedings. Such penalty involves stigma and
cannot be inflicted except by following procedure prescribed by the relevant
rules or consistently with the principles of natural justice if the field for
inflicting such penalty be not occupied by any rules. Such compulsory retirement
in the case of a government servant must also withstand the scrutiny of Article
311 of the Constitution. Then there are service rules, such as Rule 56(j) of the
Fundamental Rules, which confer on the Government or the appropriate authority,
an absolute (but not arbitrary) right to retire a government servant on his
attaining a particular age or on his having completed a certain number of years
of service on formation of an opinion that in public interest it is necessary to
compulsorily retire a government servant. In that case, it is neither a
punishment nor a penalty with loss of retiral benefits. Compulsory retirement in
public interest under service rules is like premature retirement. It does not
cast any stigma. The government servant shall be entitled to the pension
actually earned and other retiral benefits. So long as the opinion forming basis
of the order for compulsory retirement in public interest is formed bona fide,
the opinion cannot be ordinarily interfered with by a judicial forum. Such an
order may be subjected to judicial review on very limited grounds such as the
order being mala fide, based on no material or on collateral grounds or having
been passed by an authority not competent to do so. The object of such
compulsory retirement is not to punish or penalise the government servant but to
weed out the worthless who have lost their utility for the administration."

        If the expression 'by following the procedure for compulsory retirement
under the rules applicable to him' used in the proviso to Section 3(1-A) is read
in the light of what we have discussed above, it becomes clear that the same
does not impose an obligation on the High Court to follow the procedure
contained in the 1991 Rules before recommending retirement of an officer at the
age of 58 years. It merely ordains that if there exists any rule for premature
retirement of an employee, then the said rule should be complied with before
ordering retirement of an officer at the age of 58 years.  In its very nature,
compulsory retirement envisaged under proviso to Section 3 (1-A) is non-punitive
in character because decision in that regard has to be taken on the basis of an
assessment and evaluation of the service record of the officer concerned.
Therefore, the requirement of following the procedure prescribed under Rule 20
of the 1991 Rules cannot be read as implicit in proviso to Section 3(1-A) of the
Act.
        We are further of the view that if proviso to Section 3 (1-A) of the Act
is interpreted in the manner suggested by the learned counsel for the
petitioner, the purpose of substantive portion of the proviso will be defeated
because the power to compulsorily retire an office by way of punishment can be
exercised by the competent authority at any time by following the procedure
prescribed under the 1991 Rules.
What we have observed above is fully supported by the judgment of this Court in
Kotipally Murali Mukunda Rao v. State of A.P.12.  The facts of that case were
that the petitioner who was a member of judicial service of the State of Andhra
Pradesh was compulsorily retired on attaining the age of 58 years.  Writ
Petition No.14670 of 1993 filed by him was dismissed by the Division Bench vide
order dated 10-12-1993.  However, by taking shelter of sub-section (1-A) of
Section 3, which was inserted by Amendment Act of 1998, he filed Writ Petition
No.17408 of 1999 for invalidation of his retirement by contending that the
decision to retire him was taken without following the procedure prescribed for
compulsory retirement.  The Division Bench considered the issue in detail,
negatived the petitioner's challenge and held as under:
          "8. The stress laid on the words "following the procedure for
compulsory retirement under the Rules applicable" is, if we may say so, rather
misconceived. The premise on which the learned counsel for the petitioner has
built up his argument rests on a wrong assumption as to the real purport and
nuances of that phraseology. In fact, the same language is used in the judgment
of the Supreme Court. The real emphasis, in our view, is on the word
'procedure'. The legislative injunction in tune with the Supreme Court's ruling
is that the procedure laid down in the Service Rules or the procedure evolved by
administrative instructions if any on the subject should be followed. It does
not mean that substantive requirements of the rule relating to compulsory
retirement such as the fundamental conditions for initiating a move to
compulsorily retire a public servant can be regarded as the 'procedure for
compulsory retirement'. For instance, the rule contained in the proviso to Rule
44 requiring the appointing authority to give a notice in writing three months
ahead of the date on which the employee is required to retire or to tender three
months' pay in lieu of such notice, is a part of procedural requirement. It is
also possible to visualise the issuance of certain administrative instructions
to provide for modalities for assessment of the performance and utility of the
public servant for the purpose of taking a decision under Rule 44. For instance,
there may be some instructions as to the materials to be considered by the
Review Committee or obtaining of reports from any administrative superiors. Such
instructions may be regarded as part of the procedural gamut for consideration
of cases of compulsory retirement under Rule 44.
                9. It would lead to incongruous and contradictory results if we
consider the expression "procedure for compulsory retirement" as to mean that
the entire          Rule 44 of A. P. Revised Pension Rules is to be transplanted
into sub-section (1-A) of Section 3. Completion of 33 years of qualifying
service will be wholly out of place in the context of sub-section (1-A) which as
we have already clarified is nothing but reiteration of the principle laid down
by the AIJA case (supra). 'Public interest' as such cannot also be imported into
this provision, though very often, the considerations which go into the
assessment of fitness and continued utility as member of the Judicial Service
coincide with the considerations of public interest. The expression 'procedure
for compulsory retirement' cannot be divorced from the context and it cannot run
counter to the mandate of opening clause of the proviso. The proviso which is in
the nature of an exception or qualification to the main provision ordains that a
Judicial Officer should be compulsorily retired from service on the last date of
the month on which he attains the age of 58 years when once the High Court on
assessment reaches a decision that the Officer does not have the continued
utility to remain in service and therefore, he is unfit to continue beyond 58
years. The concept of completion of 33 years is wholly alien to the proviso to
sub-section (1-A) which empowers the competent authority to retire a Judicial
Officer on attaining the age of 58 years, in case he is found lacking in utility
and fitness to continue further in service. The Explanation to sub-section (1-A)
dispels any doubts in this regard and eloquently speaks for itself as to what is
the true nature and purport of the assessment to be made in terms of the
proviso. It is categorically stated therein ---- again in reiteration of the
principle laid down by the Supreme Court, that the assessment and evaluation is
in addition to and independent of the assessment for compulsory retirement that
may have to be undertaken in accordance with the relevant service Rules
governing the members of the A. P. Higher Judicial Service and          A. P.
Judicial Service. This again emphasises that the power conferred under sub-
section (1-A) of Section 3 of Act 26 of 1998 is a special power exercisable vis-
a-vis the retirement age of Judicial Officers. The entire provision would be
unworkable if we endorse the interpretation placed by the learned counsel for
the petitioner on the expression "following the procedure for compulsory
retirement".
                10. At the risk of repetition, we would like to clarify that the
'procedure' contemplated by the proviso does not mean substantive requirement
for ordering compulsory retirement under the Service Rules. The procedure for
compulsory retirement will only apply 'mutatis mutandis'. In the guise of
applying the procedure, the essence and core of the substantive power to
compulsorily retire a Judicial Officer on considerations of continued utility
and fitness cannot be destroyed. It may be mentioned that what is stated in the
Explanation to sub-section (1-A) was also stated by the Division Bench of this
Court in Writ Petition                   No. 14670 of 1993 based on the dicta of
the Supreme Court. The petitioner is placed in no better position by reason of
the Amendment Act of 1998. Considering the question from every stand point, we
have therefore no hesitation in rejecting the contention of the learned counsel
for the petitioner."
        
The above judgment is, in our considered view, a complete answer to the
petitioner's challenge to the order of retirement on the ground that the
procedure prescribed under the 1991 Rules for compulsory retirement had not been
followed.
The question which remains to be decided is whether the recommendations made by   
the Administrative Committee of the High Court and the consequential action
taken by the State Government to retire the petitioner at the age of 58 years
are vitiated by arbitrariness and whether his case falls within the parameters
of judicial review of such cases.  An inter-related issue which falls for our
consideration is whether the service record of the petitioner and his annual
confidential record dossiers contain some adverse material which could justify
formation of an opinion that he is no longer fit to be continued in service or
that he has outlived utility for the service.
It is settled law that an employee can be retired from service after completing
a specified period of service or attaining a particular age if, on an assessment
of his service record, work, performance and conduct, the competent authority
forms a bona fide opinion that he has outlived utility for service or he has
become a deadwood or that his continuance in service is not in public interest.
If the action taken by the employer is challenged in a petition filed under
Article 226 of the Constitution, the High Court cannot sit in appeal and upset
the decision of the competent authority merely because on a reassessment of the
record, it is possible to form a different opinion.  If, on the other hand, it
is found that the decision of the competent authority is tainted by
arbitrariness or mala fides or non-application of mind, the High Court can
exercise the power of judicial review and nullify the impugned decision.  The
High Court can also exercise the power of judicial review if it is found that
the service record of the employee does not contain any adversity and no person
of reasonable prudence could have formed an opinion for his premature/compulsory
retirement from service.  In Baikuntha Nath Das v. Chief Distt. Medical
Officer13, a three Judges Bench of the Supreme Court reviewed various judicial
precedents on the subject and laid down the following propositions:
"i)     An order of compulsory retirement is not a punishment. It implies no
stigma nor any suggestion of misbehaviour.
ii)     The order has to be passed by the government on forming the opinion that
it is in the public interest to retire a government servant compulsorily. The
order is passed on the subjective satisfaction of the government.
iii)    Principles of natural justice have no place in the context of an order of
compulsory retirement. This does not mean that judicial scrutiny is excluded
altogether. While the High Court or this Court would not examine the matter as
an appellate court, they may interfere if they are satisfied that the order is
passed (a) mala fide or (b) that it is based on no evidence or (c) that it is
arbitrary - in the sense that no reasonable person would form the requisite
opinion on the given material; in short, if it is found to be a perverse order.
iv)     The government (or the Review Committee, as the case may be) shall have to
consider the entire record of service before taking a decision in the matter -
of course attaching more importance to record of and performance during the
later years. The record to be so considered would naturally include the entries
in the confidential records/character rolls, both favourable and adverse. If a
government servant is promoted to a higher post notwithstanding the adverse
remarks, such remarks lose their sting, more so, if the promotion is based upon
merit (selection) and not upon seniority.
v)      An order of compulsory retirement is not liable to be quashed by a Court
merely on the showing that while passing it uncommunicated adverse remarks were 
also taken into consideration. That circumstance by itself cannot be a basis for
interference."

In Post and Telegraphs Board v. C.S.N. Murthy14, another Bench of three Judges
of the Supreme Court referred to the propositions laid down in the case of
Baikuntha Nath Das (supra) and held:
        "An order of compulsory retirement is not an order of punishment. F.R.
56(j) authorises the Government to review the working of its employees at the
end of their period of service referred to therein and to require the servant to
retire from service if, in its opinion, public interest calls for such an order.
Whether the conduct of the employee is such as to justify such a conclusion is
primarily for the departmental authorities to decide. The nature of the
delinquency and whether it is of such a degree as to require the compulsory
retirement of the employee are primarily for the Government to decide upon. The
courts will not interfere with the exercise of this power, if arrived at bona
fide and on the basis of material available on the record. No mala fides have
been urged in the present case. There was material which showed that the
efficiency of the petitioner was slackening in the last two years of the period
under review and it is, therefore, not possible for us to fault the conclusion
of the department as being mala fide, perverse, arbitrary or unreasonable."

        In State of Gujarat v. Umedbhai M. Patel15, the Supreme Court upheld the
order of Gujarat High Court which quashed the compulsory retirement of the
respondent.  Their Lordships referred to the judgment in the case of Baikuntha
Nath Das (supra) and held:

"(i) Whenever the services of a public servant are no longer useful to the
general administration, the officer can be compulsorily retired for the sake of
public interest.
(ii) Ordinarily, the order of compulsory retirement is not to be treated as a
punishment coming under Article 311 of the Constitution.
(iii) For better administration, it is necessary to chop off dead wood, but the
order of compulsory retirement can be passed after having due regard to the
entire service record of the officer.
(iv) Any adverse entries made in the confidential record shall be taken note of
and be given due weightage in passing such order.
(v) Even uncommunicated entries in the confidential record can also be taken
into consideration.
(vi) The order of compulsory retirement shall not be passed as a short cut to
avoid departmental enquiry when such course is more desirable.
(vii) If the officer was given a promotion despite adverse entries made in the
confidential record, that is a fact in favour of the officer.
(viii) Compulsory retirement shall not be imposed as a punitive measure."

At this stage, we may also notice the caution administered by the Supreme Court
to the High Court in dealing with the judicial officers.  In Bishwanath Prasad
Singh v. State of Bihar (supra), the Supreme Court emphasized the need for
fairness and justness in performing the inspection and making the entries in the
confidential rolls of the judicial officers and observed:
        "The very power to make such entries as have potential for shaping the
future career of a subordinate officer casts an obligation on the High Courts to
keep a watch and vigil over the performance of the members of subordinate
judiciary. An assessment of quality and quantity of performance and progress of
the judicial officers should be an ongoing process continued round the year and
then to make a record in an objective manner of the impressions formulated by
such assessment. An annual entry is not an instrument to be wielded like a
teachers' cane or to be cracked like a whip.  The High Court has to act and
guide the subordinate officers like a guardian or elder in the judicial family.
The entry in the confidential rolls should not be a reflection of personal
whims, fancies or prejudices, likes or dislikes of a superior. The entry must
reflect the result of an objective assessment coupled with an effort at guiding
the judicial officers to secure an improvement in his performance. Entries
either way have serious implications on the service career. Hence the need for
fairness, justness and objectivity in performing the inspections and making the
entries in the confidential rolls."

In Registrar, High Court of Gujarat v. C.G. Sharma16, the Supreme Court
highlighted the adverse circumstances in which the honest judicial officers are
required to work and observed:
        "An honest judicial officer is likely to have adversaries in the mofussil
courts and if complaints are entertained on trifling matters relating to
judicial orders, which may have been upheld by the High Court on the judicial
side, no judicial officer would feel protected and it would be difficult for him
to discharge his duties in an honest and independent manner. If judicial
officers are under constant threat of complaint and enquiry on trailing matter
and if the High Court encourages anonymous complaints to hold the field the
subordinate judiciary will not be able to administer justice in an independent
and honest manner. It is, therefore, imperative that the High Court should also
take steps to protect its honest officer by ignoring ill-conceived or motivated
complaints made by the unscrupulous lawyers and litigants. The judicial officers
have also to face sometimes quarrelsome, unscrupulous and cantankerous  
litigations but they have to face them boldly without deviating from the right
path and that they are not expected to be overawed by such litigants or fall to
their evil designs."

In the light of the above, we shall now consider whether there was some tangible
material before the Administrative Committee which can justify formation of an
opinion that the petitioner was not fit to be continued in service up to the age
of superannuation i.e., 60 years in terms of substantive part of Section 3(1-A).
The original record produced by the learned counsel for the High Court shows
that in its meeting held on 27-6-2005, the Administrative Committee considered
the extracts from the service file of the petitioner and the complaints received
against him along with the action taken thereon.  Extracts from the personal
file of the petitioner for the years 1996-2004, which were considered by the
Administrative Committee read as under:
EXTRACTS FROM THE PERSONAL FILE:         
1996 II ADDL. DISTRICT AND SESSIONS JUDGE,           RAJAHMUNDRY AND ADDL.           
DISTRICT AND SESSIONS JUDGE, MAHBUBNAGAR             

        HIGH COURT REVIEW      

        PERIOD          QUANTITATIVELY  QUALITATIVELY                   

        I PERIOD           a) Very Good                          Good 
                            b) Very Good                         Satisfactory

        II PERIOD               Very Good                        Satisfactory

Work - Quantitative performance is Good; Conduct - Satisfactory.
                                                Sd/- Motilal B. Naik, J.

Work - Good; Conduct and other remarks - Nothing adverse is heard about him.
                                                 Sd/- D.Reddeppa Reddy, J. 

Work: Quantitative - Very Good; Qualitative - Good; Conduct - Good; Other
remarks - Good and honest Officer.
                                         Sd/- B.Subhashan Reddy, J. 

Work - Satisfactory; Conduct - Good;
                                        Sd/- N.Y.Hanumanthappa, J.  

Work: Quantitatively Average, Disposals were very good; Conduct - Good; Other
remarks - A sincere officer.
                                        Sd/- P.Venkatarama Reddi, J. 

1997  ADDL.DISTRICT AND SESSIONS JUDGE, MAHBUBNAGAR              

        HIGH COURT REVIEW      

        PERIOD          QUANTITATIVELY  QUALITATIVELY                   

        I PERIOD                 Very Good                       Good 
                
        II PERIOD                Short period            No review
        
                                
Work: Quantitatively - Very Good; Qualitatively - Good; Conduct - Good.         
                 Sd/- R.M. Bapat, J.
Work and Conduct - Satisfactory          Sd/-Motilal B.Naik, J.
Work and Conduct - Good                  Sd/-B.Subhashan Reddy, J.  
Work and Conduct - Good                  Sd/-N.Y.Hanumanthappa,J.  

1998 SPECIAL JUDGE FOR ESSENTIAL COMMODITIES ACT-CUM-III ADDL.METROPOLITAN                  
SESSIONS JUDGE, HYDERABAD.         

HIGH COURT REVIEW      

        PERIOD          QUANTITATIVELY  QUALITATIVELY                   

        I PERIOD                 Very Good                       Satisfactory
                
        II PERIOD                Good                            Satisfactory
                                        
Work and Conduct - Good;                 Sd/- R.M. Bapat, J.
Work and Conduct - Satisfactory          Sd/-Motilal B.Naik, J.
Work - Satisfactory; Conduct - Good; Other remarks: No adverse.                 
               Sd/-N.Y.Hanumanthappa,J.

Work and Conduct - Satisfactory; Sd/-P.Venkatarama Reddi, J. 

1999 OFFICER WORKKING ON OD AS SECRETARY, A.P. HIGH COURT LEGAL SERVICES                   
COMMITTEE, HYDERABAD AND MEMBER SECRETARY,A.P. STATE LEGAL SERVICES AUTHORITY                        
FROM 20-11-1999 TO 06-11-2001.   

2002 CHAIRMAN, INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL-II, HYDERABAD.          

        HIGH COURT REVIEW      

        PERIOD          QUANTITATIVELY  QUALITATIVELY                   

        I PERIOD           a) Very Good                          Satisfactory
                            b) Very Good                         Good

        II PERIOD               Very Good                        Good 

Work and Conduct - Good;                 Sd/-T.Meena Kumari, J. 
Work and Conduct - Good;                 Sd/-G.Bikshapathy, J.
Work - Good; Conduct - Good; Other remarks: Very hard working and honest  
officer.                 Sd/-B.Sudershan Reddy,J.

Work and Conduct - Good;                Sd/-Bilal Nazki, J.

2003 PRL.DISTRICT AND SESSIONS JUDGE, ANANTAPUR & R.R.DISTRICTS.              

        HIGH COURT REVIEW      

        PERIOD          QUANTITATIVELY  QUALITATIVELY                   

        I PERIOD           a) Very Good                          Good 
                            b) Very Good                         Satisfactory

        II PERIOD               Very Good                        Satisfactory

Work - Very Good; Conduct -Satisfactory;
 Sd/-T.Meena Kumari, J. 
Work and Conduct - Satisfactory;         Sd/-J.Chelameswar, J.


2004 PRL.DISTRICT AND SESSIONS JUDGE, RANGA REDDY DISTRICT.             

        HIGH COURT REVIEW      

        PERIOD          QUANTITATIVELY  QUALITATIVELY                   

        I PERIOD                 Very Good                       Satisfactory"
                

        From what has been reproduced above, it is clear that in a period of nine
years preceding his compulsory retirement (the service record of those years was
considered by the committee for assessing the petitioner for determining his
continuity and utility in service), all the Judges who reviewed the petitioner's
performance, work and conduct rated him as 'good officer'.  In almost all these
years, his work was quantitatively categorized as 'very good'. Qualitatively,
his work was rated as 'good/satisfactory'.  His integrity was always treated
above board.  In five years preceding his retirement, the work of the petitioner
was quantitatively described as 'very good'; qualitatively it was described as
'satisfactory' in the year 1998.  For the next two years, he worked as
Secretary, A.P. High Court Legal Services Committee.  In 2002, he worked as
Chairman, Industrial Tribunal-II, Hyderabad and his work was rated as 'very
good' and 'good' both quantitatively and qualitatively.  All the Judges
described his work and conduct as 'good'.  One of the Hon'ble Judge remarked -
"very hard working and honest officer".  In 2003 and 2004, his work was
quantitatively rated as 'very good' and qualitatively as 'good/satisfactory'.
        The service profile of the petitioner also shows that during his career
from 16-8-1976 to 31-7-2005, 18 complaints were received against him and all
were dropped or lodged or closed after scrutiny by the competent authorities.
In none of the 18 complaints, the High Court found any substance, though, in two
of the cases covered by files in RoC Nos.53 of 1986 and 520 of 1991, the officer
was cautioned.  For the sake of reference, the allegations contained in the
complaints received against the petitioner and action taken thereon are
reproduced hereunder: 
1. In file RoC.No.206/79, three petitions received when the officer was working
as Munsif Magistrate, Nizamabad were dealt with.  The petitions made allegations
of corruption, purchase of gas cylinder with 'chulla' costing Rs.2,000/- through
the Sub-Inspector (or Circle Inspector Urban), Nizamabad and mutual
understanding between the Sub-Inspector and the officer.  The officer was
alleged to be given much weight to Brahmin parties or Brahmin advocates and to
be receiving recommendations from his villagers and relatives from the
neighbouring native Taluq, Nirmal.  He was alleged to be taking free supply of
household articles from the Sub-Inspectors of Police to pass orders in their
favour against he record.  He was alleged to be getting bribes from the police
and to have got supplies of all the articles for a party for 300 invitees on his
marriage, by the police freely.  He was alleged to be taking supply of ghee,
butter, fuel wood, rice, pulses and other articles from Dichpally and Nizamabad
Police respectively.  He was alleged to be taking bribes through one of his
relatives working at Nizamabad and one Mangal Singh, Advocate, Nizamabad.  The  
remarks of the District Judge were called for and the District Judge, Nizamabad
in his report dated 9/10-8-1979 stated that notices sent by registered post with
acknowledgment due could not be served on the petitioners and that his discreet
enquiries revealed that there is no truth in the allegations levelled against
Sri P. Raghavender, then Munsif Magistrate, Niazamabad.  Further action was
dropped by the High Court treating the matter as closed.
2. In file RoC.No.221/79, a petition sent by one Kumar, dated 18-5-1979 alleging
that on 21-4-1979 the date of marriage of Sri P. Raghavender, all the Courts of
Nizamabad remained closed and all the Judges, Government officials, merchants,
business men including smugglers and owners of Matka company attended and the   
presentations given were worth not less than Rs.1,00,000/-.  It was further
alleged that with close links with police officials, the officer earned a lot.
On this also, the report of the District Judge was called for and the District
Judge, Nizamabad in his report dated 9/10-8-1979 stated that he could not serve
notice on the complainant for want of sufficient address and that his personal
enquiries revealed that there is no truth in the pseudonymous petition.  The
High Court directed the petition to be lodged.
3. In file RoC.No.64/80, a petition was sent by Rosaiah, Baliah and Lingam
alleging caste bias, favouring Brahmins and grudge against harijans and all
backward class people and Muslims, for the officer, apart from allegedly taking
supplies of household articles from the police.  It was further alleged that he
was taking the car of Sri Ram Reddy, Advocate to go to places with his family
and was playing cards in a club with high stakes and that people of Nirmal Taluq
were doing 'pairvi' in cases.  That petition was also lodged by the High Court,
while it was proposed to transfer him on completion of three years during
general transfers as the officer's native Taluq is very near Nizamabad.
4. The next petition in file RoC.No.53/86 was an anonymous complaint received in
1986 when the officer was working as Principal District Munsif, Rajahmundry
alleging that he was not numbering fresh suits, accumulating to about 200.  The
report of the District Judge was called for and the District Judge, East
Godavari at Rajahmundry in his report, dated 10-3-1986 referred to his surprise
visit on
28-2-1989 finding that out of 951 plaints filed, 836 plaints were registered in
1985, leaving 115 plaints unregistered, out of which 14 plaints were with the
Head Clerk for checking, 15 plaints were in return bundle and two plaints were
posted before the Bench for hearing, while the returned plaints for compliance
of objections which were with the advocates, were 84.  the learned District
Judge found that the plaints could not be registered due to non-compliance with
the objections taken by the Court and that there were no laches on the part of
the Head Clerk or the Principal District Munsif.  He also referred to the
remarks of the officer, which were submitted on being called for, denying the
allegations and referring to the heavy work in his Court.  The High Court
considered any further action to be unnecessary, but cautioned the officer not
to give scope for such lapses alleged against him on the anonymous petition, in
future.
5. File RoC.No.184/88 is about the resolution of the Bar Association, Anantapur
objecting to the remarks of the officer on 17-3-1988, while working as
Additional Sub-Judge, Anantapur, that the advocates are irresponsible and that
he has to remind them of their responsibilities.  As there was no report from
the District Judge about the incident, the resolution was directed by the High
Court to be lodged.
6. A petition from Sri P. Bhaskara Rao, Advocate and party in person in
O.S.No.103 of 1973 against the officer working as Principal District Munsif,
Rajahmundry, dated 04-9-1985 was the subject of the file in RoC.No.874/88.  It
was alleged that the officer made uncalled for remarks about freedom fighters
and dismissed O.S.No.103 of 1973 in spite of abundant evidence.  Collusion
between the revenue officials and the officer was alleged.  The officer was
sought to be made responsible for the loss of property and a departmental
enquiry and punishment against him were requested to be taken.  The High Court
ordered that the officer was already transferred and the remarks were made in
the judgment, which is a judicial act and it is open to the petitioner to seek
further remedies, but no action need be taken on the petition.
7. When the officer was working as Subordinate Judge, Machilipatnam, a petition
was received from Mandava Venkataratnam, dated 10-8-1991, which was the subject  
of file in RoC.No.520/91.  The petitioner alleged that no order was passed in
his petition for appointment of a Receiver filed in February, 1991 in O.S.No.132
of 1990, which was heard on 19-6-1991, due to which the possibility of raising
crops after agricultural season was lost.  It was alleged that the officer was
not pronouncing judgments in urgent matters also.  The report of the District
Judge was called for and the District Judge, Krishna in his report dated 28-01-
1992 narrated the sequence of events in O.S.No.132 of 1990 and in I.A.No.169 of
1991.  In I.A.No.169 of 1991, after hearing the petition on
19-6-1991, it was reopened on 12-7-1991 suo motu and was heard on 08-8-1991 and  
was posted to 
03-9-1991 when orders were pronounced.  The Receiver could not conduct auction 
of the leasehold rights for that year, as the transplantation season was over
two months earlier.  But, the leasehold rights of the house were successfully
auctioned.  The District Judge also referred to his enquiry with the officer who
explained that due to pressure of work, the orders could not be pronounced
immediately.  The District Judge furnished the details of heavy pendency in the
Court, due to which the delay appears to be unintended and unintentional on
account of the pressure of work and due to the officer going on leave travel
concession during that period.  The integrity or motives of the officer were not
suspected.  The High Court directed the officer to be more careful thereafter,
after informing that the reopening of I.A.No.169 of 1991 suo motu resulted in
bidders not coming forward, as the transplantation season was over two months
earlier and that if only he had pronounced the orders on 12-7-1991, the parties
would have not been subjected to financial loss and that his action, prima
facie, appears to be without any justification and is suggestive of negligence.
8. In file RoC.No.382/95, a petition was sent by one Sri K. Rambabu, dated 29-6-
1995 against the officer, then working as II Additional District Judge,
Rajahmundry alleging caste bias and that the Public Prosecutor and Steno of the
Court were acting as brokers for the officer, which can be proved from the
judgments in O.S.Nos.1/1990 and 1/1991.  Allegations were made against the 
disposal of a bail application in Ravulapalem Income Tax case, panel sent by the
officer for Government Pleaders, officer keeping his car in the shed of Sri
Perayya Naidu, Advocate and different compensations being granted in similar
cases under the Motor Vehicles Act.  Remarks of the officer and report of the
District Judge were called for and the officer denied the allegations and
claimed ignorance of the caste of majority of the advocates.  He explained his
stand with reference to various allegations.  The District Judge, East Godavari,
Rajahmundry in his detailed report dated 20-10-1999 stated that he could not
secure the presence of Sri K. Rambabu, as no notice could be served on him in
spite of efforts.  The learned District Judge had gone through the judgments in
O.S.Nos.1/1990 and 1/1991, in which Brahmin advocates appeared on both sides and  
stated that as the officer and the Principal District Munsif were visiting
Cosmopolitan Club to play shuttle badminton, the scope arose for making
comments.  The learned District Judge stated that there is no material to
support the allegations.  The High Court directed closure of the file while
noting that there was no point in enquiring into the complaint after four years.
9. A petition in the name of Member of Bar Association, dated 23-5-1997 was the
subject of file RoC.No.1018/1997 after the transfer of the officer from the
Court of Additional District Judge, Mahaboobnagar alleging caste bias, purchase
of several movable and immovable properties, movement in private vehicles
without payment, misuse of Court telephone and Court van, delayed attendance to
the Court, collection of money or articles from the Magistrates, calling a lady
advocate to his house whenever his wife was not there etc.  The Head Clerk,
Ramachandrarao and Attender, Anand were stated to be his brokers.  The High 
Court directed closure of the petition, as the allegations are vague and as the
officer was transferred.
10. In RoC.No.1740/97, a petition by one M.M. Naidu, Advocate, dated 25-9-1997
was received alleging that Sri P. Raghavender as Additional District Judge,
Mahaboobnagar received Rs.1,00,000/- to grant bail in a sensational murder case
and secured a lorry without payment for his shift to Hyderabad and purchased
silk sarees without payment at Gadwal and secured several loans which he did not
repay.  The other allegations were similar to those made in Item 9 above and the
petition was directed to be lodged by the High Court, as there was no verifiable
material.
11. In RoC.No.412/2002, one A.V. Sobhanadri Swamy in a petition dated 07-3-2002 
wanted the officer working as Member Secretary, Legal Services Authority to be
tried and sought a permission letter.  As nothing could be culled out from the
petition, it was directed to be filed.
12. In RoC.No.925/2003, a petition was sent by one B.C. Lakshmanna and three 
others against the panel of five advocates for the post of Government Pleader,
Anantapur sent by the officer after receipt of his transfer orders from the post
of Principal District Judge, Anantapur.  The panel was said to be not according
to rules and the petition was directed to be filed.
13. An anonymous petition against the officer working as Principal District and
Sessions Judge, Ranga Reddy was the subject matter of file RoC.No.1260/2004.  It
was alleged that the officer never maintained punctuality, took long time to
finish the call work, gave unnecessary adjournments though the counsel were
ready, did not pronounce reserved orders in time, gave preference to lady
advocates, applied for leave without prior intimation, preferred community
advocates, disliked S.T. and S.C. advocates and chewed Goa Gutka in the Court.
This petition was also directed to be filed by the High Court.
14. In RoC.No.1721/2004, a petition against Sri P. Raghavender and Sri K.V.
Kishan Rao was sent alleging threats from them, by one Major Mrs.Lata Kakkar.
The complainant appeared before the Registrar (Vigilance) on notice and she
required certain records.  In the meanwhile, the District Judge, Ranga Reddy
sent a report to the High Court about the vexatious conduct of the complainant.
The High Court endorsed that there was no relevance of the files and directed
the petition to be filed.  When again a petition was received, the Registrar
(Judicial) was directed to issue notice to the complainant to appear before the
First Court treating the case as Contempt Case SR.
15. In file RoC.No.1893/2004, an anonymous complaint forwarded by the Director
General, ACB alleging that the District Judge, Ranga Reddy took Rs.25,000/-
bribe from one V.V.Kishen, Advocate for dismissal of dowry harassment death
case, was directed to be filed.
16. In RoC.No.147/2005, a petition sent by Sri B. Ram Chandra Reddy, Advocate, 
dated 25-02-2005 was dealt with, in which it was alleged that Rs.90,000/- wroth
fixed deposit receipts deposited by sureties were missing.  Sri P. Raghavender,
District Judge submitted his report to the High Court on being called for,
explaining in detail the action taken in respect of two irregularities in the
matter of return and encashment of fixed deposit receipts brought to his notice
and the report was accepted by the High Court.
17. In RoC.No.536/2005, an anonymous petition alleging delays in delivering
judgments and orders was directed to be filed by the High Court.
18. In RoC.No.984/2005, a petition dated 13-6-2005 by B. Karunakar and V.
Bhaskararao alleging irregularities, favouratism and partisanship in the process
of selection for the posts of attenders, was dealt with.  Explanation of the
officer was called for and in the meanwhile, the officer retired from service on
31-7-2005."

        It is thus clear that in his career spread over more than 29 years from
16-8-1976 to 31-7-2005, the petitioner's work and conduct was always treated as
'very good', 'good' or satisfactory, both quantitatively or qualitatively.
During these long years, his integrity was never doubted.  Out of the 18
complains received during this period, the petitioner was cautioned in two
cases.  In ten instances, the High Court directed the complaints to be lodged or
filed or dropped further action without calling for any remarks from the officer
or his immediate superior.  In four cases, the remarks/reports of the concerned
District Judges were called for and all of them supported the officer.  Only in
one case, the remarks of the officer were also called for along with the remarks
of the District Judge and that file was closed.  In two instances, the District
Judge has brought the allegations to the notice of the officer and intimated the
High Court about accepting his version.  In two other cases, the reports of the
officer himself as District Judge were considered and accepted by the High
Court.  The last of the complaints in Roc.No.984/2005 could not be the subject
of any final consideration by the High Court, as the officer retired on 31-7-
2005 and this complaint was not before the Administrative Committee, which
considered and decided not to continue in service beyond the age of 58 years.
        In our considered view, on a fair and objective evaluation of the service
record of the petitioner, it could not have been possible for the Administrative
Committee of the High Court to form an opinion that he is not fit to be
continued in service up to the normal age of superannuation.  While making the
above observation, we have kept in view the fact that in a career spanning over
29 years, the record of the officer has remained unblemished, inasmuch as nobody
ever doubted his integrity or cast adverse reflection of his honesty.
Therefore, even by applying the criteria of subjective satisfaction, there is no
escape from the conclusion that the recommendations made by the committee for  
compulsory retirement of the petitioner at the age of 58 years are liable to be
characterized as arbitrary and the consequential G.Os. issued by the State
Government retiring the petitioner are liable to be quashed.
        While disposing of representation dated 1-3-2006 made by the petitioner
for reconsideration of his compulsory retirement, the Committee of Judges, in
its meeting held on
3-4-2006 passed the following resolution:
        "Considered the representation of Sri P. Raghavender, formerly Principal
District and Sessions Judge, Ranga Reddy District filed in accordance with the
directions given in WPMP No.35262 of 2005 in W.P.No.16779 of 2005, the service 
records of the officer for the last three years, it is observed that under the
qualitative assessment he has earned two remarks of "satisfactory" and one
remark of "good".  We also observed that there is an order passed by the High
Court in which the court observed that the Officer was simply confirming the
office objections instead of rectifying the mistakes committed by the office.
The Court also observed that "under his administration, the functioning of Ranga
Reddy District Court administration will further deteriorate".  The Court made
this opinion on 07-04-2005.  We also observed that the service record of the
officer discloses that during his whole service career continuously complaints
of misconduct were received against him.
        In view of such a record, the Committee is of the opinion that the
decision of the Committee dated
27-6-2005 needs no re-consideration and resolved to reject the representation
filed by the officer."

        The aforementioned decision taken on the representation made by the
petitioner also suffers from the same infirmity with which the decision to
retire him suffers.  While rejecting his representation, the Committee directed
its attention to only previous three years record and observed that the
quantitative assessment of his work in two years is 'satisfactory' and 'good' in
one year.  However, a cursory reading of the entries recorded in the personal
file of the petitioner shows that the observations of the committee do not
reflect the true picture of the record.  In 2002, his work was quantitatively
rated as 'very good' for first as well as second period.  Qualitatively it was
rated as 'satisfactory/good' in the first period of that year and 'good' in the
second period of that year.  All the four Judges who assessed him rated the work
and conduct of the petitioner as 'good'.  One of them, namely, B. Sudershan
Reddy, J (as His Lordship then was) made the following additional remarks:
"very hard working and honest officer"
In the year 2003, his work was quantitatively rated as 'very good' (both the
periods).  It was qualitatively rated as 'good/satisfactory' in the first period
and 'satisfactory' in the second period.  Out of the two Judges who assessed his
work, one rated him as 'very good' and the other rated as 'satisfactory'.  Both
the Judges rated his conduct as 'satisfactory'.  In the first period of 2004,
his work has been quantitatively rated as 'very good' and qualitatively as
'satisfactory'.  The assessment of second period of 2004 was not placed before
the committee when it decided to recommend his compulsory retirement. 
        The observations made by the committee that there were complaints of
misconduct during his service career also do not reflect the true picture of the
petitioner's service record because, as mentioned above, all the complaints were
scrutinized by the competent authorities (including the Chief Justice in some
cases) and were filed/lodged.  Only in two cases he was cautioned.  In none of
the cases any finding was recorded casting adverse reflection on the work,
conduct, performance or integrity of the petitioner.  It is beyond comprehension
as to how the complaints, which have been filed by the competent authority,
could be relied by the Committee of Judges for reiterating the earlier decision
to compulsorily retire the petitioner at the age of 58 yers.
        The reference made in the Minutes of the meeting of Committee of Judges
held on 3-4-2006 to an order passed by the High Court in which some adverse
observations appear to have been made on the administrative capability of the
petitioner is not supported by the record produced by the learned counsel for
the High Court.  The record produced by the learned counsel for the High Court
shows that Civil Revision Petition No.1741 of 2005 filed by Rajendra Kankaria
against Cyber Enclave Welfare Association and two others questioning an order
made by the petitioner in his capacity as District Judge, Ranga Reddy District
was allowed by Hon'ble Shri Justice V. Eswaraiah, vide his order dated 7-4-2005.
The learned Judge noted that the objection raised by the office of the District
Judge on the O.P. filed by the petitioner against the layout prepared by
respondent Nos.2 and 3 were upheld by the learned District Judge without
considering the explanation submitted by the petitioner.  He accordingly set
aside the order of the District Judge by observing that the same was erroneous
and legally unsustainable.  This is evinced from the last two paragraphs of
order dated 7-4-2005, which read as under:
        "It is stated that the petitioner has chosen to file O.P. before the
District Court, Ranga Reddy district, but the office of the District Judge
raised certain objections as to the very maintainability of the O.P. under
Section 23 of the Act.  The petitioner, after complying with several objections,
stated that the O.P. is maintainable under Section 23 of the Act.  But the
learned Judge, without perusing the averments of the O.P. and without
considering the explanation submitted to the said objection, quoted certain
provisions of the A.P. Cooperative Societies Act, which has no application at
all to the facts of the case and erroneously upheld the objection of the office
and stated that the O.P. is not maintainable and returned the same.
        I am of the opinion that the order of the District Judge dated 17-03-2005,
erroneous, illegal and unsustainable."

        In the order passed by him, the learned Single Judge did not cast any
adverse reflection on the administrative capability of the petitioner, but in
the opinion form he recorded observations, which finds mention in the
proceedings of the Committee of Judges held on 3-4-2006.  It is also borne out
from the record that the opinion expressed by the learned Single Judge did not
form part of the original agenda prepared for consideration by the Committee of
Judges on 27-6-2005.  The same was subsequently added as additional material. 
From the record it is not clear whether the observations contained in the
opinion form were brought to the notice of the petitioner and he was given a
chance to explain his position.  Therefore, the same could not be made basis for
confirming the earlier decision to compulsorily retire him from service.  In any
case, some deficiency in his administrative capacity during the particular year
cannot be made basis for washing off his good record of 29 years and those
remarks cannot be made basis for sustaining the action and order impugned in
this petition.
        In the result, the writ petition is allowed.  The recommendations made by
the Administrative Committee and G.O.Ms.No.99 and 103 dated 25-7-2005 and 30-7-  
2005 are declared illegal and quashed.  The respondents are directed to
reinstate the petitioner and give him all consequential benefits.

?1 AIR 1981 SC 70  
2 AIR 1981 SC 594  
3 AIR 1988 SC 1388  
4 (2000) 6 SCC 332 
5 AIR 1997 SC 2631  
6 AIR 1979 SC 193  
7 (1978) 2 SCC 102 
8 (2003) 8 SCC 117 
9 (1992) 1 SCC 119 
10 (1993) 4 SCC 288 
11 (2001) 2 SCC 305 
12 1999 (6) ALD 586 
13 (1992) 2 SCC 299 
14 (1992) 2 SCC 317 
15 (2001) 3 SCC 314 
16 (2005) 1 SCC 132 

