

THE HON'BLE Dr. JUSTICE G. YETHIRAJULU       
Criminal Revision Case No.2235 of 2005 

03-04-2006 

Lingam Subramanyam    

Putta Seshadri and others

Counsel for petitioner   :              Sri J. Ugra Narasimha

Counsel for respondent 1 to 4:  C. Mastan Naidu 
respondent No.5 :      Public Prosecutor

:ORDER:  

        This Criminal Revision Case is filed by the de facto complainant against
the order of V Additional Sessions Judge, Tirupathi, dated 25-10-2005 in
Crl.M.P.No.77 of 2005 in Sessions Case No.104 of 2005. 
        The Sessions Case for the offences under Sections 498-A and 304-B of the
Indian Penal Code (for short 'I.P.C.') and Sections 3 and 4 of the Dowry
Prohibition Act is pending against the accused.  During the pendency of the
Sessions Case, the learned Public Prosecutor filed Crl.M.P.No.77 of 2005 under
Section 173 (8) of the Code of Criminal Procedure (for short 'Cr.P.C.') for
permission to do further investigation into the case. The accused vehemently
opposed the application.  The learned Sessions Judge, after hearing the
respective contentions, came to a conclusion that the petitioner is not entitled
for the reliefs as prayed for and accordingly the petition was dismissed.
The State did not prefer any revision against the said order.  Therefore, the de
facto complainant approached this Court through this revision challenging the
order of Sessions Judge on the ground that the Sessions Judge ought to have
given an opportunity to the Investigating Officer to do further investigation.
During the course of investigation, a death note of the deceased was traced and
it was marked during the course of trial.  When it was marked through a witness,
the accused suggested that the death note is not in the handwriting of the
deceased person.  At that stage, the prosecution realized that the handwriting
of the deceased has to be proved with reference to the material traced.  It is
mentioned in the petition that the deceased studied in a high school, therefore,
they approached the Head Master with a request to show any material with the
handwriting of the deceased.  But, the Head Master expressed his inability to
show any handwriting.  Therefore, the present revision with a similar request is
not maintainable.
The respondents further contended that unless there is fresh material to do
further investigation in the matter, investigation cannot be ordered as many of
the prosecution witnesses examined and at this stage, the State filing an
application is a belated one and that if any material is secured, they are at
liberty to place before the Court.  Therefore, there is no necessity to order
further investigation in this case.
The learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that since the charge sheet was
also filed, the Investigating Officer
suo moto cannot do further investigation unless the Court permits him to do
further investigation.  Therefore, the Sessions Judge ought to have considered
the request of the State and ought to have granted permission for the said
purpose.
Section 173 (8) Cr.P.C. reads as follows:
"Nothing in this section shall be deemed to preclude further investigation in
respect of an offence after a report under sub-s (2) has been forwarded to the
Magistrate and where upon such investigation, the officer in charge of the
police station obtains further evidence, oral or documentary, he shall forward
to the Magistrate a further report or reports regarding such evidence in the
form prescribed; and the provisions of sub-ss (2) to (6) shall, as far as may
be, apply in relation to such report or reports as they apply in relation to a
report forwarded under sub-s (2)."

The Section very clearly indicates that whenever there is a fresh material, the
Magistrate can grant permission to the Investigating Officer to do further
investigation.
The learned counsel for the petitioner relied on a judgment in Hasanbhai
Valibhai Qureshi v. State of Gujarat1, wherein the Supreme Court while
considering the scope of Section 173 (8) Cr.P.C. observed as follows:
"The mere fact that there may be further delay in concluding the trial should
not stand in the way of further investigation if that would help the court in
arriving at the truth and do real and substantial as well as effective justice.
Section 173 (8) Cr.P.C. permits further investigation, and even dehors and
direction from the court as such, it is open to the police to conduct proper
investigation, even after the court took cognizance of any offence on the
strength of a police report earlier submitted.  All the more so, if as in this
case, the Head of the Police Department also was not satisfied of the propriety
or the manner and nature of investigation already conducted.
        When defective investigation comes to light during course of trial, it may
be cured by further investigation, if circumstances so permit.  It would
ordinarily be desirable and all the more so in this case, that the police should
inform the court and seek formal permission to make further investigation when
fresh facts come to light instead of being silent over the matter keeping in
view only the need for an early trial since an effective trial for real or
actual offences found during course of proper investigation is as much relevant,
desirable and necessary as an expeditious disposal of the matter by the courts."

In Kantilal Chandulal Mehta v. State of Maharashtra2, the Supreme Court held
that whether a further investigation is warranted, the hands of the
investigating agency or the court should not be tied down on the ground that
further investigation may delay the trial, as the ultimate object is to arrive
at the truth.  Sub-section (8) of Section 173 of the Code permits further
investigation, and even dehors any direction from the court as such, it is open
to the police to conduct proper investigation, even after the court took
cognizance of any offence on the strength of a police report earlier submitted.
In Ram Lal Narang v. State (Delhi Admn.)3, the Supreme Court observed that
further investigation is not altogether ruled out merely because cognizance has
been taken by the Court.  When defective investigation comes to light during the
course of trial, it may be cured by further investigation, if circumstances so
permitted.
In State of Orissa v. Dara Singh4, the High Court of Orissa held that further
investigation of case by police subsequent to filing of charge sheet and taking
of cognizance is permissible under Section 173.
In the present case, when death note was traced everybody believed that it is
the note of the deceased.  A doubt was entertained when the accused suggested 
that the note does not contain the handwriting of the deceased.  On the basis of
the denial of handwriting of the deceased, the Investigating Officer thought
that the handwriting has to be proved with any of the prior handwriting of the
deceased.  It is a new fact came to light and the Head Master expressing his
helplessness in securing the handwriting of the deceased.  The material
containing the handwriting of the deceased is not a bar for the Investigating
Officer to search for any other material, which contains the handwriting of the
deceased, which may help for comparison and to confirm whether the death note 
contains the handwriting of the deceased or not.  The death note traced by the
prosecution is a very important piece of evidence and if the handwriting of the
deceased is proved, it is a dying declaration, which has so much evidentiary
value in support of the prosecution.
By keeping in view the above circumstances, I am of the opinion that further
investigation would help the Court in arriving at the truth and do the real,
substantial as well as effective justice.  The learned Sessions Judge, instead
of allowing the petition, dismissed on the ground that there is no fresh
material to consider the request of the Investigating Officer and that the
application has been filed with so much delay.
In view of the present legal position and to do effective justice, it would be
appropriate to set aside the order of the District Judge dated 25-10-205 and
grant permission to the Investigating Officer to do further investigation in
establishing the handwriting of the deceased on the death note.
The Criminal Revision Case is allowed with the above direction.

?1 2004 Supreme Court Cases (Cri) 1603  
2 (1969) 3 SCC 166 : 1970 SCC (Cri) 19 : AIR 1970 SC 359 
3 (1979) 2 SCC 322: 1979 SCC (Cri) 479 : AIR 1979 SC 1791  
4 2001 Cri.L.J. NOC 149 (Ori.)

