

THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE BILAL NAZKI      
Criminal Petition No. 1273 OF 2002

07-06-2006 

M.Krishna Mohan  

The State of A.P., rep. by its Public Prosecutor, High Court, Hyderabad &
another

For the Petitioner :  SRI M.V.RAJA RAM 

For the Respondent No.1 : PUBLIC PROSECUTOR       
For the Respondent No.2 : SRI C.PADMANABHA REDDY        
 ON BEHALF OF SRI K.S.MURTHY       

:ORDER :  


Heard learned counsel for the parties.

The accused No.7 in C.C.No.11 of 2002 before Additional First Class Magistrate,
Gudivada, has approached this Court under Section 482 Cr.P.C., seeking quashing 
of the charge sheet.

The petitioner is the brother-in-law of the husband of the complainant.  The
complainant filed a complaint, which was registered by the Police concerned
under Sections 498-A and 506 of I.P.C. and under Sections 3 and 4 of the Dowry
Prohibition Act.  The case of the petitioner is that when the complainant was
married to his brother-in-law, he was not even relative of the family as his
marriage took place with the sister of the husband of the complainant much
after, therefore, he could not have been a party to any demand for dowry.  He
submits that the charge sheet filed by the Police also
does not disclose any accusation, which could become a basis for trial against
accused No.7. 
The learned senior counsel appearing on the other side has, however, drawn my
attention to the statements recorded by the Police under Section 161 Cr.P.C.
LW-1 is the father of the complainant.  He has stated in his statement -

"Myself and Mr.Chinna Rao went to Eluru on 
19-11-2001.  My son-in-law his mother, sisters Jhansi, Nagavani Prasuna and
brothers-in-law Govind and Krishna Mohan were there.  When we informed that we 
bring our daughter to Eluru on 22-11-01 they informed that along with daughter
send cash and other articles otherwise don't send your daughter and further
threatened that they will kill my daughter and free from another marriage with
heavy dowry.  Then we returned to Gudivada.  Since I can't afford to meet their
demands I went to Hyderabad along with my daughter requested Kotinagulu to 
settle the issue.  Mr.Kotinagulu contacted Nagavani, her husband Krishna Mohan
(who reached Hyderabad from Eluru).  They Mrs.Prasuna and Krishna Mohan repeated   
the same demands and further threatened to kill my daughter and son and perform
another marriage to Srinivasa Reddy with heavy dowry.  This is true."

The complainant also in her statement, has stated -

"On 19-11-2001 my father and Chinna Rao went to Eluru to inform that my joining
with my husband on 
22-11-2001, to my husband and my mother-in-law.  At that time my sister-in-law
and their husbands were also there.  They also demanded the same and threatened 
that they will kill me and perform another marriage to Srinivasa Reddy.  My
father told me about what happened with pain.  Since we could not meet their
demands on 25-11-2001 we approached Koti Nagulu at Hyderabad.  Mr. Koti Nagulu   
contacted Nagavani and Krishna Mohan by that time they reached Hyderabad.  They  
did not accept the compromise and demanded more dowry.  Otherwise they will kill
me perform another marriage to Srinivasa Reddy.  They also told Srinivasa Reddy
to demand more dowry.  Since there is no option we reached Gudivada on 29-11- 
2001.  Hence we reported the matter to II Town Police Station, Gudivada for
necessary action.
        When Police officer asked I informed above."

The learned counsel for petitioner, however, submits that another witness, who
was supposed to have been present on 22.11.2001 when a demand for dowry was    
made, has not stated that the petitioner-accused No.7 was present.  These are
matters which will have to be gone into during the trial.  Whether a witness was
truthful or not, is a matter which will have to be decided during the trial, and
this Court is not supposed in its revisional jurisdiction under Section 482 of
Cr.P.C. to scrutinize the evidence collected by the Police during the
investigation.  That would only be possible for the trial Court when the
statements are made before the Court and the witnesses are cross-examined.  In
this connection, the learned senior counsel refers to a judgment of the Supreme
Court in State of Orissa v. Saroj Kumar Sahoo1.  In this case, the Court had the
occasion to re-consider all the law that is available on powers of the High
Court to quash proceedings.  In para 14 the Court held -

 "14.   It is to be noted that the investigation was not complete and at that
stage it was impermissible for the High Court to look into materials, the
acceptability of which is essentially a matter for trial.  While exercising
jurisdiction under Section 482 CrPC, it is not permissible for the Court to act
as if it was a trial court.  Even when charge is framed at that stage, the Court
has to only prima facie be satisfied about the existence of sufficient ground
for proceeding against the accused.  For that limited purpose, the Court can
evaluate material and documents on records but it cannot appreciate evidence.
The Court is not required to appreciate evidence to conclude whether the
materials produced are sufficient or not for convicting the accused.  In Chand
Dhawan v. Jawahar Lal { (1992) 3 SCC 317 : 1992 SCC (Cri) 636}, it was observed
that when the materials relied upon by a party are required to be proved, no
inference can be drawn on the basis of those materials to conclude the complaint
to be unacceptable.  The Court should not act on annexures to the petitions
under Section 482 CrPC, which cannot be termed as evidence without being tested 
and proved."

On the other hand, the learned counsel for petitioner submits that it has become
a trend in cases where there is dispute between husband and wife that the wives
invariably rope in all the relations of the husband in order to put pressure on
the other side and provisions of Section 498-A are mis-used and abused.  The
learned counsel
may be right, but at this stage, this Court is not at all in a position to come
to a conclusion whether in the present proceedings, provisions of Section 498-A
of I.P.C. and provisions of Dowry Prohibition Act are intended to be mis-used,
abused or used in the context in which the law has been made.  To come to a
conclusion on such question, trial unfortunately has to proceed.

Learned counsel for petitioner however, relies on a judgment of Supreme Court in
Sushil Kumar Sharma v. Union of India and others2.  In paragraphs 12 and 19, the
Supreme Court held - 

"12.  It is well settled that mere possibility of abuse of a provision of law
does not per se invalidate a legislation.  It must be presumed, unless contrary
is proved, that administration and application of a particular law would be done
"not with an evil eye and unequal hand." (See : A. Thangal Kunju Musaliar v.
M.Venkatachalam Potti, Authorised Official and Income-tax Officer and another,
AIR 1956 SC 246) 

19.     The object of the provision is prevention of the dowry menace.  But as has
been rightly contended by the petitioner many instances have come to light where
the complaints are not bona fide and have been filed with oblique motive.  In
such cases acquittal of the accused does not in all cases wipe out the ignomy
suffered during and prior to trial.  Sometimes adverse media coverage adds to
the misery.  The question, therefore, is what remedial measures can be taken to
prevent abuse of the well-intentioned provision.  Merely because the provision
is constitutional and intra vires, does not give a licence to unscrupulous
persons to wreck personal vendetta or unleash harassment.  It may, therefore,
become necessary for the legislature to find out ways how the makers of
frivolous complaints or allegations can be appropriately dealt with.  Till then
the Courts have to take care of the situation within the existing frame work.
As noted above the object is to strike at the roots of dowry menace.  But by
misuse of the provision a new legal terrorism can be unleashed.  The provision
is intended to be used a shield and not an assassin's weapon.  If cry of "wolf"
is made too often as a prank assistance and protection may not be available when
the actual "wolf" appears.  There is no question of investigation agency and
Courts casually dealing with the allegations.  They cannot follow any
straitjacket formula in the matters relating to dowry tortures, deaths and
cruelty.  It cannot be lost sight of that ultimate objective to every legal
system is to arrive at truth, punish the guilty and protect the innocent.  There
is no scope for any pre-conceived notion or view.  It is strenuously argued by
the petitioner that the investigating agencies and the Courts start with the
presumptions that the accused persons are guilty and that the complainant is
speaking the truth.  This is too wide available and generalized statement.
Certain statutory presumptions are drawn which again are rebuttable.  It is to
be noted that the role of the investigating agencies and the Courts is that of
watch dog and not of a bloodhound.  It should be their effort to see that an
innocent person is not made to suffer on account of unfounded, baseless and
malicious allegations.  It is equally undisputable that in many cases no direct
evidence is available and the Courts have to act on circumstantial evidence.
While dealing with such cases, the law laid down relating to circumstantial
evidence has to be kept in view."

        There is no quarrel with the principle laid down by the Supreme Court in
this judgment, and in my view, within the existing frame work, this Court would
not be in a position to come to a conclusion whether the allegations leveled
against the petitioner were true or false, and at this stage, it will not be
possible for this Court to intervene.
Learned counsel for petitioner has also relied on a judgment of Supreme Court in
Kans Raj v. State of Punjab3.  In para 5 of this judgment, the Supreme Court
held -

"A tendency has, however, developed for roping in all relations of the in-laws
of the deceased wives in the matters of dowry deaths which, if not discouraged,
is likely to affect the case of the prosecution even against the real culprits.
In their over enthusiasm and anxiety to seek conviction for maximum people, the
parents of the deceased have been found to be making efforts for involving other
relations which ultimately weaken the case of the prosecution even against the
real accused as appears to have happened in the instant case."


He has also relied on a judgment of this Court in Shaik Kusrouddin and others v.
State of A.P. and another4.  The Court quashed the proceedings against some of
the accused after coming to a conclusion that no specific allegations were made
against them.  Since there are allegations specifically made against the present
petitioner by the witnesses who are examined by the Police during investigation,
I do not think at this stage the application for quashing the proceedings can be
allowed.

For these reasons, the petition is dismissed.  However, any observations made
while dismissing this petition have been made only for the purpose of deciding
this application and should not be treated as an expression of opinion over the
merits of the case.

?1 (2006) 2 SCC (Cri) 272
2 2005 (2) ALD (Crl.) 633 (SC)
3 AIR 2000 SC 2324  
4 2004 92) ALD (Crl.) 195 (AP)

