

THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE A. GOPAL REDDY         
Crl.A. No.949 of 2005

15-06-2007 

Shaik Hussain 

State of A.P.

Counsel for the Appellant                   : Sri C.Padmanabha Reddy for
C.Praveen Kumar  

Counsel for the Respondent                      :  Public Prosecutor

:JUDGMENT:   

        The appellant/sole accused filed this criminal appeal challenging the
judgment passed by the V Additional Metropolitan Sessions Judge, Hyderabad, in 
S.C.No.513 of 1999, dated 20.08.2002, whereby the accused was convicted for the 
offences punishable under Sections 498-A, 324 and 306 IPC and sentenced to 
undergo rigorous imprisonment for a period of five years and to pay a fine of
Rs.5,000/-, in default, to undergo simple imprisonment for one year for the
offence under Section 306 IPC. In view of the sentence imposed for the offence
under Section 306 IPC no separate sentence was imposed for the offences under 
Sections 498-A and 324 IPC. 
        The accusation, which led to the conviction of the appellant is that on
10.06.1999 at about 5 pm., the accused being the husband of Smt. Farzana Begum @   
Husna Begum (hereinafter referred to as 'the deceased'), subjected her to
cruelty and harassment by beating her indiscriminately with belt, sticks, wooden
plank etc., in a drunken state, and thereby subjected her to physical as well as
mental cruelty, which driven her to commit suicide and thereby committed an
offence punishable under Section 498-A IPC. Secondly, on the same date, same  
place and same time, he voluntarily caused hurt to the deceased with belt and
pestle, which is a deadly weapon, and thereby he committed an offence punishable
under Section 324 IPC. Thirdly, on such beatings, unable to bear the torture,
the deceased poured kerosene on herself and burnt herself and thereby the
accused abetted her to commit suicide and thereby he committed an offence 
punishable under Section 306 IPC. When the charges were read over to the
accused, he pleaded not guilty and claimed for trial.
        In order to substantiate the charge, the prosecution examined PWs.1 to 12
and marked Exs.P.1 to P.6 apart from Mos.1 to 10. Except marking Ex.D.1-161  
Cr.P.C. statement of PW.2, no other evidence was adduced on behalf of the
defence.
        Learned Sessions Judge by the impugned judgment, found the accused guilty  
for the charges framed against him and accordingly convicted and sentenced him
as referred to above. Hence the present appeal by the accused.
        The prosecution story as narrated during the course of trial, can be
stated briefly as follows.
        PW.1, who is the brother of the deceased, lodged a complaint on 10.06.1999
under Ex.P.1 before the Inspector of Police, Golconda Police Station, alleging
that his deceased sister was given in marriage with the accused in 1993 and they
blessed with three children. The accused was in the habit of consuming alcohol
and beating her daily. After some time he came to know that the accused married
another lady. When the younger brother of PW.1 died, the accused and the
deceased have attended the last rites and left to their house. Thereafter, again
there was a quarrel took place between them due to which his sister received
head and eyes injuries. Then his sister came to his house with injuries and he
got treated her. Then once again the accused came to PW.1's house and took the 
deceased to his house. On 10.06.1999 evening, the accused came to his house in a 
fully drunken condition and bet the deceased in front of his another sister
Ghousia and sister-in-law Sameena and went out. After some time the deceased  
poured kerosene on her and set fire to herself. On deceased making hue and cry,
his sister and sister-in-law put out the fire with the help of neighbours and
shifted her to Government hospital. While undergoing treatment, the deceased
succumbed to the burn injuries. PW.12-the Sub-Inspector of Police received the
report from PW.1 registered the same as a case in Crime No.76 of 1999 for the
offence punishable under Section 306 IPC and issued Ex.P.6 F.I.R. During the
course of investigation, he examined PW.1, recorded his statement, and visited
scene of offence. Since it was late night, he posted two constables to guard the
scene and on the next day in the presence of PWs.6 and 7 he observed the scene 
of offence under Ex.P.2, photographed the scene, seized Mos.1 to 10 under a
cover of panchanama under Ex.P.3, drew the rough sketch of the scene, and 
thereafter he gave requisition to M.R.O. to conduct inquest over the dead body
of the deceased. He also examined PWs.2 to 5 on 12.06.1999. On 14.06.1999 he   
arrested the accused and remanded him to judicial custody. Thereafter, he
altered the F.I.R. by adding Section 498-A IPC. After receipt of relevant
reports he laid charge sheet.
        To support the contents of Ex.P.1 PW.1 was examined. He testified that
about one year after the marriage of the deceased and the accused, a male child
was born to them. Until then they were amicable. Thereafter the accused started
beating the deceased even on petty matters. Since the accused went to Gulf
country by virtue of his employment, PW.1 brought his sister to his house and
gave a room to her to reside. After 18 months of his stay at Gulf, the accused
returned to home. They were amicable for some time and got three more sons. 
Thereafter they started quarrelling on petty matters in view of the accused was
not providing any money for the maintenance of the family. When his younger
brother Azam Khan died they all went to their village Pedda Mangalaram where
they stayed for 10 days. After the obsequies, the accused brought the deceased
to Golconda. 20 days later, the accused bet the deceased and caused injuries on
her face then PW.1 got her treated medically. 10 days later, the accused took
her to his house promising that he would not beat the deceased and would look
after her well. For two or three days they were amicable. On 10.06.1999, the
accused beat the deceased severely from 4.30 pm., to 5.30 pm., and thereafter,
the deceased got burnt and she was shifted to Osmania General Hospital. When he  
went to the hospital, he was informed that the deceased was brought dead to the
hospital. Thereafter, he went to Golconda P.S. and lodged Ex.P.1 report. In his
cross-examination he admitted that he has not mentioned in Ex.P.1 that at the
time of marriage they presented four tolas of gold and Chetak scooter to the
accused. He also admitted that he was not present when the accused bet the 
deceased on her face.
PW.2, who is the sister-in-law of the deceased, in her testimony stated that for
each and every matter the accused and the deceased used to quarrel and the 
accused used to come home in drunken condition and abuse the deceased. On the   
date of incident, the accused came there in heavily drunken state at 4.30 pm.,
questioning the deceased why she allowed the children to play outside, and
started beating her. After the children came home, the accused bet them also
severely. Meanwhile, another sister-in-law of PW.2 came there and questioned the
accused why he was beating his wife and children. Then the accused threatened
her not to meddle with his affairs and started attacking the deceased. The
deceased asked Gousia to go away. Even after Gousia left the place, the accused
bet the deceased indiscriminately with whatever object he could pick up. The
disputes between the accused and the deceased were in respect of their children,
their finances and on the ground that the deceased was not preparing food
properly. In her cross-examination she admitted that she did not state before
the police that the accused bet the deceased indiscriminately.
PW.3, who is the mother of the deceased, corroborated the evidence of PW.2. She 
stated that she came to know through her daughter-in-law about the incident.
PW.4, who is another brother of the deceased, corroborated the evidence of PWs.1
and 2. He stated that he came to know through neighbours that the accused bet
the deceased severely in connection with his children and thereafter the
deceased got burnt and that with the help of his wife and other sister, he
shifted the deceased to the hospital.
PW.5 did not support the case of prosecution, and hence he was declared hostile.
PWs.6 to 8 are the panch witnesses to the scene of observation, seizure of
material objects and for conducting inquest over the dead body of the deceased.
PW.9 is the Civil Assistant Surgeon, Golconda Hospital at the relevant point of
time. According to him on 10.06.1999 the deceased was brought dead to the 
hospital at about 6 pm. Since her body got fully burnt, he advised to take the
dead body to O.G.H. Mortuary. 
PW.10-the Mandal Revenue Officer, deposed that on requisition from the police at
the Mortuary of O.G.H., he conducted inquest over the dead body of the deceased
on 11.06.1999 at about 11.30 am., in the presence of PW.8 and another and issued
Ex.P.4-Inquest report. According to him the deceased died due to burns.
PW.11 is the Doctor, who conducted autopsy over the dead body of the deceased  
and found antimortum dermo epidermal mixed burns over the dead body of the 
deceased. He also noticed three antimortum injuries, which reads as follows.
1. Abrassion of 6 x 6 cms. Noted over the left frontal region.
2. Contusion of scalp of 5 x 5 cms. Noted over left parital eminance.
3. Abrassion of 1 x 1 cm., noted over the left temple.
According to his opinion the cause of death of the deceased is due to burns and
approximate death is about 12 to 24 hours prior to his post mortem examination.
He issued Ex.P.5-P.M. certificate. According to him the injuries noted above are
not possible due to contact with either pestle or belt, if MO.1 is folded and
then a person stuck with it, injury No.1 is possible. The injuries are not
possible by coming into contact with MO.5, but they are possible when a person
struggles after sustaining burns.
PW.12 is the investigating officer, who investigated into the matter and laid
charge sheet.
From the above evidence, it is clear that the prosecution is able to establish
that the deceased poured kerosene on her unable to bear the torture meted out to
her and died due to burn injuries.
Now the crucial question, which falls for consideration is whether the accused
can be convicted for the offences for which he stood charged.
Before dealing with the above question, an insight into Section 498-A IPC is
appropriate, which reads as under.
Whoever, being the husband or the relative of the husband of a woman, subjects
such woman to cruelty shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may
extent to three years, and shall also be liable to fine.

        The evidence on record clearly establishes that the deceased was subjected
to harassment and cruelty by his wilful conduct, which is of such nature as is
likely to drive the woman to commit suicide or to cause grave injury or danger
to life, limb or health of the woman. Therefore the accused is liable to be
punished for the offence under Section 498-A IPC and the lower Court rightly
convicted the accused for the said offence as the prosecution is able to bring
home the guilt of the accused beyond reasonable doubt for the said offence and
the conviction recorded thereon do not call for any interference.
The postmortem report and the evidence of the Doctor would clearly go to show
that the burn injuries caused on the dead body are the root cause of the death
of the deceased and the evidence of PW.2 clearly goes to show that before the
deceased commit suicide the deceased was subjected to cruelty by the accused by  
beating indiscriminately, which drove her to commit suicide and there by he
committed the offence punishable under Section 324 IPC and the same needs no  
interference.
Coming to the conviction recorded under Section 306 IPC, I see sufficient force
in the submission made by Sri C. Padmanabha Reddy, the learned Senior Counsel   
for the appellant that merely on the allegation that the deceased committed
suicide unable to bear the harassment, cannot be a ground to convict the accused
for the offence punishable under Section 306 IPC since he neither abetted her
nor instigated her to attract Section 306 IPC.
Section 306 IPC reads as under.
If any person commits suicide, whoever abets the commission of such suicide,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term, which may
extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.

        Section 107 IPC defines abetment, which reads as under.
A person who abets the doing of a thing, who -
First - Instigates any person to do that thing; or
Secondly - Engages with one or more other person or persons in any conspiracy
for the doing of that thing, if an act or illegal omission takes place in
pursuance of that conspiracy, and in order to the doing of that thing; or
Thirdly - Intentionally aids, by any act or illegal omission, the doing of the
thing.

        In Mahendra Singh v. State of M.P.1 wherein the accused was charged for an
offence under Section 306 IPC basically basing upon the dying declaration of the
deceased, while considering the definition of abetment under Section 107 IPC the
Supreme Court held that the charge and conviction of the accused for an offence
under Section 306 IPC is not sustainable merely on the allegation of harassment
to the deceased. It was further held that neither of the ingredients of abetment
are attracted on the statement of the deceased.

        In Ramesh Kumar v. State of Chhattisgarh2 the Supreme Court while 
considering the charge framed under Section 306 IPC on the basis of dying
declaration recorded by an Executive Magistrate in which she had stated that
previously there had been quarrel between the deceased and her husband and on 
the day of occurrence she had a quarrel with her husband who had said that she
could go wherever she wanted to go and that thereafter she had poured kerosene
on herself and set fire, held as under:
A word uttered in a fit of anger or emotion without intending the consequences
to actually follow cannot be said to be instigation. If it transpires to the
court that a victim committing suicide was hypersensitive to ordinary petulance,
discord and difference in domestic life quite common to the society to which the
victim belonged and such petulance discord and difference were not expected to
induce a similarly circumstanced individual in a given society to commit
suicide, the conscience of the Court should not be satisfied for basing a
finding that the accused charged for abetting the offence of suicide should be
found guilty.
                In JAMMU SINGH v. STATE OF BIHAR3 a three Judge Bench of the Supreme       
Court held that the question of the abettor's guilt depends on the nature of the
act abetted and the manner in which the abetment was made. Under Section 107 IPC  
a person abets the doing of an act in either of three ways which can be:
instigating any person to do an act; or engaging with one or more person in any
conspiracy for the doing of that act; or intentionally aiding the doing of that
act. If a person instigates another or engages with another in a conspiracy for
the doing of an act which is an offence, he abets such an offence and would be
guilty of abetment under Section 115 or Section 116 IPC, even if the offence
abetted is not committed in consequence of the abetment. The offence of abetment
is complete when the alleged abettor has instigated another or engaged with
another in a conspiracy to commit the offence. It is not necessary for the
offence of abetment that the act abetted must be committed. This is clear from
Explanation 2 and illustration (a) thereto, to Section 108 IPC.
                In SHRI RAM v. STATE OF U.P.4 the Apex Court held as under:   
"......Thus, in order to constitute abetment, the abettor must be shown to have
"intentionally" aided the commission of the crime. Mere proof that the crime
charged could not have been committed without the interposition of the alleged
abettor is not enough compliance with the requirements of Section 107........ It
is not enough that an act on the part of the alleged abettor happens to
facilitate the commission of the crime. Intentional aiding and therefore active
complicity is the gist of the offence of abetment under the third para of
Section 107."
                In SURENDER v. STATE OF HARYANA5 the Supreme Court while agreeing        
the finding of the High Court of Punjab and Haryana confirmed the conviction of
the appellant under Section 306/34 and 498A/34 IPC and held that the deceased-
Pushpa was pregnant at the time of the suicide; that a young pregnant woman
having a child in the womb would not ordinarily commit suicide unless she was
compelled to do so and further she would not have felt depressed if she had not
been harassed on account of demand for dowry. 
                In the light of law as aforementioned i.e. Mahendra Singh v. State
of M.P. and Ramesh Kumar v. State of Chhattisgarh (1 and 2 supra), even
accepting the evidence adduced by the prosecution that the accused beat the
deceased and left the house and thereafter then deceased poured kerosene on 
herself and set fire herself, in the absence of any instigation and the accused
intentionally aiding the deceased in committing suicide, he cannot be convicted
for the offence under Section 306 IPC.
              In view of the same, the conviction and sentence of imprisonment of
five years imposed on the appellant/accused for the offence under Section 306
IPC is set aside.
               Since no separate sentence was awarded by the lower Court for the
offences under Sections 498A and 324 IPC, now he is convicted and sentenced to 
undergo rigorous imprisonment for three years for the offence under Section 498A
IPC and to pay fine of Rs.2,500/-, in default to suffer simple imprisonment for
a period of six months; and he is further convicted and sentenced to undergo
rigorous imprisonment for three years for the offence under Section 324 IPC and
to pay fine of Rs.2,500/-, in default to suffer simple imprisonment for a period
of six months. Both the sentences shall run concurrently.
               The fine amount, if any, paid by the accused for the offence
under Section 306 IPC shall be adjusted towards the fine amount now imposed. The 
period of detention undergone, if any, shall be set off under Section 428
Cr.P.C. The appellant/accused shall be taken into custody forthwith to serve out
the sentence of imprisonment now awarded. 
                Criminal Appeal is partly allowed, to the extent indicated above.

?1 1995 Supp. (3) SCC 731  
2 (2001) 9 SCC 618 
3 AIR 1967 SC 553  
4 AIR 1975 SC 175  
5 (2007) 2 SCC (CRL.) 210 

