

THE HON'BLE Dr. JUSTICE G. YETHIRAJULU       
Criminal Appeal No.1243 of 2003 

13-11-2007 

Dheshetti Rajesham and another  

State of A.P., rep.by
Public Prosecutor,
High Court of A.P., Hyderabad.

Counsel for Petitioners:  D. Bhaskar Reddy

Counsel for respondent: Pubic Prosecutor

:JUDGMENT:   

        This Criminal Appeal has been preferred by A.1 and A.2 in Sessions Case
No.851 of 2002 on the file of IV Additional and District Sessions Judge,
Karimnagar. 
        
2)      Both the accused were charged for the offences under Sections 498-A and 
304-B of the Indian Penal Code
(for short 'IPC') and Section 4 of the Dowry Prohibition Act
(for short 'D.P. Act') for allegedly subjecting the deceased to cruelty and
harassment by demanding to bring the balance dowry amount of Rs.40,000/- and  
thereby the deceased committed suicide on 30.12.2001 by consuming poison within  
the period of seven years from the date of her marriage.
The accused denied the charges and claimed for trial.

3)      The prosecution in order to prove the guilt of the accused examined PWs.1
to 10 and marked Exs.P.1 to P.15 and MO.1. No oral or documentary evidence was   
adduced on defence side.  The trial Court after considering the oral and
documentary evidence came to the conclusion that the prosecution proved the
guilt of the accused beyond reasonable doubt for the offence u/s.304-B and 498-A
IPC and Section 4 of D.P. Act and convicted A.1 for the offence u/s.304-B IPC
and sentenced to undergo Rigorous Imprisonment for seven years.  He was also 
convicted for the offence u/s.498-A IPC and sentenced to undergo R.I. for three
years and to pay a fine of Rs.27,000/-, in default to suffer Simple Imprisonment
for two years.  He was also convicted for the offence u/s.4 of D.P. Act and
sentenced to undergo R.I. for two years and to pay a fine of Rs.9,000/-, in
default to suffer S.I. for one year.  A.2 was convicted for the offence u/s.304-
B IPC and sentenced to undergo R.I. for seven years.  She was also convicted for
the offence u/s.498-A IPC and sentenced to suffer R.I. for one year and to pay a
fine of Rs.1,000/-, in default to suffer S.I. for two months.  She was also
convicted for the offence u/s.4 of D.P. Act and sentenced to suffer S.I. for six
months and to pay a fine of Rs.1,000/-, in default to suffer S.I. for two
months.  All the sentences of imprisonment were directed to run concurrently.

4)      Being aggrieved by the judgment of the trial Court, dated 27.11.2003, the
accused preferred the present Criminal Appeal challenging its validity and
legality.

5)      The case of the prosecution leading to the conviction of the appellants-
accused is briefly as follows:
The marriage of A.1 and the deceased was performed in the year 1999.  At the
time of marriage, the parents of the deceased agreed to pay Rs.80,000/-, but
paid cash of Rs.40,000/- only undertaking to keep the balance amount in fixed
deposit in the bank, but they failed to do so.  Therefore, A.1 and his mother-
A.2 used to abuse and beat the deceased demanding to get the balance amount.  
When A.1 demanded the balance amount, the father of the deceased said that he 
would deposit the amount within a week. On 30.12.2001 the brother of A.1 came to
the house of PW.1 and informed that the deceased was in serious condition.
Whereupon, PW.1 went to the house of the accused and found the dead body of the  
deceased lying and through the villagers he came to know that the deceased
committed suicide on account of harassment for dowry by A.1 and A.2.  A report
was given to the police and it was registered as a crime.  The investigation was
conducted and after completion of the investigation, the charge sheet was laid.

6)      The learned counsel for the appellants/A.1 and A.2 submitted that both the
accused were falsely implicated in the present case; that there was no demand
for balance amount of dowry at any time; that there were no specific instances
of harassment said to be caused by them; that they are no way responsible for
the alleged offences; that there is no direct evidence for the harassment and
hearsay evidence of police and other witnesses cannot be relied on in view of
the present legal position, therefore, they are liable to be acquitted.

7)      The learned Additional Public Prosecutor representing the State submitted
that there is no ample evidence to show that there was persistent harassment
caused by the accused.  Though there is no direct evidence, the inference has to
be drawn from the circumstances on the basis of the evidence of the police and
other witnesses and the trial Court rightly came to the conclusion that the
prosecution proved the guilt of the accused beyond reasonable doubt, therefore,
convicted them for various offences.  Since the judgment of the trial Court is
on the basis of the evidence and legal position, he requested this Court to
dismiss the appeal by confirming the judgment of the trial Court.

8)      In the light of the above contentions of both parties, the point that
arises for my consideration is:
"whether the prosecution proved the guilt of the appellant/A.1 and A.2 beyond
reasonable doubt and whether the convictions and the sentences imposed by the 
trial Court are liable to be set aside?"

9)      The prosecution mainly relied on the evidence of PWs.1 to 5.  PWs.1 and 2
are the parents and PW.3 is the cousin brother of the deceased.  PWs.4 and 5 are
the neighbours to the house of the accused.

10)     PW.1, the father of the deceased deposed that the deceased committed  
suicide by consuming poison on account of harassment caused by the accused   
regarding the demand of balance amount of dowry.  About 2 1/2 years prior to the
death, the deceased was married to A.1.  At the time of marriage, he promised to
pay the dowry of Rs.80,000/-.  At the time of marriage he paid Rs.40,000/- and
he promised to keep the balance amount in fixed deposit, but he did not do so.
For about
one or two months, A.1 and the deceased lived cordially. Subsequently, the
accused began beating the deceased demanding her to bring the balance dowry  
amount. 
The deceased used to inform the same to them whenever she was visiting their
house. About one year after the marriage PW.2 and himself visited the house of
the accused and told them that on account of their difficulties they could not
deposit the amount and promised that they would deposit the balance amount by 
adding some more amount and requested the accused not to   
ill-treat the deceased.   About a week later, A.1 telephoned to him stating that
the deceased was sick, therefore, he has to get her treated by taking from his
house.  Accordingly, they brought the deceased to their house and got her
treated.  Later, A.1 came to their house and took the deceased about two days
prior to the incident.  After two days, the elder brother of A.1 informed them
that their daughter was serious.  Immediately they rushed to the house of the
accused and found the deceased lying dead.  On the next day he presented a 
complaint to the police.  In the cross-examination, he denied a suggestion that
the deceased was suffering from some abdominal pain and she was suffering from 
problems of menses etc. and despite treatment, the ailment was not cured,
therefore, she committed suicide being vexed with the life.

11)     PW.2, the wife of PW.1 deposed that the deceased was married to A.1 about 
11/2 year prior to the death.
She committed suicide by consuming poison on account of harassment and ill- 
treatment caused by the accused regarding the payment of balance amount of 
dowry.  Though they have promised to pay dowry of Rs.80,000/-, they paid only
Rs.40,000/- and promised to pay the balance amount by way of fixed deposit in
the bank, but they could do not so.  About 1 or 2 months, they lived amicably.
Thereafter, the accused started
ill-treating and harassing the deceased asking her to get the balance dowry
amount.  The deceased informed them about it whenever she was visiting their
house.  They were visiting the house of the accused once in 2 or 3 months and
they advised them to live amicably.  One week later, they received telephone
call from A.1 informing that the deceased was sick.  Therefore, they brought the
deceased to their house and got her treated.  Two days prior to the death, A.1
came and took the deceased to his house.  After 2 days, the brother of A.1 came
and informed that their daughter was serious and immediately they visited the
house of the accused and found the deceased dead.  She also denied a suggestion 
that the deceased was suffering from abdomen pain and being unable to bear with
that she committed suicide.

12)     PW.3, the cousin brother of the deceased deposed that the deceased was  
married to A.1 about 11/2 year prior to her death.  At the time of marriage, her
parents promised to pay Rs.80,000/- as dowry, but paid only Rs.40,000/- and the
balance amount shall be deposited in the bank, but they failed to do so.
Therefore, the accused were harassing the deceased and forcing her to get the
balance amount.  The deceased was telling about it as and when she used to visit
her parents house.  The parents of the deceased were going to the house of the
accused now and then and he was requesting the accused to live amicably 
promising to pay the amount.  One week prior to the death of the deceased, A.1
stated to the parents of the deceased that the deceased was not doing well.
Whereupon, the parents of the deceased went to the house of the accused and 
brought her to their house and got her treated.  Later, A.1 came to the house of
PWs.1 and 2 and took the deceased along with him.  After two days, the elder
brother of A.1 informed that the deceased was serious.  Immediately they rushed
to the house of the accused and found the deceased dead. 

13)     PWs.1 to 3 are residents of Ramakrishnapur village, whereas, the accused
were residents of Kotthur village.  Therefore, there is no possibility of PWs.1
to 3 observing A.1 harassing and beating the deceased and it was said to be
informed by the deceased that A.1 was harassing her by way of demanding the 
balance of dowry amount. 

14)     PW.4, a neighbour to the house of the accused did not support the
prosecution version, and he was declared hostile.

15)     PW.5 who is another neighbour deposed that the deceased died about 11/2  
year back by consuming poison on account of suffering from stomach pain.  She
further stated that A.1 and the deceased were living cordially and there was no
ill-treatment or harassment of the deceased by the accused regarding the demand
of balance dowry amount.  This witness also did not support the prosecution case
and he was declared hostile.

16)     After excluding the evidence of PWs.4 and 5, there remains only the
evidence of PWs.1 to 3.

17)     The learned counsel for the appellant-accused submitted that nobody in the
village of the accused came forward to support the version of PWs.1 and 2 that
the accused was harassing the deceased demanding the balance of dowry amount.   
The prosecution witnesses did not further elaborate whether they noticed any
injuries on the dead body of the deceased due to beatings.  They also did not
elaborate whether the harassment was physical or mental.  If so, how he was
frequently beating the deceased or abusing the deceased, whether there was
anybody to witness the harassment or any one of the occasions.  It is not the
case of PWs.1 and 2 that A.1 and the deceased were not in cordial terms.  They
were going to the house of the deceased and the accused was visiting their
house.  Had A.1 has any grouse against the accused, he would not have telephoned 
to her parents about the sickness of the deceased and even if they took her and
keep her at their house, A.1 would not have gone there to bring her to his house
and there was short gap between the deceased coming to the house and committing  
suicide.  It is not the case of the prosecution witnesses that whether there was
any harassment or beating the deceased immediately prior to the incident.

18)     The learned counsel for the appellants-accused further submitted that in
order to attract the provisions of Section 304-B IPC, four essential ingredients
have to be satisfied.  Though first two ingredients that the death must be
within seven years from the date of marriage and the death of the deceased was
unnatural, the remaining ingredients are not satisfied.  Therefore, there is any
amount of doubt about the version of PWs.1 to 3 regarding the harassment and
beating of the deceased.  The Doctor, who conducted Post Mortem examination on  
the dead body of the deceased, did not mention whether there are any other
injuries on the dead body except the symptoms of consuming poison. 

19)     In the light of the above circumstances, we have to examine the legal
position whether the conviction for the offence u/s.304-B IPC can be given on
the basis of hearsay evidence of PWs.1 to 3.
i)      In Biswajit Halder @ Babu Halder and others v. State of West Bengal1
wherein the Supreme Court held that the following ingredients have to be
examined to attract the provisions of Section 304-B IPC:
a) the death of a woman should be caused by burns or fatal injury or otherwise
than under normal circumstances; 
b) such death should have occurred within seven years of her marriage;
c) she must have subjected to cruelty or harassment by her husband or any
relative of her husband; and
d) such cruelty or harassment should be for or in connection with demand for
dowry.

It is further observed that if a married woman dies in an unnatural
circumstances at her matrimonial house within seven years from her marriage and
there are allegations of cruelty or harassment upon such married woman for or in
connection with demand of dowry by the husband or relatives of the husband, the
case would squarely come under 'dowry death' and there shall be a presumption
against the husband and the relatives.
In the case covered by the above decision, it is held that thee is no evidence
to show that there was any cruelty or harassment for or in connection with the
demand of dowry.  In the above case, the deceased was married to A.1.  At the
time of marriage, dowry of Rs.43,000/-, and gold ornaments and other articles
were given to the appellants, but they were not satisfied with the dowry items.
Since the marriage, the deceased was put under pressure to bring one colour TV,
English Cot and VIP bag for her father-in-law and other relatives.  The deceased
time and again reported about the matter to her father and brothers.  On
different occasions the brother of the deceased requested the accused not to
harass the deceased for non-payment of those items.  Later, the deceased
committed suicide at the house of the deceased by consuming poison and after 
getting the news, the brother of the deceased and others went to the village of
the accused and later they lodged a complaint to the police. Under those
circumstances, the Supreme Court held that there is practically no evidence to
show that there was any cruelty or harassment for or in connection with the
demand of dowry. 
The deficiency in evidence proves fatal to the prosecution case.  Even otherwise
mere evidence of cruelty and harassment is not sufficient to bring the offence
under Section 304-B IPC. 
ii)     In Harjit Singh v. State of Punjab2, the Supreme Court held that when
there is no evidence on record to show that the deceased was subjected to
cruelty or harassment, the presumption either u/s.304-B IPC or Section 113-B of
Indian Evidence Act could not be invoked against the accused and the prosecution
must be held to have failed to establish the case against the accused.
iii)    In Bejjanki Kishan v. State of Andhra Pradesh3 a Division Bench of this
Court held that where there is no evidence of harassment for dowry immediately
before the death of the deceased, no conviction under Section 304-B IPC or
Section 4 of the Dowry Prohibition Act.  In the case covered by the above
decision, the evidence of close relations of the deceased was adduced to
establish that there had been harassment on account of demand of dowry prior to
the death of the deceased by the accused, but there is no specific mention by
the witnesses as to when the demand of dowry was made in their presence and the 
evidence of those witnesses is only hearsay.  Since there is no proof regarding
the demand of dowry and harassment, the prosecution failed to establish the
offence u/s.304-B IPC.
iv)     In G.M. Ravi @ G. Purushotham v. State of A.P.4 a Division Bench of this
Court held that when the accused subjected the deceased to cruelty and when the
witnesses examined by the prosecution had no personal knowledge of harassment,  
but only stated what according to them was told by the deceased to them with
respect to the harassment meted out to her by her husband, such statements do 
not come within the purview of Section 32 of the Indian Evidence Act.
Therefore, the conviction of the appellants cannot be sustained.
v)      In Inderpal v. State of M.P.5 the Supreme Court held that unless the
statement of a dead person would fall within the purview of Section 32 (1) of
the Indian Evidence Act, there is no other provision under which the same can be
admitted in evidence.  In order to make the statement of a dead person
admissible in law the statement must be as to the cause of her death or as to
any of the circumstances of the transactions, which resulted in her death, in
cases in which the cause of death comes into question.  As there is no single
piece of evidence, which can be admitted in law to be used against the appellant
we are left with the only alternative to set aside the conviction of the
appellant.
vi)     In Sakatar Singh and others v. State of Haryana6 the Supreme Court held
that the testimony of witnesses about the harassment based on what deceased told 
them but not based on their personal knowledge cannot be relied upon.  Unless it
is based on their personal knowledge, the conviction of the appellants could not
be sustained.
vii)    In Tirath Kumari @ Raj Rani and another v. State of Haryana7 the Supreme
Court while considering the scope of Section 304-B IPC held that there is no
evidence adduced by the prosecution that soon before her death, the victim was
subjected to cruelty by her husband or in-laws in connection with the demand of
dowry.  The ingredients of presumption of dowry death u/s.113-B of Indian
Evidence Act were not established.  Therefore, the appellants are entitled to
the benefit of doubt.

20)     In the present case also, none of the witnesses stated that they have any
personal knowledge about the harassment of beatings caused by A.1.  No role has 
been attributed to A.2, the mother of A.1 except a general statement that the
accused were harassing the deceased.  The statements said to be made by the  
deceased to PWs.1 to 3 were long prior to the death of the deceased and that is
not the information about the circumstances leading to the death of the
deceased.  Therefore, such statements do not come within the purview of Section
32 (1) of the Indian Evidence Act.  Therefore, no reliance can be placed on such
statement.  In the absence of any other material and as the evidence of PWs.1 to
3 was only hearsay evidence, it is not safe to come to a conclusion that the
prosecution proved the guilt of the accused beyond reasonable doubt.  The trial
Court basing on the evidence of PWs.1 to 3 came to the conclusion that the
prosecution proved the guilt of the accused, but in the light of the foregoing
discussion, I am inclined to give the benefit of doubt to the appellants.

21)     In the result, the Criminal Appeal is allowed and the convictions and the
sentences imposed on the appellants-A.1 and A.2 on all the counts are set aside
and they are acquitted for all the offences covered by the charges.

?1 2007 (4) Scale 462
2 2006 (1) ALD (Crl.) 316(SC)
3 2005 (3) ALT (Crl.) 207 (DB) (AP)
4 2003 (2) ALD (Crl.) 344 (AP)
5 2003 SCC (Cri) 1049 
6 2004 (2) ALD (Crl.) 36 (SC)
7 2006 (1) ALD (Crl.) 42 SC

