

THE HONOURABLE SRI JUSTICE G.V.SEETHAPATHY            
Criminal Revision Case No.707 of 2004

01-10-2007 

Illyas Ahmed, son of Mohd. Ismail, aged 42 years, Occupation: Pvt. Service,
resident of 18-12-419/424/A, Hafeezbaba Nagar, Hyderabad. 

State of Andhra Pradesh represented by its Public Prosecutor.

Counsel for the Revision petitioner: SRI K.SAI BABU.

Counsel for the respondent:  Public Prosecutor.

:JUDGMENT:   

        This Criminal Revision Case is filed under Sections 397 and 401 Cr.P.C.
assailing the order dated 26-2-2004 in Crl.P.No.59 of 2004 in S.C.No.125 of 2003
on the file of the 4th Additional M.S.J. Hyderabad wherein the said petition
filed by the petitioner-accused under Sections 227 and 228 Cr.P.C seeking to
discharge him was dismissed. 
        2.      The petitioner herein is the accused who is the husband of the
deceased by name Amtul Mateen (hereinafter referred to as "the deceased" for the
sake of convenience.)
3.      The petitioner-accused is facing the prosecution for the offences under
Section 498-A and 306 IPC in S.C.No.1125 of 2003 on the file of the 4th
Additional Metropolitan Sessions Judge, Hyderabad.  He filed Crl.M.P.No.59 of
2004 under Sections 227 and 228 Cr.P.C. praying for discharge on the ground that
the averments contained in the Dying Declaration based on which the F.I.R. was
registered do not disclose any ground to proceed against him for the alleged
offences and the statements recorded under Section 161 Cr.P.C. during the course
of investigation were the result of the subsequent deliberations.
4.      The learned Additional Metropolitan Sessions Judge dismissed the said
application by a cryptic order dated 26th February, 2004 observing that whether
or not the statements under Section 161 Cr.P.C. are true is a question of fact
which cannot be decided unless full fledged trial is taken up.  Aggrieved by the
same, the present Revision case is filed.
5.      Arguments of the learned counsel for the petitioner-accused and the
learned Public Prosecutor appearing for the respondent-State are heard.  Records
are perused.
6.      The main contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner-accused is
that the learned Additional Sessions Judge has passed the impugned order without
application of mind though the averments in the Dying Declaration, Charge Sheet
and the statements under Section 161 Cr.P.C. do not disclose any ingredients to
constitute the offences alleged against the petitioner-accused.
7.      The learned Additional Public Prosecutor representing the respondent-State
however would submit that the statements recorded during the course of
investigation prima facie reveal the case against the petitioner-accused and the
rejection of plea of the petitioner-accused for discharge by the learned
Sessions Judge does not call for any interference.
8.      It is not disputed that the petitioner-accused is the husband of the
deceased who sustained burn injuries at her residence on 20-12-2001 at 5.30
P.M., and subsequently died in Osmania General Hospital at 3 A.M. on 21-12-2001 
while undergoing treatment. In the Dying Declaration recorded by the learned
Magistrate at 9.30 P.M. on               20-12-2001, the deceased stated that on
the evening at about 4 P.M., while she was adjusting the stove pin, suddenly,
kerosene fell on her and caught fire and she raised hue and cry and her mother-
in-law and her husband came to her rescue and the hands of her husband also got
burnt and they brought her to the Hospital.  Basing on the above Dying
Declaration, the petitioner-accused contends that he has not committed any
offence and it is a case of accidental death.      In the Statement given to the
police basing on which the F.I.R. was registered, the deceased stated that while
she was in the kitchen, the kerosene fell on her and caught fire accidentally
and thus, she sustained the burn injuries.  The police, however, filed the
charge sheet against the accused for the offences under Sections 498-A and 306
IPC.
9.      According to the prosecution, during the course of investigation, it
revealed that the petitioner subjected the deceased to ill-treatment and
harassment by demanding more dowry and used to abuse and quarrel with her and a  
number of times, the owner of the house by name Mohd. Shanawas @ Mohd.Siddiq     
also interfered and pacified the matter and warned the petitioner also against
the recurrence of such incident and that on 20-12-2001, the deceased telephoned
to her parental house and informed her younger sister  by name Amtul Shabana 
that the petitioner was harassing and beating her for more money and on noticing
the petitioner entering the house, she abruptly kept the telephone at about 4.30
P.M., and in the night at about 11 P.M., the parents of the deceased received
intimation about the incident.  A perusal of the statements recorded by the
police during the course of  investigation from the father, brother and sister
of the deceased and also the owner of the house in which the petitioner-accused
and the deceased were residing disclose that the petitioner-accused has been
subjecting the deceased to ill-treatment and harassment demanding her to bring
more dowry from her parents.  The statements of the witnesses recorded during
the course of investigation by the police would disclose that the petitioner in
no way abetted the deceased to commit suicide.  It is not disputed that the
marriage of the deceased with the petitioner-accused took place in the year 1992
and the alleged incident occurred in the year 2001which is more than seven years
after the marriage.  The presumption contained in Section 113-A of the Indian
Evidence Act regarding abetment to suicide by a married women does not come to  
the aid of the prosecution in the present case, as the said presumption would be
available only when it is shown that the wife committed suicide within a period
of seven years from the date of the marriage.
10.     In a decision reported in HANS RAJ v. STATE OF HARYANA (1) it was held by   
the apex Court that to constitute an offence under Section 306 IPC, the cruelty
by the accused was of such nature as likely to drive the woman to commit suicide
and mere allegation of frequent quarrels between the husband and wife resulting
in physical assault are not sufficient to warrant the presumption under Section
113-A of the Evidence Act.
11.     In a decision reported in WAZIR CHAND and ANOTHER v. STATE OF HARYANA with         
STATE OF HARYANA v. WAZIR CFHAND AND ANOTHER (2) it was held thus:           
"We propose to discuss first the validity of conviction under Section 306 of the
Indian Penal Code because that is the more serious offence alleged against Wazir
Chand and Kanwar Singh, Section 306 of the Indian Penal Code states inter alia
that whoever abets the commission of suicide shall be punished with imprisonment
and fine as set out in the said section. Section 107 of the Indian Penal Code
defines abetment.  Reading Sections 306 and 107 together t is clear that if any
person instigates any other person to commit suicide and as a result of such
instigation the other person commits suicide, the person causing the instigation
is liable to be punished under S.306 of the Indian Penal Code for abetting the
commission of suicide.  A plain reading of this provision shows that before a
person can be convicted of abetting the suicide of any other person, it must be
established that such other person committed suicide.  We may mention here that
the commission of dowry death is now punishable under Section 304B of the Indian
Penal Code and certain presumptions are prescribed under sub-section (1) of that
section, but it is pointed out to us that section was not enacted at the time
when the incident in question took place and hence can have no application to
the case before us.  We must, therefore, first examine whether the evidence on
record establishes with the degree of certainty required in criminal law that
Veena committed suicide.  In this regard it is pointed out by Mr.Lalit that, in
the present case, there is no such clear piece of evidence like a suicide note
or statement had been made by Veena after the incident to the effect that she
had taken her own life or set herself on fire.  Further there is no evidence
that her clothes gave out a smell of kerosene which would indicate of suicide.
It is true that the post mortem was performed after several hours and such smell
might not have been detectable from Veena's clothes at that time but it is
significant that Dr.Kusum Goel, who treated Veena at the Geeta Nursing Home has 
not been asked any question regarding any smell given out by Veena's clothes.
As far as the question of improbability of sustaining burns accidentally from
the stove lighted for preparing tea is concerned, evidence was led by the
prosecution to show that the stove was placed on the raised slab which would
make it unlikely that burns were caused to Veena by accident.  The evidence in
this regard, however, is by no means satisfactory.  The evidence of the
Investigating Officer, S.I. Bansi Dhar undoubtedly is to the effect that when he
went to the residence of Wazir Chand for the first time for investigation, the
stove was lying on the slab.  However, the evidence of the photographer who went
to the residence of Wazir Chand along with the investigating officer is to the
effect that when he went there, the said stove was lying on the kitchen floor.
In view of this contradiction, it is not possible to hold that the stove was
placed on the slab when Veena was preparing tea for the family and hence an
accident was highly unlikely."

12.     In the above case, it was noticed that there was no suicide.  It was not
clear from the evidence whether she set herself on fire and it could not also be
said with certainty that there was deliberate delay on the part of the 1st
respondent in taking her to the Hospital or in making better treatment available
to her.  It was further held that there was no satisfactory evidence on the
basis of which, conclusion can be reached with a reasonable certainty that the
deceased committed suicide, and so, the accused need not be convicted under 
Section 306 IPC.
13.     In the present case, the Dying Declaration and also the statement given by
the deceased to the police on which F.I.R. was registered disclose that the
deceased sustained burn injuries due to the fire accident and that her husband
immediately came to her rescue and he also sustained burn injuries on the hands
and he immediately brought her to the Hospital.  Even if the statement of the
father and other relatives of the deceased recorded during the course of
investigation would only disclose that the alleged harassment and ill-treatment
by the petitioner-accused for additional dowry but do not reveal that the
petitioner-accused has resorted to any such acts which constitute abetment to
commit suicide by the deceased. 
14.     In a decision reported in V.SHANKARAIAH v. STATE OF A.P., (3), this Court 
held that abetment under Section 306 IPC has to be understood with reference to
its definition given in S.No.107 IPC.
15.     In a decision reported in SIA RAM v. STATE OF U.P., (4) the apex Court
held that in order to constitute abetment, the abettor must be shown to have
intentionally aided the commission of the crime. It was further held that mere
proof that the crime could not have been committed without the interposition of
the alleged abettor is not enough compliance with the requirement of S.107 IPC.
16.     In a decision reported in MAHENDRA SINGH v. STATE OF M.P. (5), the apex    
Court held that merely because the deceased woman stated in her dying 
declaration that she was harassed by the accused, the accused cannot be held 
guilty of an offence under S.306 I.P.C.
17.     In the present case, the deceased in her Dying Declaration did not make
any allegation against her husband- the petitioner and on the other hand, she
stated that she sustained burnt injuries due to accident and her husband came to
rescue her and he too, sustained burn injuries on hands in the process.  In the
above case of V.SHANKARAN  vs. STATE OF ANDHRA PRADESH (3rd cited), this Court         
held that in the case of married woman committing suicide, within 7 years of her
marriage due to harassment by her husband or his relatives, by virtue of Section
113-A of Evidence Act only Section 306 IPC would come into operation, but not
otherwise.
  18.   Since there is no averment in the Charge sheet and the material on record
not showing that the petitioner-accused either induced the deceased or abetted
her to commit suicide the petitioner is not liable to be charged for the offence
under Section 306 IPC.  Accordingly, the prosecution of the petitioner-accused
for the said offence under Section 306 IPC is not warranted.
19.     In a decision reported in G.LAXMAIAH v. STATE OF A.P. (6) which is similar
to the facts of the present case, this Court held at para 4 thus:
"In the Charge-Sheet, absolutely there is no averment against the petitioner to
charge him for the offence under Section 306 IPC.  Only during the course of
investigation, it is stated that some evidence has been collected to the effect
that the deceased was subjected to harassment and cruelty by the petitioner
herein; and he did not provide proper food and clothes to the deceased and her
children because he used to spend all his earnings for consumption of toddy and
liquor.  Thus, there is some evidence with regard to the offence under Section
498-A IPC.  But, as far as the offence under Section 306 IPC is concerned, even
accepting the allegations on its entirety as stated in the charge-sheet, the
offence under Section 306 IPC cannot be attracted, as according to the dying
declaration and the evidence available on record, there is nothing to show that
the husband has abetted the deceased for committing suicide.  This is not a case
of suicide as per the dying declaration of the deceased itself, but the fire was
accidentally caught to her saree; and in fact, the husband made an attempt to
put off the fire and himself admitted the deceased in the Osmania General
Hospital.  About the abetment by the husband for catching fire, neither the
deceased stated in her dying declaration nor any other witnesses stated during
the course of investigation.  It is not the case of the deceased or any other
witnesses that it is a case of suicide; but it is stated that it is only an
accidental death. Merely because it is an accidental death, the harassment and
cruelty on the deceased by the petitioner cannot be ruled out, which attracts
the offence under Section 498-A IPC."

20.     In a decision reported in HARJIT SINGH v. STATE OF PUNJAB (7) the apex   
Court held that before invoking the provisions of Section 306 IPC, it is
necessary to establish that: (i) the deceased committed suicide, and (ii) she
had been subjected to cruelty within the meaning of Section 498-A IPC and on
facts it was held that the prosecution has not made out either of the two
offences.  It was held that in any event, no evidence has been brought on record
to show that there has been any act of omission or commission on the part of the
accused, before the death of the deceased to demonstrate that the appellant was
responsible for the same.
 21.    What all the father has stated in the above case was that his daughter
died due to the non-payment of dowry to the accused by him.  In the present
Case, the statement of the father of the deceased by name Hameedullah does not 
disclose that he attributed any acts of omission or commission on the part of
the petitioner-accused which are in the nature of abetting the deceased to
commit suicide.  On the other hand, he stated that he personally felt that the
case is not fire accident and it is burnt case by his son-in-law on account of
dowry and his son-in-law poured kerosene on his daughter and set fire to her.
He did not state that the petitioner-accused abetted the deceased to commit
suicide.
22.     In view of the principles laid down in the above decisions and on the
factual matrix of the present case, it must be held that there is no material on
record which would satisfy the ingredients to constitute the offence under
Section 306 IPC as against the petitioner-accused.  There is, however, prima
facie material to proceed against the petitioner-accused for the offence under
Section 498-A IPC. 
23.     In the result, the Criminal Revision Case is allowed in part as stated
above.

?1 2004 CRL.L.J. 1759 
2 AIR 1989 SC 378  
3 2002 Crl.L.J.3201
4 AIR 1975 SC 175  
5 1996 CRL. L.J. 894
6 2002 (1) ALD (Crl.) 119
7 (2006) 1 SCC (Cri) 417

