

THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE A. GOPAL REDDY AND THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE P. SWAROOP                  
Crl.A.No.1608 of 2005

06-08-2007 

Sirumalla Bhumesh  

Sate of AP., rep by Public Prosecutor,
High Court, Hyderabad. 

!Counsel for the appelalltnt:  Sri C. Praveen Kumar, Advocate

Counsel for the Respondents: The Public Prosecutor 

:Judgment: 
(Per P. Swaroop Reddy, J.)

This appeal is filed against the judgment of the learned
II Additional Sessions Judge (Fast Track Court), Adilabad in S.C.No.119 of 2003.
The appellant, who was A-1 before the learned trial judge was convicted for the
offence under section 302 IPC and sentenced to under go imprisonment for life,
apart from fine of Rs.5,000-00 in default to suffer simple imprisonment for
three months. A-1, the present appellant is the son of A-2, who died during the
pendency of the case.
2.      The prosecution case is that A-1's marriage was performed with the
deceased, Radha @ Laxmi, two years prior to her death on 9-5-2001.  At the time
of marriage no dowry was given. After the marriage of the deceased, the marriage
of the elder sister of the deceased was performed at which time an amount of
Rs.10,000-00 was given towards expenditure.  Thereafter A-1 started feeling that
he was not given any dowry and started harassing the deceased, asking her to get
dowry equal to the amount given to her sister A-2 instigated A-1 and they drove
out the deceased from their house. The parents of the deceased could not fulfil
the demand of the accused. While so, on 25.2.2001 at about 10-00 AM, A-1 beat 
the deceased and both the accused poured kerosene and set fire to her. When the
persons present there tried to rescue her, A-2 obstructed and warned them.  The
neighbours ultimately extinguished the fire and shifted the deceased to
Government Hospital, Boath.  PW-1, mother of the deceased gave complaint, on the 
basis of which a case under sections 307 and 498-A IPC and Sections 3 and 4 of
Dowry Prohibition Act was registered and investigation was taken up.  The dying
declaration of the deceased was got recorded by the learned Judicial Magistrate
of First Class, Boath. On 9.5.2001 the deceased succumbed to the injuries while
undergoing treatment.  Thereafter, the section of law was altered to one under
section 304-B IPC and after completion of investigation, charge sheet was filed
against Boath the accused. 
3.      The following charge was framed against both the accused.

"That you A-1 and A-2 on or about the 25th day of February, 2001 at about 10-00
AM at Boath you A-1 beat the deceased, Sirumalla Radha @ Laxmi and Boath of you   
poured kerosene oil on her and lit fire with an intention to kill her and as a
result she sustained burn injuries and while undergoing treatment at Government
Hospital, Boath, she succumbed to burn injuries on 9.5.2001 at 1.30 PM and that
you thereby committed an offence punishable under section 302 IPC and within my 
cognizance." 

Alternatively:

"That you A-1 and A-2 on or about the 25th day of February, 2001 at about 10-00
AM at Boath you A-1 beat the deceased, Sirumalla Radha @ Laxmi and Boath of you   
poured kerosene oil on her and lit fire with an intention to kill her and as a
result she sustained burn injuries and while undergoing treatment at Government
Hospital, Boath, she succumbed to burn injuries on 9.5.2001 at 1.30 PM, that her
death occurred within seven years of her marriage, that she was subjected to
cruelty or harassment by you in connection with demand for dowry and that you
thereby committed an offence punishable under section 304-B IPC and within my 
cognizance." 
4.      As already referred, during the pendency of the trial, A-2 died.

5.      On behalf of the prosecution PWs 1 to 18 were examined and Exs P-1 to P-15 
were marked, apart from Mos 1 to 3.  Out of the witnesses examined on behalf of
the prosecution, PW-1 is the mother of the deceased. She deposed that A-1 was 
the son of her husband's sister: the deceased was given in marriage to him and
no dowry was given at the time of marriage and for two years they lived happily.
One year after their marriage, the marriage of the elder sister (Sunitha) of the
deceased was performed at which time some amount was paid to meet the marriage   
expenditure. She received information about the death of her daughter and that
no body was responsible for her death.  PW-2 is the father of the deceased. He
also spoke similar to PW-1 and did not state anything against the accused. He
specifically stated that the accused was not responsible for the death of the
deceased. PW-3 is a neighbour of the accused. His evidence is that on the date
of the incident he heard cries of people; went to the house of the accused and
found the deceased in flames. They extinguished the fire and shifted her to
Government Hospital, Boath.  He stated that he is not aware as to how the
deceased sustained injuries. PW-4 is a resident of Boath, the place of the
accused. His evidence is that he has seen the deceased coming out of the house
with flames. Many people gathered there and extinguished fire. He is not aware
as to how the deceased received injuries. She was shifted to Government
Hospital. PW-5 is also a resident of Boath. His evidence is that the deceased
was coming out from the house with flames. Many people gathered there and 
extinguished the fire. He is not aware as to how the deceased received injuries.
She was shifted to Hospital. PW-6 is another neighbour of the accused. His
evidence is that at the time of the incident many people gathered at the house
the accused; out of curiosity he went there and found the deceased with burn
injuries. The deceased was shifted to the hospital on a cot and he also carried
the cot along with some others. PW-7 is also a resident of Boath. He stated that
on the date of the incident, he found many people gathered at the house of the
deceased. He also found the deceased with burn injuries  and he helped in
shifting her to the Government Hospital, by carrying the cot. PW-8 is another
person that carried the deceased to the Hospital on the cot along with PWs 6 and
7. PW-9 is the elder sister (Sunitha) of the deceased, after whose marriage
troubles started in the marital life of the deceased. She stated that one year
after the marriage of the deceased, her marriage was performed and at that time
her parents gave Rs.10,000-00 and presented half tola gold . No dowry was paid
to the accused. On learning that the deceased suffered burns, she went to the
Hospital and saw the deceased. She is not aware as to how the deceased sustained 
burn injuries. PW-10 is the husband of PW-9. He has stated that there are no
disputes between the accused and the deceased. He is not aware as to how the 
deceased received burns.              PW-11 is a panch for the scene of offence
and seizure panchanama, Ex P-9. PW-12 is the panch for the inquest panchanama,   
Ex P-10. PW-11 is the Assistant Sub Inspector of Police, who received the
complaint -           Ex P-1, registered the case and issued FIR (Ex P-11). He
stated that he went to the Government Hospital and found the victim with burn
injuries; recorded her statement under section 161 Cr.P.C. and requested the
Medical Officer to send requisition to the learned Judicial Magistrate of First
Class, Boath (PW-17) for recording the dying declaration of the deceased and
accordingly the learned Magistrate recorded the dying declaration (Ex P-15) and
he continued further investigation. PW-14 is another panch for scene of offence
and seizure panchanama Ex P-9. PW-15 is the Medical Officer that conducted  
autopsy on the dead body of the deceased. He stated that he found burns all over
the body of the deceased, except eyes and frontal area of the face and that the
deceased died due to burns. Ex P-14 is the post mortem report.  PW-16 is the-
then Inspector of police, who investigated the case; PW-17 is the then Judicial
Magistrate of First Class, Boath; who recorded the dying declaration of the
deceased and PW-18 is the then Mandal Revenue Officer, Boath who conducted   
inquest on the dead body of the deceased.
6.      Though all the material witnesses - PWs 1 to 5, 9 and 10 turned hostile,
on the basis of the dying declaration (Ex P-15) recorded by the learned
Magistrate (PW-17) the learned trial Judge found the accused guilty for the
offence under section 302 IPC, convicted and sentenced him as stated supra, and
the same is challenged in this appeal.
7.      The main contention of the leaned Senior counsel appearing for the accused
is that none of the witnesses have supported about the accused harassing the
deceased in any manner; in spite of that the learned trial Judge has erroneously
convicted the accused, solely on the basis of Ex P-15 dying declaration recorded
by PW-17, the learned Magistrate; that the dying declaration earlier recorded by
PW-13, is suppressed by the prosecution and on account of that adverse inference
has to be drawn against the prosecution under Section 114, illustration (g)  of
the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (for short 'the Act').
8.      The contention of the learned Public Prosecutor is that though the
material witnesses have turned hostile, as the dying declaration      (Ex P-15)
recorded by PW-17 is found to be reliable, the trial judge has rightly convicted
the appellant.
9.      Now, the point for consideration is whether there are any grounds to allow
the appeal.
10.     As all the material witnesses have turned hostile, there is absolutely no
material to show that there was any harassment of the deceased for anything. The
prosecution case is that after the marriage of the sister of the deceased,
wherein the parents of the deceased gave Rs.10,000-00  towards the marriage
expenditure, the accused started harassing the deceased asking for the same
amount as dowry. 
11.     Material portion of the dying declaration Ex P-15 reads as follows:
"Since one month, my husband abusing and beating me. Today also, he misbehaved    
and bet and unnecessarily, saying not to go neighbor's house. Today morning, at
about 10.00 hours, he poured kerosene on me and burnt with firewood. At that
time, there was only my husband and myself and no one in the house. My street 
members quenched the fire and brought me hospital. I don't want to go my in
law's house. My in-law's stay with us. When this incident happened, my in law's
(My mother and father in-law) were not there in the house. I don't have any
thing to say. My husband used to talk about dowry. That is all.",
as per which , the accused was abusing and beating the deceased since one month;  
on the date of incident also he bet her unnecessarily saying not go to
neighbor's house; on the date of the incident at about 10.00 AM, he poured
kerosene on her and burnt with fire wood; at that time the accused alone was
present at the house and none else; the locality people extinguished the fire
and at the time of the incident her in-laws were not in the house.
12.     Thus, in this dying declaration also there is absolutely no reference to
any harassment for dowry.  On the other hand, the accused has allegedly beat the
deceased asking her not to go to neighbor's house.  May be, the husband had some 
objection for the deceased going to neighbor's house. This dying declaration
also makes it clear that other than the husband none else were present at the
time of the incident.  It is specifically stated in the dying declaration that
her in-laws were not at all present in the house; whereas the prosecution case
is that A-2 (father-in-law) was present and both of them poured kerosene and set
fire to her and when neighbour's tried to extinguish fire, A-2 obstructed them
asking to allow her to burn and die.  Thus it appears to be a case of attempted
false implication of, at least, A-2, as, as already stated, the dying
declaration specifically excludes the presence of A-2, at the time of the
incident.
13.     Now, the question is how far the dying declaration with regard to the
appellant (A-1) can be accepted:
14.     Illustration (g) under Section 114 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, reads
as follows:
"114.   Court may presume existence of certain facts: The court may presume the 
existence of any fact which it things likely to have happened, regard being had
to the common course of natural events, human conduct and public and private
business, in their relation to the facts of the particular case:
The court may presume:-- 
(g) That evidence which could be and is not produced would, if produced, be
unfavourable to the person who withholds it."
Thus, withholding of evidence has to be interpreted adversely to the party,
which withholds the same. The evidence of PW-13 shows that he recorded the 
statement of the deceased. He has specifically stated "I found the victim, Radha
with injuries. I examined her and recorded her statement under section 161
Cr.P.C." Thus the statement recorded by PW-13 becomes dying declaration, on  
account of the death of the deceased and is admissible in evidence. The
prosecution never filed this statement into the court.  The learned Additional
Public Prosecutor could not explain as to why the above statement was not filed
by the prosecution.
15.     In Shaik Meheboob @ Hetak Vs. State of Maharashtra1 the Hon'ble Apex Court   
held that when the prosecution has withheld a written report about the incident
made by the complainant to the police, the irresistible conclusion is that the
prosecution has suppressed the document. The Hon'ble Apex Court ultimately held 
that in such circumstances the accused is entitled for acquittal.
16.     The learned Additional Public Prosecutor relied on a decision of our High
Court in Harijana Mulinti Bhushanna v. State of A.P.2, wherein it was held that
due to non-production of a dying declaration of one of the deceased, the entire
prosecution case cannot be thrown out. The Division Bench further held that
though under section 114, illustration (g) of the Indian Evidence Act, the court
can draw adverse inference against the party not producing a vital document,
that cannot effect the entire prosecution case, if there is satisfactory oral
evidence.  In that particular case, the witnesses have consistently deposed
before the court about the incident, in detail, and they were found to be
truthful.
17.     In a recent decision in Sayarabano @ Sultanabegum Vs. State of 
Maharashtra3 where there were two dying declarations recorded by a Magistrate,
where, in the first dying declaration, the deceased has not attributed overt-
acts to the accused-mother-in-law and when a subsequent dying declaration was 
recorded by the Magistrate, the deceased attributed overt-acts to the accused-
mother-in-law, the Hon'ble Supreme Court held that conviction can be based on
such a subsequent dying declaration, in spite of the fact that in the earlier
dying declaration no overt-acts were attributed to the accused-mother-in-law.
The reason given was, at the time of recording of the first declaration, the
accused-mother-in-law and her people were present and the deceased, at the time
of recording the second dying declaration, has stated that, earlier, at the
instance of the accused-mother-in-law, she gave the dying declaration not
implicating her (mother-in-law) and the Hon'ble Supreme Court observed that by
the time of recording of second dying declaration, as parents of the deceased
and her other people came, the deceased must have picked-up courage and gave the  
true facts about the cause of her death.
18.     Thus the above two decisions - Harijana Mulinti Bhushanna (second read
above) and Sayarabano @ Sultanabegum (third read above) would make it clear that 
even in cases where a dying declaration of the deceased is not made available by
the prosecution and even in cases where the same deceased gave two dying  
declarations, and in the earliest dying declaration the deceased did not
implicate the accused and in a subsequent dying declaration, the deceased
implicated the accused, also, in case the prosecution case is found acceptable,
on the basis of the other evidence, the accused can be convicted.  In view of
the above legal position, mere non-production of a document, however important
it is, cannot effect the prosecution case in spite of it being hit by
illustration (g) of Section 114 of the Act, in case there is other material in
support of the prosecution case.
19.     In view of this legal position even in case some very important documents
could not be produced by the prosecution also, the accused cannot be acquitted
on account of illustration (g) of Section 114 of the Act, in case there is other
evidence and the prosecution case is found to be otherwise acceptable.
20.     Now, it has to be seen as to whether there is any other material, other
than Ex P-15 dying declaration in this case, to accept the prosecution case.  No
material witness, including the kith-and-kin of the deceased, have supported the
prosecution case and the contents of the dying declaration (Ex P-15) recorded by
the learned Magistrate are not in consonance with the prosecution case, as, as
per the prosecution case, both the accused (A-1 and A-2) have set fire to the
deceased, and, in fact, A-2 prevented the neighbours that came to rescue the
deceased from extinguishing the fire; but, the deceased, in Ex P-15, her dying
declaration completely ruled out the presence of A-2 saying that he was not at
all present in the house.  Thus, as there is no other evidence in this case and
as the dying declaration (Ex P-15) recorded by the learned Magistrate (PW-17) is
not consistent with the prosecution case, the circumstance of suppression of the
statement of the deceased recorded by PW-13 assumes important role, as in case  
it was against the prosecution case, there was no possibility of holding the
accused guilty, such being the case, it is not at all safe to hold the accused
guilty of the offence with which he is charged, on the basis of the dying
declaration (Ex P-15) and accordingly the accused is entitled to be acquitted.
20.     In the result, the appeal is allowed. The conviction and sentence imposed
on the appellant-A-1 in S.C.No.119 of 2003 by the learned II Additional Sessions
Judge (Fast Track Court) Adilabad is set aside. The appellant-A-1 shall be set
at liberty forthwith, if he is not required to be detained in any other case.
Fine amount, if any, paid by the appellant-A-1 shall be refunded to him after
appeal time is over.

?1 AIR 2005 SC 1805  
2 2004 (2) ALT (Crl.)571 (DB) AP.
3 2007 (2) Supreme 49 

