

THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE B. PRAKASH RAO AND THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE L. NARASIMHA                 
Criminal Appeal Nos. 802 of 2005 & 1057 of 2007

27-12-2007 

Pachala Durga Prasad  

The State of A.P., rep.by the Public Prosecutor,
High Court of A.P., Hyderabad.

Counsel for the Appellant: Sri C.Padmanabha Reddy, 

Counsel for the Respondent: Public Prosecutor

:COMMON JUDGMENT: (Per Hon'ble Mr. Justice L. Narasimha Reddy)      

        Accused No.1 in S.C.No.25 of 2004, on the file of the
II Additional District & Sessions Judge, East Godavari at Rajahmundry, was
convicted for the offences under Sections 302 and 314 of IPC.  He was sentenced
to undergo imprisonment for life, and to pay a fine of Rs.5,000/-, and in
default, to undergo simple imprisonment for one year, for the offence under
Section 302 IPC.  Sentence of imprisonment for life, for the offence under
Section 314 of IPC, was also imposed, and both the sentences were directed to
run concurrently.  A-2, the father of A-1, and A-3, the sister of A-1, were
tried for offences under Sections 302, 314, read with 114 and 498-A of IPC and
under Section 4 of Dowry Prohibition Act.  However, they were acquitted of the
said offences.  While the appellant (A-1) filed Crl.A.No.802 of 2005, assailing
the conviction and sentence awarded to him, the State filed Crl.A.No.1057 of
2007, against the acquittal of A-2 and A-3.
        Briefly stated, the case presented by the prosecution, before the trial
court, is as under:
        A-1 to A-3 belong to Padmasali community.  PW-1 who belongs to a different
caste, had three sons, i.e. PWs-2, 3 and another, and a daughter, by name
Bhagyalaxmi.  PW-2 was running a hotel and a pan shop.  Bhagyalaxmi used to look  
after the pan shop.  The appellant, who is a mechanic, used to frequently visit
the pan shop, and thereby developed intimacy with Bhagyalaxmi. Both of them have 
eloped and came back after three days.  The elders of the village kept the
appellant and Bhagyalaxmi, in the house belonging to a barber, where they lived
for about two months.  Mean while, Bhagyalaxmi became pregnant, through the 
appellant.  The elders and well-wishers insisted on performance of marriage, but
the appellant was demanding the house owned by PW-1 to be given towards dowry,  
or an amount of Rs.2,00,000/-.  After deliberations and discussions, the
marriage was performed in a temple at Gummalladoddi village, on PW.1 expressing 
her willingness to pay a sum of Rs.15,000/-.
        The appellant got the pregnancy of Bhagyalaxmi aborted, prior to the
marriage.  PW.1 took Bhagyalaxmi to her house at Gokavaram village, during
Ashadamasam, and by that time, Bhagyalaxmi was pregnant of two months.  After   
that month, she was taken away by the appellant, to his residence. Bhagyalaxmi
was complaining to PW-1 about the harassment by A-1 to A-3 and their insistence
on abortion of the second pregnancy also. She was also made to fall in a
bathroom, by applying oil on the floor.  At a time, when the pregnancy was of
six months, PW-1 took her initially to Korukonda, the residence of PW-2, and
thereafter, to Gokavaram.  None of A-1 to A-3, have visited Gokavaram for about
3 months to see Bhagyalaxmi.  
        It was only on 24.2.2003 that the appellant came to Gokavaram to the
place, where PW-1 and Bhagyalaxmi were living, at about 1'0 clock.  By that
time, PW-1 was not in the house and Bhagyalaxmi informed the neighbours, PWs-6   
and 7 about the arrival of the appellant.  Thereupon, the appellant was made to
sit on a chair in the verandah, and PW-1 was sent for.  After her arrival, PW-1
served a cool drink to the appellant.  PW-7 woke up her husband, PW-6, who was 
sleeping in the house, and he came out.  The appellant gave the keys of his
scooter to Bhagyalaxmi and asked her to give the same to PW-6, to open the 
dickey.  PW-6 tried, but could not open it. Thereupon, the appellant himself
opened the dickey, and took out a tin/box of glucose.
        The appellant felt some discomfort, on account of presence of number of
persons, who have come to see him, and the children that gathered.  At his
instance, Bhagyalaxmi asked all of them to leave, and they were left alone.
Within a short time, PW-1 heard cries from the room, where the appellant and
Bhagyalaxmi were staying.  When she went inside, she found foam coming from the  
mouth of Bhagyalaxmi, and her tongue protruded.  When PW-1 accosted as to what   
happened, the appellant tried to flee away.  PW-1 held him by collar.  She
called PW-6 and Bhagyalaxmi was taken to a private hospital, run by PW-20.  By
the time they reached the hospital, Bhagyalaxmi was gasping, and even before any
treatment could be started, she died.  PW-1 gave a complaint to the police,
stating that the appellant administered poison to her daughter, resulting of her
death, and it was marked as Ex.P-1.  Initially, the investigation was taken up,
and autopsy was conducted on the dead body, by the Mandal Revenue Officer, who  
was examined as PW-24.  The dead body was sent for post-mortem and PWs-23 and 27     
conducted the same.  It was found that the death of Bhagyalaxmi was on account 
of administration of 'Endosulphan' with some liquid.
        The prosecution virtually conducted a marathon trial, by examining as many
as 29 witnesses and marking Exs.P-1 to P-35.  On behalf of the defence, Exs.D-1
to D-7, which are some portions of statements, recorded under Section 161
Cr.P.C., from different witnesses, were marked.  Through its judgment dated
7.4.2005, the trial court held the appellant guilty of the offences under
Sections 302 and 314 IPC, and acquitted A-2 and A-3.
        Sri C.Padmanabha Reddy, learned Senior Counsel appearing for the 
appellant, submits that the conviction of the appellant is only on the basis of
circumstantial evidence, which is not coherent and consistent.  He contends that
even according to PW-1 and other witnesses, what was taken out by the appellant
from the dickey of the scooter, was only a tin of glucose, and none of them have
spoken to about possession of Endosulphan, or any other poison by the appellant.
He further contends that the prosecution pleaded that the appellant purchased
Endosulphan from the shop of PW-18, through PW-17, and since both the witnesses  
turned hostile, there is absolutely no basis for the accusation, in this regard.
        Learned Senior Counsel supports the acquittal of A-2 and
A-3 and opposes the appeal filed by the State against their acquittal.  In this
regard, he submits that though several witnesses were examined, none of them
have pointed out any acts of demand of dowry, against A-2 and A-3.
        Learned Public Prosecutor submits that the circumstantial evidence,
together with the conduct of the appellant, leads to only one conclusion and
inference that it is the appellant, who committed the murder of the deceased.
He contends that it is not even disputed that the appellant, was in the company
of the deceased who was otherwise hale and healthy, and under the guise of
giving glucose water, the appellant had administered poison to his wife.  He
also submits that the insistence by the appellant that the persons that gathered
on his arrival must move away, is a pointer to his plan to ensure that the
deceased must be alone and none should witness what he has planned to do.  
        Learned Public Prosecutor submits that apart from proving the guilt of the
appellant, the prosecution has adduced considerable and dependable evidence to
prove that A-2 and A-3 have harassed the deceased for dowry.
        It was a love marriage between the appellant and the deceased.  They
belong to different castes.  A-2 and A-3, on the one hand, and PWs-1 to 3, on
the other hand, do not appear to have approved the affair between the appellant
and the deceased.  The record discloses that even before the marriage between
them took place, the deceased became pregnant and it was terminated, just before
the marriage.  The appellant is said to have demanded PW-1 to give him the only
residence held by her.  PW-1, in turn, expressed her inability, on the ground
that the house is to be shared by her three sons, and was inclined to give her
share of the house to the deceased.  Ultimately, the marriage took place.
Though there were allegations of harassment of the deceased by PWs-1 to 3, they
did not surface, till the death of the deceased.
        The case of the prosecution rests upon circumstantial evidence.  The whole
incident occurred virtually in a span of half an hour. PW-1 brought his
daughter, the deceased, to Gokavaram, when the latter was pregnant of six
months.   Since the place, where she was residing was a small hut, she took a
premises on rent, in the neighbourhood, for the comfort and convenience of the
deceased.  On 24.2.2003, the appellant came to Gokavaram to meet his wife, the
deceased.  It was his first visit ever since the deceased came to her mother's
house, and there was a gap of three months.  PW-1 was not at the house, when the 
appellant came to Gokavaram. The deceased and PW-7 were there.  The latter  
invited the appellant and deceased to her house, and offered a chair to the
appellant.  Thereafter, she went to inform PW-1.  The latter, in turn, brought
sweets and cool drink and offered the same to her
son-in-law, the appellant.  The cool drink was said to have been consumed
partly, by the appellant.
PW-7 woke up her husband, PW-6.  After he came out from the room, the appellant 
gave the keys of the scooter to the deceased, and asked her to hand over the
same to PW-6, so that he can open the dickey and remove the glucose tin.  PW-6 
made an attempt to open the dickey, and when he could not open the same, the 
appellant himself opened it and removed a "glucose tin".  In the process,
several persons, including PWs-8 and 9, have gathered.  On being asked by the
appellant, the deceased informed her mother and others, who gathered there, to
leave them alone.  PW-7, in turn, asked the appellant and the deceased to go
into the room of her house.  Up to this extent, the evidence of PWs-1, 6, 7, 8
and 9 is consistent and clear.  Shortly after the appellant and the deceased
went inside, PW-1 heard some cries, and immediately reached into the room.  She 
found that foam was coming out of the mouth of the deceased and even the tongue
was protruding out.  On the cries raised by PW-1, the other persons, such as PW-
6, 7, 8 and 9, gathered and immediately they shifted the deceased to the
hospital of PW-20.  Even before he started any treatment, the deceased died.  It
has already been pointed out that the post-mortem revealed that the death of the
deceased occurred on account of administration of poison i.e. Endosulphan.
        Two important aspects need to be noted here.  The first is about the
manner, in which the appellant had removed a box from the dickey of the scooter.
After getting down from the scooter, he could have gone into the house, along
with the glucose tin, which is almost a small box.  Even assuming that he kept
it in the dickey and he wanted to remove it later, he could have done it by
himself.  By giving the keys to his wife and asking PW-6 to remove it, he wanted
to demonstrate that what he brought was only a glucose tin, so that none would
suspect his bonafides.  The second aspect is that soon after the deceased was
administered poison, he tried to escape from the scene.  It was PW-1, who held
him by collar and stopped him from escaping.
        Further, in the natural course of things, being the first person to notice
the convulsion, vomiting, etc, of the deceased, the appellant was supposed to
raise alarm.  Till PW-1 entered the room, on hearing the cries, he was virtually
comfortable by the side of the deceased.
        The version of the prosecution that the appellant mixed some powder in the
water and gave it to the deceased, is beyond any pale of doubt.  In fact, the
defence did not give any suggestion to the concerned witnesses that the
appellant did not mix any powder in the water, that was given by him to the
deceased.  Their endeavour was only that it was a glucose powder that was mixed
in the water.  Except the liquid offered to her by the appellant, the deceased
did not take anything, at least till he came to their house.  The medical
examination revealed that the deceased died out of consuming Endosulphan.  The 
inescapable conclusion is that it is the appellant that mixed Endosulphan in
water, may be together with glucose, and that resulted in the death of the
deceased. 
        The previous conduct of the appellant lent support to the said inference.
It was not even disputed that at his instance, two months pregnancy of the
deceased, before the marriage between herself and the appellant, was terminated.
The evidence of PWs-4 and 5 tells upon the conduct of the appellant and the
nature of treatment given by himself and A-2 and A-3 to the deceased.
        It may be true that PWs-17 and 18, who were examined to show that the 
appellant procured Endosulphan, have turned hostile. That, however, makes little
difference.  The sequence of events that have taken place in a span of almost
half an hour, when the appellant and the deceased alone were there, together
with the medical evidence, furnishes a very strong circumstance, that leaves no
doubt whatever, that the appellant administered poison to the deceased, and
there existed a clear motive for him to resort to the same.  The heinous and
cruel act resorted to by the appellant has not only killed his wife, but also
the baby, who was to take birth, in a matter of few days.  But for the fact that
there was no eye witness, or dying declaration of the deceased, the appellant
deserved a capital punishment.  We are of the view that the conclusion arrived
at by the trial court, for holding that the appellant is guilty of committing
the offences under Sections 302 and 314 of IPC, does not warrant interference.
        So far as the acquittal of A-2 and A-3 is concerned, there is uninterested
and independent evidence of PWs-4, 5 and some witnesses, to conclude that the 
said accused have harassed the deceased, such as by applying oil to the floor of
bathroom, making her to wash all their clothes, even when she was pregnant of
six months, etc.  However, none of the witnesses have spoken to any demand of
dowry by A-2 and A-3.  Further, the acts revealed by them came to light, only
after the death of the deceased, and not earlier thereto.  On the basis of such
evidence, it is difficult to hold A-2 and A-3, guilty of the offence under
Sections 498-A of IPC, or to conclude that they have abetted the appellant, in
committing the offences under Section 302 and 314 IPC.  Therefore, we are not
inclined to take a different view from the one, taken by the trial court, in
this regard.
        Hence, Crl.A.Nos.802 of 2005 and 1057 of 2007 are accordingly dismissed.

