

THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE D.S.R.VARMA AND THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE K.C.BHANU               
Criminal Appeal No.1783 of 2005 

23.10.2007 

Katikala Ratnam 

State reptd. By Public Prosecutor,
High Court of A.P., Hyderabad.

Counsel for the Appellant     :   SRI D.RAGHAVA REDDY  

Counsel for the Respondent : PUBLIC PROSECUTOR      

:ORAL JUDGMENT:(per the HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE D.S.R.VARMA)          

        Heard the learned counsel appearing for the appellant-Accused No.1 (for
brevity "A-1") and the learned Public Prosecutor, appearing for the respondent-
State.

2. Appellant is Accused No.1 in the Sessions Case.

3. This Criminal Appeal, by A-1 (through jail), under Section 374 (2) Cr.P.C.,
is directed against the judgment, dated 30.11.2004, passed by the IX Additional
District and Sessions Judge (Fast Track Court), Guntur, in S.C.No.685 of 2002,
convicting A-1 for the offence punishable under Section 302 I.P.C., and
sentencing him to suffer imprisonment for life and to pay a fine of Rs.100/-, in
default to suffer simple imprisonment for seven days and also convicting for the
offence punishable under Section 498-A I.P.C., and sentencing him to suffer
rigorous imprisonment for a period of three months and to pay a fine of Rs.100/-
, in default to suffer simple imprisonment for seven days and directed to run
both the sentences concurrently.

4. The gravamen of the charge is firstly, on or about the 9th day of May 2002,
A-1, at his house, committed murder of his wife intentionally (or knowingly), by
kicking her indiscriminately on her body, and thereby committed the offence
punishable under Section 302 I.P.C., or A-1 along with A-2 and A-3, parents of
A-1, within seven years from the date of the marriage of the deceased with A-1,
subjected her to cruelty and harassed bodily either in connection with any
demand of dowry or otherwise and thereby, committed the offence punishable under
Section 304-B read with Section 34 I.P.C; secondly, A-1, being the husband of
the deceased, along with A-2 and A-3, subjected the deceased to cruelty by
beating her for demand of more dowry and thereby, committed the offence
punishable under Section 498-A read with Section 34 I.P.C., and thirdly, in
furtherance of their common intention, A-1 along with A-2 and A-3 kicked the
deceased for more dowry and caused her death by causing bodily injury and
thereby, committed the offences punishable under Sections 304-B and 498-A read 
with 34 I.P.C.

5. The case of the prosecution, in brief, is that the marriage of A-1 and the
deceased was performed on 14.02.2000; that, though it was agreed that a total
sum of Rs.35,000/-, one gold chain and one gold ring will be given to A-1, at
the time of the marriage, the said promises had been complied with in part by
way of paying only Rs.20,000/- and a gold ring; that, after the marriage, A-1
along with A-2 and A-3, who were living together, started harassing the deceased
to make good the deficiency of the amount of dowry; that the deceased used to
inform her parents by telephone from the neighbour's house about the demand for
additional dowry by A-1 to A-3 from time to time; that eventually, the mother of
the deceased (P.W.1) along with P.W.5 (grandfather of the deceased by courtesy)
went to the house of A-1 to A-3, paid a sum of Rs.15,000/- and gave a gold chain
towards full and final satisfaction of the dowry amount, which was originally
agreed to; that, after some time i.e., on 09.05.2002, at about 11 pm., A-1
informed P.W.1 that the deceased was suffering from severe headache and was  
hospitalized, with a further request to come and see her; that pursuant thereto,
P.W.1 along with others went to the village, where the deceased was living with
A-1 and found the dead body of the deceased laid on the floor in front of the
house of A-1; that P.W.1 found injuries all over the body of the deceased and a
ligature mark on her neck; that, later on, P.W.1 gave a complaint to the Police,
Ex.P-1 and that the Police initiated investigation and after completion of all
the formalities, filed the charge sheet.

6. When charges under Section 302 I.P.C., against A-1 or in the alternative
under Section 304-B read with Section 34 I.P.C., and under Section 498-A read
with Section 34 I.P.C., against A-1 to A-3 were framed, read over and explained
to them in Telugu, they pleaded not guilty and claimed to be tried.

        7. In order to bring home the guilt of A-1 to A-3, the prosecution
examined P.Ws.1 to 15 and got marked Exs.P-1 to P-19 and M.O.1 on its behalf.  

        8. The Court below, having considered the entire material, including the
evidence, both oral and documentary, available on record, recorded a finding
that A-2 and A-3 are found not guilty of all the offences, with which they were
charged, and convicted A-1 for the offences punishable under Sections 302 and
498-A I.P.C., and accordingly sentenced him, as stated supra. Aggrieved by the
same, A-1 has preferred the present Criminal Appeal.

9. After closure of evidence on behalf of the prosecution, when A-1 to A-3 were
examined under Section 313 Cr.P.C., with reference to incriminating material
found against them, in the evidence of prosecution witnesses, they denied the
same and, on behalf of defence, D.Ws.1 and 2 were examined, but no documents   
were marked. 

10. Learned counsel appearing for A-1 submits that the present case is purely
based on circumstantial evidence and the prosecution had failed to establish the
case against A-1; that the standards of proof and appreciation of evidence on
record, as was done in case of A-2 and A-3 also should have been applied in case
of A-1 and that the Court below had erred in convicting A-1 of the offences
under Sections 302 and 498-A I.P.C.

11. Learned Public Prosecutor, appearing for the respondent-State, submits that
this is a clear case of homicide, as could be seen from the opinion of P.W.10,
the Doctor and that there was no proper explanation by the accused even during
his examination by the Court under Section 313 Cr.P.C. Therefore, the chain of
circumstances is complete pointing out the guilt only towards A-1 and that the
Court below was absolutely right in convicting him for the offences under
Sections 302 and 498-A I.P.C.

12. In view of the rival contentions of learned counsel appearing on either
side, it is necessary to examine the oral evidence on record in order to
determine as to whether the conviction and sentence imposed on A-1, by the
Court, below are sustainable in law?

13. P.W.1, mother of the deceased, deposed about the marriage between A-1 and  
the deceased, the offer and acceptance of dowry; that she also admitted that
only a sum of Rs.20,000/- was paid, instead of Rs.35,000/-, as was originally
agreed to, at the time of marriage and that the same was complied with after
repeated remainders made by the deceased because of harassment meted out by her    
at the hands of A-1 and the alleged A-2 and A-3, in-laws of the deceased. She
further deposed that, on 09.05.2002, at about 11 pm., she received a telephone
call from A-1 that the deceased was suffering with severe headache and was
hospitalized; that she was asked to come and see her; that, therefore, she
immediately rushed to the village of A-1 and found the deceased lying dead on
the floor in front of the house of A-1 with bleeding injuries all over the body
and also a ligature mark on the neck and thereafter, she gave a complaint to the
Police, Ex.P-1.

14. Same is the version of P.W.2, son of P.W.1 and also P.W.3, to whom the 
deceased was related as niece. 

15. In other words, P.Ws.1 to 3 deposed in the same lines as regards the demand
of dowry, its partial compliance, at the time of marriage, and the demand for
additional dowry by A-1 to A-3.

16. P.W.4 was declared as hostile witness on all material aspects, but, one
important factor, which was lost sight of by the Court below, is that he
specifically deposed that, on 08.05.2002 i.e., on the date of death of the
deceased, A-1 and the deceased were present in the house, but A-2 and A-3 were 
not present. Therefore, the evidence of P.W.4 can be made use of, though he was
declared hostile, to the limited extent of establishing the fact that A-1 and
the deceased were together in the house on the fateful day and A-2 and A-3 were
not present. We are of the considered view that this piece of evidence is
crucial, even though the rest of his evidence is absolutely hostile to the case
of the prosecution, which will be dealt with later.

17. P.W.5, a close relative of the deceased, deposed about the facts as regards
the agreement and demand of dowry and compliance of the same, at a later point
of time.

18. The evidence of other prosecution witnesses is not very much relevant.

19. From the above evidence, it is obvious that the prosecution had established
the factum of agreement regarding the demand of dowry, at the time of marriage,
and compliance of the same, at a later point of time, after the marriage. It is
also not in dispute that the death of the deceased had taken place within seven
years from the date of her marriage with A-1.

20. Further, as already referred to above, it is obvious that there was a demand
for additional dowry and, on that score, the deceased was subjected to
harassment, in which case, any fatal injury or death of the deceased has to be
dealt with under Section 304-B I.P.C.

21. It is to be remembered that application of Section 304-B I.P.C., would arise
only in cases, where there is a doubt as to whether the death is homicide or
suicide. When it could not be established by the prosecution, either way, a
presumption can be drawn under Section 113-B of the Indian Evidence Act.

22. In the instant case, that question need not be gone into, inasmuch as, it
was specifically proved by the prosecution that this was a clear case of
homicide, but not suicide. Therefore, application of Section 304-B I.P.C., does
not arise.

23. But, in the instant case, it is to be seen that the evidence of P.W.10, the
Doctor, coupled with postmortem report, Ex.P-8, would clinchingly prove that the
death of the deceased was due to head injury.
24. P.W.10, the Doctor, who conducted postmortem examination on the dead body of  
the deceased and issued postmortem report, Ex.P-8, found the ligature mark
extending from right angle of mandible to left sternocleido mastoid muscle and
on cutting, the tissues under ligature mark are pale in colour, in addition to
the following injuries:

"1. Contusion on right side of upper back, 10 x 5 cms size.
  2. Contusion on right side of forehead."

25. P.W.10 further deposed that the ligature mark found on the dead body of the
deceased was post-mortem and injury Nos.1 and 2 were antae-mortem in nature. He  
further opined that the death of the deceased was due to the second injury i.e.,
contusion on right side of the forehead.

26. From a perusal of injury Nos.1 and 2, it is abundantly clear that the
deceased was subjected to cruelty by A-1, by causing two bodily injuries, out of
which one injury was fatal. So far as the ligature mark found on the neck of the
deceased is concerned, it is quite obvious that a deliberate attempt was made by
A-1 to show that the death of the deceased was because of hanging.

27. In other words, both the bodily injuries and the strangulation on the neck
of the deceased were done simultaneously, but with a little gap. It is further
obvious that soon after the death of the deceased, knowingly or unknowingly, or
to make sure that the deceased died, or in order to show that the deceased died
because of hanging, strangulation was also attempted, which resulted in causing
ligature mark.

28. We are conscious of the fact that we are dealing with a case of
circumstantial evidence and in such a case, the Court should be extra cautious
in order to fix the liability on A-1. The entire chain of circumstances shall be
strong enough and capable of specifically pointing out towards the guilt of A-1
to record the conviction against him. Hence, little more scrutiny, by the Court,
is necessary in appreciating the evidence.

29. Keeping the settled position of law in mind, we are of the view that it is
necessary to consider the evidence of P.W.4, who was declared as hostile
witness. No doubt, he did not support the case of the prosecution on material
aspects i.e., 'demand of dowry' or 'additional dowry', 'the cause of death' etc.

30. But, from the evidence of P.W.4, one crucial aspect to be noted, which has
not been considered by the Court below, is that he did speak specifically that
A-1 and the deceased were together in the house on 08.05.2002 and A-2 and A-3 
were not present.

31. The said statement of P.W.4, which was not controverted in his cross-
examination, in any manner, clearly indicates that it was A-1 alone, who was in
the company of the deceased, on the fateful day. The said statement of P.W.4
would be useful only to the extent of eliminating A-2 and A-3, nevertheless his
statement regarding the presence of A-1 in the house exclusively in the
association of the deceased, on the fateful day, is a vital factor, which ought
to be taken into consideration.

32. From the above, it is further clear that there was no chance for any person
nor there was any other person in the house, on the fateful day, except A-1, and
consequently, it is only A-1 who had a chance to commit any kind of assault on
the deceased. 

33. No doubt, the basic cause, for committing any kind of assault, either verbal
or physical, demanding additional dowry, has already been established.

34. However, it is the specific opinion of P.W.10, the Doctor, who conducted
postmortem on the dead body of the deceased, that the deceased died due to head 
injury, but not because of hanging.  Further, though, initially, it was the
specific case of A-1 that the deceased was suffering from severe headache and
was hospitalized, subsequently, he changed his version, in his examination under
Section 313 Cr.P.C., stating that the deceased died due to hanging. This is yet
another additional and strong circumstance, firstly, to fix the presence of A-1
alone in the company of the deceased, on the fateful day, and secondly, to show
that A-1 had a motive/grievance to commit the assault on the deceased.

35. Furthermore, learned Public Prosecutor, appearing for the respondent-State,
relying on the decision of the Supreme Court in USMAN MIAN vs. STATE OF BIHAR1,    
submits that even from a perusal of the statement of A-1, made during the course
of his examination under Section 313 Cr.P.C., it is evident that A-1 stated that
he was not present in the house at the time of death of the deceased and
further, by the time he came back to the house, he found the deceased to have
committed suicide by hanging; that, then, he took her to some private hospital
and since the said hospital authorities refused to take up the case, he had
taken her to a General Hospital, where she was declared dead and, therefore, he
brought the dead body of the deceased back to home. 

36. From the very fact that A-1 telephoned to his mother-in-law, P.W.1, and
informed that the deceased was suffering from severe headache and was 
hospitalized, and the statement made by A-1, in his examination under Section
313 Cr.P.C., when all the incriminating material was put to him by the Court
below, shows that there is any amount of shift of stance by A-1.

37. As already noticed, only after specifically deposing that, on 08.05.2002
i.e., on the date of death of the deceased, A-1 and the deceased were present in
the house, but A-2 and A-3 were not present, P.W.4 was declared hostile.

38. So, if the events are to be narrated, they go in the following manner: -

The marriage of A-1 and the deceased was performed on 14.02.2000; that,
initially, there was an agreement as regards the dowry to be given at the time
of marriage and the said demand was complied with partially, at the time of
marriage, and, on that score, the deceased was being put to harassment at the
hands of A-1; that, later on, P.W.1 had given the entire dowry, as was
originally agreed to; that, on 08.05.2002, nobody was present in the house
except A-1 and the deceased; that it is not the case of the defence that there
was anybody else in the house, on the date of the death of the deceased, other
than A-1, who telephoned to P.W.1, mother of the deceased, and informed that the
deceased was in the hospital because of severe headache; that, eventually, A-1
shifted his stand after closure of evidence on behalf of the prosecution and
during the course of his examination, by the Court below, under Section 313
Cr.P.C., stating that he was not present at the house when the deceased
committed suicide by hanging and that when he came back to house, he found that 
the deceased to have committed suicide by hanging; that after conducting
postmortem on the dead body of the deceased, P.W.10, -the Doctor, specifically
opined that the ligature mark found on the neck of the deceased was post-mortem
and the other two injuries were ante-mortem in nature, out of which, the injury
No.2 caused on the right frontal region of the forehead was fatal and only
because of that injury the deceased died, as such, the theory of the defence was
disproved by this very fact.

39. Therefore, the chain of incidences, as stated above, would specifically
suggest that it is only A-1, who had chance to commit any kind of assault on the
deceased and not anyone else, nor it is the case of the defence that there was
chance for anyone else to commit the present brutal assault on the deceased.
Further, the conduct of A-1, at the end of the trial was again altogether
different; that he was not present at the house when the deceased committed
suicide by hanging, which was ruled out by P.W.10, the Doctor, by stating that
the death of the deceased was only because of injury No.2 caused on the right
frontal region of the forehead and that the hanging and the resultant presence
of ligature mark on the neck of the deceased was only post-mortem, but not ante-
mortem. 

40. Having regard to the same, we are of the considered view that the Court
below had considered all the aspects in right perspective and recorded cogent
reasons for convicting A-1. However, taking clue from the evidence of P.W.4, who
was declared hostile, to the limited extent, but, which is vital for fixing the
presence of A-1 in the association of the deceased, on the date of commission of
the offence, we hold that the chain of circumstances is sufficiently complete
and strong enough pointing out that A-1 alone was responsible for the death of
the deceased. 

41. For the foregoing, we find no merit in the present Criminal Appeal and the
same is liable to be dismissed.

42. In the result, the Criminal Appeal is dismissed, confirming the judgment,
dated 30.11.2004, passed by the IX Additional District and Sessions Judge (Fast
Track Court), Guntur, in S.C.No.685 of 2002, convicting A-1 for the offence
punishable under Section 302 I.P.C., and sentencing him to suffer imprisonment
for life and to pay a fine of Rs.100/-, in default to suffer simple imprisonment
for seven days and also convicting for the offence punishable under Section 498-
A I.P.C., and sentencing him to suffer rigorous imprisonment for a period of
three months and to pay a fine of Rs.100/-, in default to suffer simple
imprisonment for seven days.

?1 2005 SCC (Cri) 567 

