

THE HON'BLE Dr. JUSTICE G. YETHIRAJULU       
Criminal Petition No.5079 of 2006

26-04-2007 

Kalaparthy Ranjit Kumar,
S/o Bhaskar Rao, Age:29 years, 
Telephone Office, Junior
Telecom Officer, Mahaboobnagar  
and two others.

The State of A.P. rep. by the
Public Prosecutor,
Hyderabad and another 

Counsel for petitioners:  Sri P.Vinod Kumar

Counsel for respondent No.1: Public Prosecutor
Counsel    for    respondent   No.2:  G.L.Nageswara Rao

:ORDER:  

        The petitioners are A.1 to A.3 in C.C.No.241 of 2006 on the file of V
Additional Judicial First Class Magistrate, Guntur, filed for the offence
punishable under Section 498-A of the Indian Penal Code.

2)      The complaint was filed before the said trial Court at Guntur.  The
parents of the complainant were residing at Guntur.  The accused are residents
of Vijayawada.  After the marriage, the complainant joined A.1 and led marital
life for some time and she gave birth to a female child.  She was at
Mahaboobnagar for some time when A.1 was working at Mahaboobnagar.     
The marriage was also performed at Vijayawada.   Therefore, the petitioners
contended that though the complainant contended that the petitioners harassed
her by pointing out that she is black and demanded to bring more dowry, none of
the cause of actions arose at Guntur, therefore, the Court at Guntur has no
jurisdiction to entertain the complaint and to proceed with the trial.
Therefore, the prosecution is liable to be quashed.
In support of his contention, the learned counsel for the petitioners relied on
certain judgments.
        i)      In Y. Abraham Ajith and others v. Inspector of Police, Chennai and
another1, the Supreme Court while considering the crucial question covered by
Sections 177 and 178 of the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 held as hereunder:
"The crucial question is whether any part of the cause of action arose within
the jurisdiction of the concerned Court.  In terms of Section 177 of the Code it
is the place where the offence was committed.  In essence it is the cause of
action for initiation of the proceedings against the accused.
        While in civil cases, normally the expression 'cause of action' is used,
in criminal cases as stated in Section 177 of the Code, reference is to the
local jurisdiction where the offence is committed.  These variations in
etymological expression do not really make the position different.  The
expression 'cause of action' is therefore not a stranger to criminal cases.
        It is settled law that cause of action consists of bundle of facts, which
give cause to enforce the legal inquiry for redress in a Court of law.  In other
words, it is a bundle of facts, which taken with the law applicable to them,
gives the allegedly affected party a right to claim relief against the opponent.
It must include some act done by the latter since in the absence of such an act
no cause of action would possibly accrue or would arise.
        The expression 'cause of action' has acquired a judicially settled
meaning.  In the restricted sense cause of action means the circumstances
forming the infraction of the right or the immediate occasion for the action.
In the wider sense, it means the necessary conditions for the maintenance of the
proceeding including not only the alleged infraction, but also the infraction
coupled with the right itself.   Compendiously the expression means every fact,
which it would be necessary for the complainant to prove, if traversed, in order
to support his right or grievance to the judgment of the Court.  Every fact,
which is necessary to prove such fact, comprises in 'cause of action'."

The Supreme Court by making the above observations held that the concerned 
Magistrate at Chennai has no jurisdiction to deal with the matter.  Therefore,
the proceedings were quashed and the complaint is directed to be returned to the
complainant, but if so chooses, she may file the same in the appropriate Court
to be dealt with in accordance with law.
ii)     In T. Balaji Rao v. State of A.P. and another2 a learned single of this
Court, by applying the principle laid down in Y. Abraham Ajith's case, also held
that the Magistrate in that case has no jurisdiction to try the case.  The
proceedings before the Magistrate are liable to be quashed and gave liberty to
the de facto complainant to move the appropriate Court for redressal of her
grievance.

3)      The learned counsel for the petitioners relying on the above judgments
submitted that since the Magistrate at Guntur has no jurisdiction to try the
offence, the prosecution is liable to be quashed.

4)      However, the Supreme Court in Y. Abraham Ajith's case held that after
quashing the proceedings, the complaint was directed to be returned to the de
facto complainant to present it before the appropriate Court to be dealt with in
accordance with law.
5)      On the other hand, the learned counsel for the second
respondent/complainant relied on certain judgments by contending that the
complaint is maintainable and it is not liable to be quashed before the
Magistrate at Guntur.
i)      In Sistu Pullam Raju and another v. State of A.P. and another3 a learned
single judge of this Court while dealing with Sections 177 and 178 of Cr.P.C.
held that trial in a wrong place is not vitiated when the accused is not
prejudiced as per the constitutional bench of the Apex Court in Mangaldas v.
Maharashtra State4 wherein it was held that if the objection as regards lack of
territorial jurisdiction is not raised at trial, it would be legitimate to
presume that the accused suffered no prejudice.  It was further observed that
the provisions of the Sections 177 and 179 Cr.P.C. do not trammel the powers of
any court to take cognizance of the offence.  The only restriction contained in
Section 190 for the Court to take cognizance is subject to the provisions of
that Chapter wherein section 190 occurs.
ii)     In Nasiruddin Khan v. State of Bihar5 the Supreme Court held thus:
"According to the scheme of the code trial within a wrong territorial
jurisdiction does not by itself vitiate it."

        iii)    In Trisuns Chemical Industry v. Rajesh Agarwal6 the Court held thus:
"It is an erroneous view that the Magistrate taking cognizance of an offence
must necessarily have territorial jurisdiction to try the case as well."

6)      From the decisions cited by the learned counsel for the second respondent
also, it indicates that the prosecution does not vitiate for want of territorial
jurisdiction and the complaint can be returned for presentation before the
appropriate Court, which has territorial jurisdiction to try the offence.  The
decision rendered by the Supreme Court makes it clear that when the Court comes 
to a conclusion that a particular Magistrate has no territorial jurisdiction to
try the offence, the proceedings before that Court can be quashed by returning
the complaint to the de facto complainant to present it before the appropriate
Court.

7)      After going through the complaint, I am made to understand that the
Judicial Magistrate of First Class at Guntur as no part of cause of action
arisen at Guntur, therefore, the learned Magistrate at Guntur has no
jurisdiction to entertain the complaint.  Therefore, the proceedings pending
before him shall not be allowed to continue and they are directed to be returned
to the complainant for presentation before the Court, which has territorial
jurisdiction to try the matter according to law.
8)      With the above observations and directions, the Criminal Petition is
allowed.

?1 2004 (2) ALD (Crl.) 491 (SC)
2 2006 (2) ALT (Crl.) 62 (A.P.)
3 2005 (3) ALT (Crl.) 153 (A.P.)
4 AIR 1966 SC 128  
5 AIR 1973 SC 186  
6 1999 (2) ALT (Crl.) 405 (SC) = (1999) 8 SCC 686

