

THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE D.S.R. VARMA AND THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE K.C.BHANU                
Criminal Appeal No. 1702 of 2005

11-10-2007 

$Alla Lakshmi Narayana Reddy @ Chinna Bujjodu S/o Venkata Swamy aged about 34      
years, Madanuru Village, Kothapatnam Mandal, Prakasam District.  

$State of A.P., rep.by P.P.,
High Court of A.P., Hyderabad.

!Counsel for Appellant  : SRI T.S. Rayalu, Legal Aid

^Counsel for Respondent :   Public Prosecutor.

:JUDGMENT: (per the Hon'ble Sri Justice K.C.BHANU)   

Accused No. 1 in S.C.No. 188 of 2003 on the file of II Additional District and
Sessions Judge, FTC, Ongole, filed the present appeal challenging his conviction
under Section 304-B IPC and sentence of imprisonment for life.
The brief facts that are necessary for disposal of the prosecution case may be
stated as follows:
Originally, the Inspector of Police filed a charge sheet against five accused
persons.  The marriage of the deceased Alla Venkateswaramma was performed with   
A1 in the month of August 1998.  At the time of marriage the parents of the
deceased agreed to pay dowry of Rs. 40,000/- to A1 and accordingly they paid
Rs. 30,000/- at the time of marriage.  For about four or five months, they lived
happily.  Thereafter, differences took place between A1 and the deceased as the
accused started harassing the deceased to get more dowry. PW-1, who is none  
other than the brother of the deceased,  was also informed by the deceased that
the accused were harassing her to bring additional dowry.  On the date of
incident, the deceased went to the well to fetch water.  Then all the accused
beat her and killed her.  On coming to know about the incident the father of PW-
1 laid Ex.P-9 report. Basing on which,   PW-13 registered a case under Section
302 IPC and sent FIRs to all concerned.  PW-11 took up investigation and
inspected the scene of offence in the presence of witnesses.  At the scene of
offence, incriminating materials were seized.  Thereafter, he gave a requisition
to the Mandal Revenue Officer.  PW-10 conducted inquest on the dead body and 
thereafter the body was subjected to Postmortem examination.  PW-9 conducted  
autopsy over the dead body and opined that the deceased died due to acute
pressure on neck leading to Asphyxial death.  The accused was arrested and after
completion of investigation the police filed charge sheet against A1 to A5.  A1
is the husband of the deceased.  A2 is the mother of A1. A3 is the elder
brother, A4 is the wife of A3 and A5 is the son of A3 and A4.  The charge
leveled against all the accused is that on 15.1.2002 at about 10.00 AM in their
home at Madanuru they killed Alla Venkateswaramma, within seven years of her 
marriage.  Before her death, all the accused subjected her to cruelty or
harassing her either in connection with demand of additional dowry or otherwise
and that thereby, they committed an offence under Section 304-B IPC.  All the
charges were read over and explained to them and they pleaded not guilty.
On behalf of the prosecution PWs 1 to 13 were examined and Exs. P-1 to P-10 were 
marked.  On behalf of defence, none was examined but marked Exs D1 to D4 besides   
material objects M.Os. 1 to 7.  The learned Sessions Judge, on appreciation of
evidence on record, came to the conclusion that A1 had killed the deceased and,
in fact, hanged her to a beam of the house giving a colour that the deceased
committed suicide and therefore, he is entitled for punishment.  While giving
benefit of doubt to A2 to A5  and after giving such a finding, A1 was convicted
under Section 304-B IPC instead  under Section 302 IPC.
The learned counsel appearing for the accused appellant contended that there is
absolutely no evidence with regard to the harassment of dowry and all the
witnesses examined on behalf of the prosecution are very much interested in the
success of the case.  Therefore, their evidence against all the accused has to
be disbelieved  and the trial court having given benefit of doubt to A2 to A5
should have extended the same benefit to the appellant A1 also and that the
evidence of PWs 1 to 3 with regard to payment of dowry before death of the
deceased has not been stated before the police.  Therefore, if that is taken as
an omission or an improvement, the appellant/accused is liable to be acquitted.
Hence, prays the acquittal of the accused/appellant.
On the other hand, the learned Public Prosecution contended that the evidence of
PWs 1 to 3, was to the effect that soon before her death she was subjected to
cruelty for payment of dowry and that because PWs 1 to 3 did not pay the
remaining amount of Rs. 10,000/-,which was agreed to be given towards dowry at
the time of marriage, therefore, the deceased was subjected to harassment  and
unable to bear the said harassment the deceased committed suicide and Postmortem   
report would clearly go to show that it is a case of homicidal death but not
suicidal death and hence, he prays dismissal of the appeal.
PW-7 is one of the mediator to the observation report of scene of offence.  The
police seized M.O-1, Wooden Stool, M.O.2, Sickle, M.Os 3 and 4 Coconut Rope and   
Coconut Rope piece, M.O.5 Cement block.  The scene of occurrence is the house of 
A1 at Mudunur Village.  Even the evidence of PWs 4 and 5 would go to show that
when A1 called them to his house, they found the dead body of the deceased
hanging on the wooden beam of the house of A1.  There is no dispute about the
scene of occurrence.  PW-7 is also one of the inquest mediators, who opined that
the deceased died due to strangulation.  For asserting true cause of death, the
dead body was subjected to for Postmortem examination.  PW-9 is the doctor, who 
conducted autopsy over the dead body of the deceased and found no external 
injuries on the body of the deceased so also no ligature mark around the neck
was visible due to putrefaction of the dead body. The report of the Forensic
Science Laboratory shows antemortem fracture of rigor cornu of Hyoid bone on
left side with diffused contusion on surrounding Tissues of Hyoid bone on both
sides.   The doctor opined that the deceased died due to acute pressure on neck
leading to Asphyxial death about 48 hours  prior to postmortem examination.  Ex.
P-5 is the Postmortem certificate issued by him.  Ex. P-6 is the expert opinion
received and Ex.P-7 is the report of Forensic Science Laboratory.  The evidence
of PW-9 remained unchallenged.  From the evidence of PW-9, it can be said that
it not a case of suicide but it is a clear case of homicidal death because there
was an acute pressure on the neck. 
In spite of the said opinion of the doctor, police filed charge sheet under
Section 304-B lPC and charges were also framed under Section 304-B IPC.  The 
necessary ingredients for the charge under Section 304-B IPC are:
(1) Whether the death of a woman is either by burns or bodily injury or
otherwise than under normal circumstances. 
(2) The death should have taken place within seven years after her marriage.
(3) If it is shown that soon before the death she was subjected to cruelty or
harassment by husband or relative of the husband
(4) Such harassment or cruelty should be in connection with any demand of dowry.
In so far as the first two ingredients are concerned, there is no dispute in
view of the fact that the marriage of A1 with deceased Alla Venkateswaramma,
took place in August 1998, where as the death had taken place on 15.1.2002  and
the death is otherwise than under normal circumstances.  Whether it is suicidal
or homicidal, it makes no difference.
Now, the last two ingredients are concerned, the evidence of PW-1 would go to
show that for about 4 or 5 months A1 and deceased lived happily and in the
marriage they have agreed to give dowry of Rs. 40,000/- to A1 but actually paid
Rs. 30,000/- and the balance amount of Rs. 10,000/- has to be paid at a later
point of time.  His evidence further would go to show that two months after the
marriage the accused beat her demanding to get more dowry.  Therefore, from the
evidence, it is clear that the deceased informed him nearly 3 1/2  years prior
to her death.  The said statement cannot be taken as a fact because that it was
not soon before her death, but the fact remains from his evidence dowry of Rs.
40,000/- is agreed to be given but only Rs. 30,000/- was paid and an amount of
Rs. 10,000/- has to be paid, therefore, to that extent only his evidence is
taken into consideration.
PW-2 is a resident of Ulavapadu Village and that the deceased was the daughter
of her younger sister.  She also speaks that they agreed to give dowry of Rs.
40,000/- and just before the marriage the father of the deceased gave Rs.
30,000/- to the elder sister of A1 and he also agreed to give the balance of Rs.
10,000/- at the time of marriage or subsequently.  When the father of the
deceased could not pay the balance of Rs. 10,000/- then the sister of A1 told A1
not to agree for the marriage then she interfered and performed the marriage.
She stated that four or five times after the marriage, the deceased and A1 came
to his house and the deceased told him that the accused was demanding the 
balance amount of Rs. 10,000/-.  Then she advised the deceased to get the
document written by Annapurnamma in respect of 20 cents, in favour of A1 and
that thereafter if her parents are not able to provide the balance amount she
would pay that amount of Rs. 10,000/-.  For about 7 or 8 months thereafter the
deceased came to her and asked to give balance amount of Rs. 10,000/-.  She also
stated that PW-1 and herself took a motor worth Rs. 10,000/- to the house of A1
but the deceased told that the motor does not worth about Rs. 10,000/-.  In the
cross examination, though it is elicited from the statement of PW-2 that they
have agreed to pay Rs. 40,000/- and paid only Rs. 30,000/-to Annapurnamma and  
that for the balance of Rs. 10,000/- herself and PW-1 gave a motor worth Rs.
10,000/-.  She has not  stated so before the police when she was examined.
Since he is a close relative to the deceased, she could be the proper person to
inform about the harassment meted out to the deceased by her husband and the 
relatives of the husband. The statement of PW-2 that the accused were demanding 
her to provide the balance amount of Rs. 10,000/- and that seven or eight months
after the deceased came to her house and asked her to give balance amount of Rs.
10,000/-, would clearly go to show that the deceased was subjected to harassment
for the remaining dowry of Rs. 10,000/-.  Nothing has been elicited to discredit
the testimony of PW-2.  PW-3 is a resident of Madanuru Village.  The deceased
Venkata Ramanamma was the daughter of her elder sister.  She has stated that the 
deceased used to come to her house for every four or five days and informed that
the accused was demanding to get balance amount of Rs. 10,000/-.  Then she told 
her to inform the same to her elder brother.  About 10 days thereafter, the
deceased again came to her to inform that her brother brought the motor and Pump
set and pipes worth Rs. 10,000/-.  On the date of the incident the accused beat
the deceased for not bringing the balance amount of dowry.  Later A1 came to her
house and informed her that the deceased died and asked her to inform the same
to relatives.  An omission is elicited with regard to the fact that the deceased
used to come to her house for every four or five days and informed her that the
accused was demanding to get the balance amount of            Rs. 10,000/-.
There is nothing unusual for the deceased to go to the house of PW-3 to inform
about her grievances to her, particularly, with regard to the demand of
remaining dowry of       Rs. 10,000/-.  The Investigating Officer admitted that
PW-3 did not state before him that the deceased used to come to her house for
every four or five days and informed that the accused were demanding her to get
the balance dowry amount of Rs. 10,000/-.  If that statement has not been stated
to the police when she was examined under Section 161 (3) Cr.P.C, certainly it
is a material omission, which would affect the main fabric of the prosecution
case.  To know whether such a fact was stated to police or not we have perused
the statement of PW-3 recorded by PW-12 under Section 161 (3) Cr.P.C.  As a 
matter of fact, it is stated by PW-3 before police that the deceased informed
her that all the accused were harassing to bring additional dowry of  Rs.
10,000/- when such a fact has been stated when she was  examined, by police 
without looking into the record, PW-12 simply stated that PW-3 did not state
about that fact to him.  We are conscious of the fact that the statements of
witnesses recorded by the police during the course of investigation cannot be
used for any other purpose except for contradicting the witness as provided for
under Section 145 of Evidence Act.  Only for the limited purpose of knowing
whether it is an omission or not, we have perused the statement of PW-3 recorded
under Section 161(3) Cr.P.C.  It can be done so, by virtue of sub-section (2) of
Section 172 of the Code of Criminal Procedure to get substantial justice to the
State and the accused but certainly not for taking the same as a evidence.
Therefore, if that omission is not an omission in the strict sense, the evidence
of PW-3 can be taken into consideration to that effect that on the date of death
of the deceased at about 10 AM she came to know that the accused was beating the  
deceased for not bringing the amount of dowry and that on several occasions, the
deceased went on informing her that the deceased was demanding to get balance  
amount of Rs. 10,000/-.  Therefore, we have no hesitation in accepting the
evidence of PW-3, who is a close relative of the deceased.  No doubt mere
relationship by itself is not a ground to reject the testimony of PW-3.  The
court has to appreciate the evidence of the relatives with care and
circumspection; In view of the fact that she is residing in the same village
where A1 was residing, there is every reason for the deceased to inform her
grievance to PW-3.  PW-3 has no grouse or enmity against the accused to speak 
false or something against them.  Therefore, the evidence of PW-3 can be
accepted.  PWs 4 and 5 were examined by the prosecution to show that the accused  
in the first instance raised cries as "snake snake" and accused took them
forcibly to the house and opened the door, then they found the dead body of the
deceased hanging to the wooden beam of the house.  Then they both lifted the
body to the ground.  Therefore, from their evidence it can be inferred that
after the death of the deceased and in order to make it appear as suicide, the
dead body was hanged.  Their evidence is not of much helpful to the case of
prosecution but the fact remains, the deceased died in the house of A1.  PW-6 is
also a resident of Madanuru Village and the deceased was her sister by courtesy.
On the date of the death of the deceased, while he was passing on the road, A3
to A5 were raising cries and pushing the deceased at the well.  Then he
interfered and separated the deceased from A3 to A5.  About one week or 10 days
prior to the death, the deceased told him that all the accused are harassing her
to get the balance dowry amount of Rs. 10,000/-.  He admitted that the said fact
has not been stated before the police.
Therefore, from the above evidence, it is clear that the amount of Rs. 40,000/-
was agreed to be given at the time of marriage but only Rs. 30,000/- was given
and the remaining amount of Rs. 10,000/- has to be given after the marriage.
The said amount has not been paid by the father of the deceased.  Therefore,
from the evidence of PWs 1 to 3, it is clear that the accused were harassing the
deceased in connection with demand of remaining balance of dowry of Rs. 10,000/-
.  The trial court acquitted A2 to A5.  Admittedly, A3 to A5 are residing
separately from A1. This fact has been admitted by PW-1 who is none other than
the brother of the deceased, who stated that A3 to A5 reside separately since 25
years.  Therefore, most likely the accused 3 to 5 were not harassing the
deceased for dowry in view of the fact that they are residing separately since
25 years from A1.  So also, there is no evidence showing that A2 was residing
with A1 and that A2 was present in the house on the date of incident.
Therefore, basing on the evidence, the trial court rightly acquitted A2 to A5
and the same benefit of doubt should not be extended to A1 appellant.  In view
of the fact that there is evidence to show that A1 and the deceased were
residing together and there is a scope and possibility for A1 alone to harass
the deceased for payment of remaining dowry of Rs. 10,000/-.  It is settled law
that part of statement of witness can be relied upon rejecting the remaining
part, if the truth can be separated from the falsehood.  Though PWs 1 to 3
implicated all  the accused, but the circumstances would go to show that A2 to
A5 were not residing with A1 and the deceased.  Therefore, the question of
harassing the deceased by A2 to A5 for the remaining amount of Rs. 10,000/-
would not arise.  Perhaps, this may be the reason why the trial court rightly
found A1 guilty of the offence under Section 304-B IPC.  Therefore, we have no
reason to differ from the finding of the trial court that A1 has killed the
deceased and hanged  her body to beam in the house  on 15.1.2002 by giving 
colour that the deceased committed suicide.  The evidence of prosecution shows
that soon before her death the deceased was subjected to cruelty or harassment
for or in connection with demand of additional dowry of Rs. 10,000/- by her
husband.  With regard to sentence, the trial court imposed maximum punishment 
under Section 304-B IPC, in view of the fact that the intention of the accused
is so cruel which can be gathered from the circumstances of the case.  It is not
a case of suicide.  To make it appear as a suicide, the dead body was hanged to
the ceiling of the house and to give a colour of suicide, A1 also called PWs 4
and 5 to his house and opened the door.  When it is not a case of suicide
because there was lack of evidence for the offence under Section 302 IPC,
considering the nature of the offence, we have no reason to interfere with the
sentence also, particularly, in view of the opinion of the doctor that it is
homicidal death.  But there is no proof as such, to connect the accused with the
said offence.  Therefore, the finding arrived at by the trial court was
confirmed with which the accused was charged with. 
Before parting with the case, we have to observe that the Investigating Officer
without refreshing his memory with regard to the material omission, admitted
that PW-3 did not state before him that the deceased used to come to her house
for every four or five days and informed her that the accused are demanding to
get balance amount of Rs. 10,000/-.  To ascertain that omission is correct or
not, we have perused the original statement of Battula Seshamma recorded by the
Sub-Inspector of Police on 28.01 year nil, which shows as follows:









So from the above statement, it is clear that all the accused were harassing the
deceased for the remaining balance amount of Rs. 10,000/-.  Without verifying
the statement recorded by him, PW-12 gave evidence that PW-3 did not state 
before him about that fact.  We have extracted the above paragraph in Telugu to
know whether eliciting the omission is correct or not, invoking our jurisdiction
conferred under Section 172(2) of the Code of Criminal Procedure to do
substantial justice to the State and the accused.
In case of a material omission, it merits consideration.  In case omission
amounts to contradiction, which will go to the root of the matter, then such a
contradiction would be destruction to the prosecution case.  The Court,
Investigating Officer, Public Prosecutor must ensure the proper and relevant
omissions and contradictions if any have to be identified carefully and
recorded.
Therefore, we are of the view that the Investigation and the Trial conducted by
both by the Investigating Officer and the Public Prosecutor respectively are in
a perfunctory manner.   This type of attitude is coming to our notice quite
frequently.  In cases of grave offences, when the accused are to be tried, not
like the present one, proper and reasonable care is to be taken by both the
Public Prosecutor as well as the Investigating Officer. Because of this casual
approach, there is every possibility that the accused would get entitlement of
benefit of doubt resulting miscarriage of justice.
The situation has to be corrected by all concerned by way of taking appropriate
steps and to avoid any public outcry.
Accordingly, the Criminal Appeal is dismissed confirming the order of the trial
court.

*THE HONOURABLE DR.JUSTICE G.YETHIRAJULU           

+Criminal Appeal No. 367 of 2004

%05-11-2007  

Employees' State Insurance Corporation, having its Regional Office at 5-9-23,
Hill Fort Road, Adarshnagar, Hyderabad-63, rep.by its Insurance-Inspector
(Legal).

Sri Syed Jameel and another. 

Counsel for Appellant   :       Mr. B.G.Ravindra Reddy 

Counsel for Respondent  :       Mr.A.K.Jaya Prakash Rao  
                        The Public Prosecutor

:JUDGMENT:   

        This is an appeal preferred by the complainant in prosecution case No.34
of 2002 on the file of the Judicial Magistrate of First Class to try the
offences under the Employees State Insurance Act, Hyderabad. 
The complaint was filed by the complainant against the accused for the offences
punishable under Section 85 (a) and 85 (e) of the Employees State Insurance Act,
1948 (for short "the Act").  The complainant alleged that the accused is the
principal employer in respect of a Company, which is running within the meaning
of Section 2(17) of the Act. Under Section 40 of the Act, every principal
employer shall pay both the shares of contributions i.e., employer's share of
contribution as well as employees share of contribution in respect of every
employee and such contribution payable under the Act shall be paid by the
principal employer within 21 days from the last day of the calendar month in
which the contribution falls due as required under Regulation 31 of the
Employees' State Insurance (General) Regulations, 1950 (for short "the
Regulations").  Under Section 44 of the Act and Regulation 26 of the
Regulations, every principal employer is required to submit the returns of the
contribution in form-6 in respect of the employees working in their factory
within 40 days from the date of expiry of each contribution period.  The accused
failed to pay the contributions amounting to Rs.12,548/- for the period from
October, 2000 to March, 2001 within the stipulated time.  The accused also
failed to submit the returns for the contribution period ended on 31-03-2001
within the specified time.  Thus, the accused have committed the offences as
referred to above.  The complaint was filed on 02-01-2002.  The accused made his
appearance on 07-03-2002.  Evidence was adduced for the prosecution. 
Accused was examined under Section 313 Cr.P.C.  During his examination under  
Section 313 Cr.P.C, the accused stated that he paid the entire contribution and
submitted returns before the first hearing date, as such, he has not committed
any offence.
Basing on the said representation, the lower Court observed that there are no
malafides or criminal intention can be attributed to the accused and to show the
bona fides the accused paid the contribution on actuals for the relevant period
and also submitted the returns of the contribution soon after receipt of the
summons of this Court.  Under these circumstances, it cannot be held that the
accused committed offences punishable under Section 85 (a) and (e) of the Act.
By making the above observations, the lower Court found the accused not guilty
of the offences punishable under Sections 85 (a) and (e) of the Act and he is
acquitted.  Being aggrieved by the same, the complainant preferred the present
appeal.
        It is an undisputed fact that the contribution of the employer and the
employees have to be remitted within 21 days of the last day of the calendar
month in which the contribution fell due as required under the Regulations.
Section 40 of the Act reads as follows:
        "40.Principal employer to pay contributions in the first instance:- (1)
The principal employer shall pay in respect of every employee, whether directly
employed by him or by or through an immediate employer, both the employer's 
contribution and the employee's contribution.
        (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other enactment but subject
to the provisions of this Act and the regulations, if any, made thereunder, the
principal employer shall, in the case of an employee directly employed by him
(not being an exempted employee), be entitled to recover from the employee the
employee's contribution by deduction from his wages and not otherwise:
        Provided that no such deduction shall be made from any wages other than
such as relate to the period or part of the period in respect of which the
contribution is payable, or in excess of the sum representing the employee's
contribution for the period.
        (3) Notwithstanding any contract to the contrary neither the principal
employer nor the immediate employer shall be entitled to deduct the employer's
contribution from any wages payable to an employee or otherwise to recover it
from him.
        (4) Any sum deducted by the principal employer from wages under this Act
shall be deemed to have been entrusted to him by the employee for the purpose of
paying the contribution in respect of which it was deducted.
        (5) The principal employer shall bear the expenses of remitting the
contributions to the Corporation."
        Section 44 of the Act reads as follows:
        "44. Employers to furnish returns and maintain registers in certain
cases:-1) Every principal and immediate employer shall submit to the Corporation
or to such officer of the Corporation as it may direct such returns in such form
and containing such particulars relating to persons employed by him or to any
factory or establishment in respect of which he is the principal or immediate
employer as may be specified in regulations made in this behalf.
        (2) Where in respect of any factory or establishment the Corporation has
reason to believe that a return should have been submitted under sub-section (1)
but has not been so submitted, the Corporation may require any person in charge
of the factory or establishment to furnish such particulars as it may consider
necessary for the purpose of enabling the Corporation to decide whether the
factory or establishment is a factory or establishment to which this Act
applies.
        (3) Every principal and immediate employer shall maintain such registers
or records in respect of his factory or establishment as may be required by
regulations made in this behalf."
        As per the above Sections, when once the employer failed to remit the
amount within the stipulated period under the Act, he is liable to punishment.
Under Section 85 (a) and (e) of the Act, simply because the employer remitted
the amount immediately after receipt of the summons, will not exonerate the
accused from prosecution.  Therefore, the finding of the lower Court that there
are no mala fides or criminal intention on the part of the accused for failing
to pay the contribution amount within the stipulated time is not correct.  I am
therefore inclined to set aside the same but by taking into consideration the
payment of the contribution and filing of the returns before attending the Court
immediately after receiving summons, while imposing sentence on the accused. 
        In the result, the Criminal Appeal is allowed. The acquittal recorded by
the lower Court through the judgment dated
10-02-2003 is set aside.  The accused is convicted for the offences punishable
under Section 85 (a) and (e) of the Act.  Since the accused remitted the amount
immediately after receipt of the summons from this Court and submitted the
returns, I am inclined to take a lenient view in the matter.  Though a minimum
sentence of imprisonment is prescribed under the Act, for the reasons recorded
above, I am inclined to impose a fine of Rs.1,000/- under each count.  If the
accused fails to pay the amount, he shall suffer simple imprisonment for one
month on each count.  The fine shall be paid within a period of two weeks from
today.

