

THE HON'BLE SRI.JUSTICE P.S.NARAYANA         
Civil Revision Petition No.1005 of 2007

16-09-2008 

NALLAMALA PADMAJA       

NALLAMALA RAMESH       

COUNSEL FOR THE PETITIONER:   Ms. W.V.S.RAJESWARI           

COUNSEL FOR THE RESPONDENT: Mr. P.PRABHAKAR REDDY                

:ORDER:  

1.      Heard Ms.W.V.S.Rajeswari, learned counsel representing the revision
petitioner and Mr.P.Prabhakar Reddy, learned counsel representing the
respondent.
2.      The civil revision petition is filed against the order, dated 18.1.2007,
in I.A.No.1928 of 2006 in O.P.No.1146 of 2006 on the file of the I Additional
District Judge, Khammam.  The revision petitioner filed the said application
being the mother of the minor female child by name Pranavi for temporary custody
under Section 12(1) of Guardians and Wards Act, 1890 read with Section 151
C.P.C.  The learned I Additional District Judge, Khammam, after referring the
respective stands taken by the parties having formulated the point for
consideration at para 6 and further recording certain reasons after referring to
certain decisions which had been relied upon, came to the conclusion that there
is no merit in the application filed by the mother of the ward for interim
custody of her daughter and ultimately dismissed the said application.
Aggrieved by the same, the present CRP had been preferred. 
3.      Ms.W.V.S.Rajeswari, learned counsel representing the revision petitioner
would maintain that the paramount consideration of the welfare of the minor
while giving custody to be taken into consideration.  The learned counsel also
pointed out to certain of the findings which had been recorded while deciding
the matter and would maintain that at this age keeping the minor female child in
a residential school may not be just and proper.  The learned counsel also
pointed out to certain orders, which had been made in this regard and ultimately
would make a request that in the facts and circumstances of the case suitable
directions to be given to safeguard the interests of the minor female child.
The learned counsel also placed reliance on certain decisions to substantiate
her submissions. 
4.      On the contrary, Mr.P.Prabhakar Reddy, learned counsel representing the
respondent would maintain that it is no doubt true that the child is a female
child and the counsel also would maintain that it is not as though the female
child is of very very tender age, but sufficiently grown up of age of 12 years
at present.  The learned counsel also would maintain that in fact recently the
learned Magistrate interviewed the minor female child and recorded reason to the
effect that she was not willing to go with the mother, when that being so, when
the respondent-father is looking after the welfare of the child having admitted
her into a decent school, giving good education, it cannot be said that the
respondent-father is not looking after the welfare of the child, in fact the
father is the natural guardian, may be after the father the mother may be the
natural guardian.  Even otherwise, the learned counsel would maintain inasmuch
as the O.P. is of the year 2006 instead of deciding this application at this
stage, it would be just and proper to issue suitable directions for disposal of
the O.P. itself at an early date.  The learned counsel also placed strong
reliance on several decisions to substantiate his submissions.
5.      Heard the learned counsel.  Perused the record and the order impugned in
the present civil revision petition.
6.      The petitioner, wife of the respondent, filed I.A.No.1928 of 2006 in
O.P.No.1146 of 2006 on the file of the I Additional District Judge, Khammam, for
temporary custody of the female child by name Pranavi.  It is stated that the
said Pranavi is of 12 years age at present.  It is stated by the revision
petitioner that the parents and sister-in-law of the respondent necked away the
petitioner and her minor son and demand additional dowry of Rs.12,00,000/- and
they had retained the minor daughter threatening that they would not give the
child till the additional dowry is paid.  The petitioner secured private
employment and she is looking after the welfare of the minor son.  She filed a
report under Sections 498-A and 506 IPC in Crime No.73 of 2006, the respondent,
his sister and his parents remanded to judicial custody on 10.10.2006.  The said
Pranavi who was in the hands of the respondent has stated to the learned
Magistrate that the petitioner may beat her.  In such circumstances, the learned
Magistrate delivered the said ward to the custody of the Principal, Gowtham
Concept School at Gudivada wherein she was studying V standard vide orders dated 
19.10.2006 in Crl.M.P.No.993 of 2006 in Cr.No.73 of 2006.  It is stated at the
relevant point of time, she was staying in the said school and at present she is
studying in Triveni Talent School, a residential school at Kothagudem.  It is
also stated that the respondent married the petitioner on 9.11.1995.  They lead
happy married life for five years.  They begot Pranavi on 4.1.1997 and Nowhith
on 20.9.2000.  The respondent previously used to work in M/s.Sangfroid Remedies
Ltd., at Kottur, Mahaboobnagar District.  Later he left the said job and went to
Muscat and returned in June, 2002.  He did not take care of the petitioner and
her children while he was at Muscat.  Therefore for sometime she along with her
children stayed in the house of her mother and for sometime she stayed in the
house of parents of respondent. Therefore her parent-in-law, their two
daughters, husband of her elder sister-in-law used to harass her mentally, later
the respondent returned to India.  He started ill-treating her.  He demanded
Rs.12,00,000/- for starting a business.  He necked out her and her son in
August, 2003.  She joined her parents at Nellipaka.  Later she resided at her
brother's house at Hyderabad.  Respondent filed M.O.P.No.99 of 2003 for
restitution of conjugal rights, but he took back her in the month of April,
2005.  Petitioner joined him since she was unaware of the pendency of
M.O.P.No.99 of 2003.  The respondent later demanded Rs.12,00,000/-.  He used to 
manhandle the petitioner.  He used to speak in low language.  He is having vices
such as drinking and extra marital relationships.  She got employment.  She is
capable of maintaining her children.  Respondent is unemployed.  He cannot see
the welfare of the minor daughter.  Without taking personal care, he admitted
his daughter in Gowtham Concept School at Gudiwada.  The ward is in need of her
mother's care since she is at the age of attaining puberty.
7.      The respondent filed counter denying the averments made in the affidavit
filed in support of the application.  It is stated that the respondent or his
relatives never demanded any dowry.  They never ill-treated the petitioner.
Petitioner is of adamant nature.  She is suffering neurological problems.
Respondent spent huge amounts for her neurological problems.  But she is not
using the medicines properly.  On account of neurology problems she used to ill-
treat her daughter.  She never took any proper care for her daughter.  She never
exhibited any love and affection for her daughter.  For the bright future of his
daughter, the respondent admitted her in Gowtham Concept School, Gudiwada in V  
class for the year 2005-2006 by spending huge amounts.  Petitioner presented a
false report in Crime No.73 of 2006 when the learned Magistrate, Bhadrachalam
questioned the ward when his parents and this respondent were remanded to 
judicial custody.  The learned Magistrate delivered the girl to the custody of
school after interviewing the ward.  As per the orders of the court, the
respondent is visiting the school and providing her all amenities and he is
looking after the welfare of the ward.  By suppressing all these facts,
petitioner filed the petition for temporary custody.  If the petitioner is at
clean hands, she would have filed an application before the court for production
of minor girl before the court for interview.  Since she is aware that the ward
dislikes her, she did not move the court for production of the baby.  The
certified copy of the order of the learned Magistrate and the medical record of
the petitioner are filed.
8.      The I Additional District Judge, Khammam had taken note of the fact that
the father might have spent considerable amount in seeing that the daughter will
educate in a good school and also had further taken note of the fact of the
learned Magistrate in fact interviewed the girl and found that she is not
willing to go along with the mother and further recorded certain reasons and
ultimately negatived the relief of interim custody of the ward.
9.      It is brought to the notice of this Court that in C.C.No.657 of 2007 this
Court for willful and deliberate violation of the order dated 23.4.2007 of this
Court, respondent is sentenced to simple imprisonment for two months and a fine
of Rs.2,000/-, in default simple imprisonment for two weeks.  It appears that in
CRPMP No.2276 of 2007 in the present CRP the following order was made by this  
Court:
"Therefore, with a direction to the Principal of the Gowtham Concept School,
Gudivada, to deliver custody of the minor girl N.Pranavi (Admission No.3999) to
the petitioner for her i.e., the minor to be in custody of the petitioner from
25.4.2007 to 25.5.2007, and with a direction to the petitioner to handover
custody of the minor girl to the respondent on 25.5.2007 and with a further
direction to the respondent to readmit the minor Pranavi into school on
17.6.2007, the petition is disposed of.  No costs."


10.     It is stated that instead of readmitting the minor girl in Gowtham Concept
School, she was admitted in a different school.  It is no doubt stated that this
was done in accordance with the wishes of the minor girl.  It is also brought to
the notice of this Court that the respondent herein filed C.A.No.3 of 2008 and
the order dated 9.7.2008 in C.C.No.657 of 2007 had been suspended by order dated 
22.7.2008.
11.     The said I.A.No.1928 of 2006 in O.P.No.1146 of 2006 is filed by the
revision petitioner-mother praying for granting of interim custody of the minor
female child.  While granting custody of a minor the paramount consideration to
be taken into consideration is the welfare of the minor child.  The twin reasons
which had been recorded by the learned I Additional District Judge, Khammam is
that the respondent-father has been spending considerable amount in seeing that
the child is properly educated and the other reason recorded is that when
recently the learned Magistrate interviewed the girl the learned Magistrate
found that she was not willing to join her mother and in view of the same there
is no need to interview the girl further while deciding the present application.
12.     In Githa Hariharan v. Reserve Bank of India1 the Apex Court at para 44
observed as under:
"The expression 'natural guardian' has been defined in Section 4(c) as noticed
above to mean any of the guardians as mentioned in Section 6 of the Act of 1956.
This section refers to three classes of guardians, viz., father, mother and in
the case of a married girl, the husband.  The father and mother, therefore, are
natural guardians in terms of the provisions of Section 6 read with Section
4(c).  Incidentally, it is to be noted that in the matter of interpretation of a
statute, the same meaning ought to be attributed to the same word used by the
statute as per the definition section.  In the event, the word "guardian" in the
definition section means and implies both the parents, the same meaning ought to
be attributed to the word appearing in Section 6(a) and in that perspective, the
mother's right to act as the guardian does not stand obliterated during the
lifetime of the father and to read the same on the statute otherwise would
tantamount to a violent departure from the legislative intent.  Section 6(a)
itself recognizes that both the father and the mother ought to be treated as
natural guardians and the expression "after" therefore shall have to be read and
interpreted in a manner so as not to defeat the true intent of the legislature".

13.     In Lekha v. P.Anil Kumar2 the Apex Court at paras 17 and 18 observed as
under:
"According to the Hindu Law, the natural guardian of a minor child is the
father.  In the next place, the guardian of a child is the mother.  The very
principle of guardianship is that there is a presumption that parents will be
able to exercise good care in the welfare of their children if they do not
happen to be unsuitable as guardians.

The law permits a person to have the custody of his minor child.  The father
ought to be the guardian of the person and property of the minor under ordinary
circumstances.  The fact that the mother has married again after the divorce of
her first husband is no ground for depriving the mother of her parental right of
custody.  In cases like the present one, the mother may have shortcomings but
that does not imply that she is not deserving of the solace and custody of her
child.  If the Court forms the impression that the mother is a normal and
independent young woman and show no indication of imbalance of mind in her, then
in the end the custody of the minor child should not be refused to her or else
we would be really assenting to the proposition that a second marriage involving
a mother per se will operate adversely to a claim of a mother for the custody of
her minor child.  We are fortified in this view by the authority of the Madras
High Court in Sura Reddy v. Chenna Reddy (AIR 1950 Madras 306) where Govinda   
Menon and Basheer Ahmed Syed, JJ have clearly laid down that the father ought to
be a guardian of the person and property of the minor under ordinary
circumstances and that fact a Hindu father has married a second wife is no
ground whatever for depriving him of his parental right of custody."


14.     Reliance was also placed in Dhanwanti Joshi v. Madhav Unde3 while dealing
with child custody and also visitation rights the Apex Court after referring to
several decisions observed at paras 34 and 35 as under:
"On the facts of his case, we are not inclined to grant temporary custody to the
respondent to take the child from India.  That would affect the child's studies
and further there is an ex parte order of the US Court giving permanent custody
to the father and if that order is executed by the respondent, there is danger
of the boy not returning to India thus frustrating any order that we are asked
to pass giving temporary custody to the respondent.

As to visitation rights, of course, the respondent can be given, as long as he
wants to visit the child in India, at Pune.  So far as this aspect is concerned,
the point has not been argued before us elaborately but, in case the respondent
is coming of India, he could, in advance of at least 4 weeks, intimate in
writing to his counsel either at Bombay/Delhi with copy to the address of the
appellant /child and if that is done, the appellant shall positively respond in
writing.  We grant visitation rights for three hours per day twice a week (for
weeks) at a time and venue at Pune to be agreed by counsel and the appellant,
and this shall be at a place at Pune where the counsel or their representatives
are necessarily present at or near the venue.  The respondent shall not be
entitled to take the child out from the said venue.  The appellant shall take
all such steps to comply with the above visitation rights of the respondent.  It
will also be open to the parties to move this Court for any other directions in
regard to these visitation rights."


15.     The Division Bench of this Court in M.Venkata Mani Kanthu and another v.
Nil4 while dealing with the appointment as guardian of minor children observed
at paras 15 and 18 observed as under:
"Section 8 of the HMG Act, which deals with the powers of natural guardian,
postulates that natural guardian of a Hindu minor, will primarily be the
'father' of the minor, subject to the limitations contained in Section 6 of the
HMG Act.  If the natural guardian of the minor is the father, subject to the
limitations contained in Section 6 of the HMG Act, the father of the minor shall
obtain the previous permission of the Court in case the property of the minor is
to be mortgaged, transferred, gifted or leased out etc.

In the instant case, the first thing that is to be noticed is that the admitted
ages of the minors are - 15 years (girl) and 17 years (boy).  In such an event,
it is only the father who has to be treated as the natural guardian of the
minors for the purpose of filing an application under Section 7 of the GW Act,
but not the mother of the minors."


16.     Further reliance was placed on the decision of the Division Bench of this
Court in Manchala Hushikesh v. Terala Pradeep Kumar and others5 wherein the 
Division Bench observed as paras 22 and 32 as under:
"From the above, it is clear that the father is the guardian of the minor until
he is found unfit to be the guardian of he minor. The welfare of the minor is
paramount consideration while ordering their custody.  In view of the Section 25
of the Act, the onus is on the person who opposes the application by a guardian
for the custody of a ward under this section to make out that the welfare of the
wards be better served by its being kept out of the custody of its guardian and
retained in the custody of the person against whom the application is made.
This onus is particularly heavy when the guardian is the father of the child.
Likewise, under Section 19 the burden of proof to deny the natural father the
custody of his child would be very heavy to establish his unfitness and the
Court will require very strong reasons for interference with the father's right
to custody.  In the facts and circumstances of the present case, it is in this
background of the legal position we have to analyse the evidence adduced, both
oral as well as documentary, to prove the unfitness or otherwise of the father
and also see whether the welfare of the child would be better served in the
hands of the father or the respondents.

The another reason given by the trial Court is that the evidence brought on
record clearly shows that the appellant did not evince any interest in the minor
children and it is only when the minor wards are showing proficiency in the
dancing and singing, the petitioner came up with this application belatedly.
The trial Court has not recorded any specific finding about the unfitness of the
natural father as required under Section 19 of the Act, and in the absence of
any evidence regarding the unfitness of the father, the trial Court was not
justified in denying the custody to the petitioner.  The petitioner-natural
father has invested a sum of Rs.1,00,000/- each in favour of the wards, claiming
no right or interest in the said money.  Added to that, there appears to be no
evidence on record that the petitioner remarried again.  A careful perusal of
the evidence on record also does not give an impression that the interests of
the minors would not be served if they are given custody to the petitioner.  In
the circumstances stated above, in our view, the Court below erred in rejecting
the petition filed by the natural father claiming custody of the children from
the maternal uncle of the wards.  Considering the totality of the circumstances,
we hold that the petitioner is entitled to seek the custody of the minor
children."

17.     The learned counsel also placed reliance on Dr.Mrs.Veena Kapoor v.
Varinder Kumar Kapoor6 and also Thrity Hoshie Dolikuka v. Hoshiam Shavaksha  
Dolikuka7.  In V.V.Narasaiah v. C.P.Raju8 the Division Bench of this Court at
paras 6 and 11 observed as under:
"The learned counsel for the appellant contends that even though the father is
not unfit to be the guardian of the minor girl, the paramount consideration for
handing over the custody of the minor is the welfare of the minor.  The father
no doubt has a legal right but that right is always subservient to the welfare
of the minor.  If the Court finds that it will not be in the interest of the
minor or conducive to its welfare to entrust it to the custody of the father,
the mere fact that the father has a legal right to the guardianship of the
minor, is of no consequence.  It is contended that admittedly the minor girl has
been living with the grand mother ever since the death of her mother in the
month of May 1962.  At the time when the application was filed i.e., in the year
1964, two years had passed and now when we are considering the matter, more than  
7 years have elapsed that the child has been continuously living with the
grandmother.  The grandmother and the child were both present in the Court
throughout the hearing of the appeal and we saw the obvious attachment of the
child to her grandmother.

It is quite clear that as the child is with the grandmother right from her
infancy, she does not know her father.  It is also an admitted fact that the
father was married in about May, 1963 and that at the time when the matter was
decided by the lower court in the year 1968 he had two children by his third
wife.  It is also in evidence that the respondent has a daughter by his first
wife who is living all along with his brother's wife and there was no attempt by
the respondent to get the custody of that child.  There are no allegations made
against the father that he is not fit to be the guardian as he has no means to
look after the welfare of the child.  The main point that is advanced for
consideration is that after the custody of the minor girl is handed over to the
father, she has to live with the stepmother and her stepbrother and sister.  It
is a matter of common knowledge that the child will not get the same care and
affection from the stepmother as she would have from her mother's mother, the
appellant.

No doubt the mere fat that the father has married again, is no ground to
disqualify him from the guardianship of the minor girl; but that is a factor
which has to be taken into consideration while ascertaining whether it will be
in the interest of the minor that the custody should be handed over to the
father.  Distinction will also have to be drawn between the custody of a male
child and the custody of a female child.  Even in tender years, it is a matter
of common knowledge that male child spends most of his time outside the house 
and comes into contact with the stepmother only for a limited time.  That is not
the case with a female child.  In the case of female child for every want of
hers, she has to look to her stepmother and there are certain wants of hers
which cannot be administered by the father at all.  It was argued that the law
has not made any distinction between the custody of male child and the custody
of female child.  But the law has laid down that the welfare of the child is the
paramount consideration and in determining the welfare of the child, sex of the
child will necessarily have to be taken into consideration.
        
The position has become clearer by the provisions of the Hindu Minority and
Guardianship Act, 1956 (hereinafter referred to as the Hindu Minority Act).
Section 2 of this Act states that the provisions of the Hindu Minority Act shall
be in addition to and not save as expressly provided in derogation of the
Guardians and Wards Act, 1890.  Sections of the Hindu Minority Act will have to
be read as in addition to the provisions of the Guardians and Wards Act, 1890.
Section 13 of the Hindu Minority Act reads:

"(1) In the appointment or declaration of any person as guardian of a Hindu
minor should be the paramount consideration".

This provision clearly shows that even in spite of the provisions of Section 19
of the Act, while appointing or declaring a guardian the Court, in case of
Hindus will have to take into consideration the provisions of Section 13 of the
Hindu Minority Act.  The paramount consideration for appointment or declaration
of guardian is the welfare of the minor.  The position of law even prior to the
enactment of Section 13 of the Hindu Minority Act was that the father's right to
the custody of his minor child was not absolute and was subservient to the
paramount consideration of the welfare of the minor.  That position has been
made very clear by the provisions of Section 13 of the Hindu Minority Act.  We
are supported in this observation of ours by a decision of the Punjab High Court
in Rattan Amol Singh v. Kamaljit Kaur, AIR 1961 Punj. 51.  The learned Judges
held:

"Reading the relevant sections of these statutes (Hindu Minority Act and
Guardians and Wards Act) together the benefit of the minor is the dominant and
paramount consideration and if the circumstances so warrant the father's prayer
under Section 25 of the Guardians and Wards Act can legitimately be disallowed
in the better interest of the minor's welfare.

The father's right to the custody of his minor child is not absolute; nor is it
indefeasible in law; it is circumscribed by the consideration of the beneficial
welfare of the minor.  This was the position even before the enactment of the
Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act; but by enacting this provision the
Parliament has unambiguously indicated in the clearest language, by providing in
the statute that even in the appointment and declaration of the guardian of a
minor the paramount consideration is the welfare of the minor concerned".

That being the position in law, what we have to consider is whether it will be
for the welfare of the minor that she is removed from the custody of the
grandmother and handed over to the custody of the father where she will have to
live with her stepmother.  Certain decisions were relied upon by the learned
counsel for the appellant to show that the very fact that there is a stepmother
is a sufficient ground to deny the father the custody of the child.  Those
decisions are: Muthuverappa Chetti v. Ponnuswmy Chetti (1912) 13 Ind Cas 16 
(Mad) and AIR  1935 Mad 63. In both these decisions the question for
consideration was the welfare of a minor girl. The learned counsel for the
respondent relied upon Gummalapudi Kalidas v. Attaluri Subbamma (1884) ILR 7 Mad  
29; AIR 1916 Mad 605 and AIR 1929 Mad 81, where it was held that the mere  
existence of step mother is not sufficient to hold that it will not be for the
welfare of the minor that the custody of the child should be handed over to the
father.  It has to be noted that all the cases cited by the learned counsel for
the respondent relate to the custody of the male child".

18.     The Division Bench in fact had referred to Rattan Amol Singh v. Kamaljit
Kaur (1961) AIR 1961 Punj 51; Soora Reddi v. Chenna Reddi (1950) AIR 1950 Mad  
306; Ponniah Asari v. Suppiah Asari (1935) AIR 1935 Mad 363; Atchayya v. 
Kosaraju Narhari (1929) AIR 1929 Mad 81; Audiappa Pillai v. Nallendran Pillai
(1916) AIR 1916 Mad 605; Muthuveerappa Chetti v. Ponnuswami Chetti (1912) 22 Mad   
L.J. 68 and Gummalapudi Kalidas v. Attaluri Subbamma (1884) ILR 7 Mad. 29. 
19.     It is no doubt true that the respondent-husband the father of minor child
had contravened the order made by this Court and he is found guilty of contempt
of court and no doubt it is stated in the interest of the welfare of the minor
girl and in accordance with the wishes of the minor child only this had been
done.  This Court is not inclined to express any opinion relating to the said
aspect since it is stated C.A.No.3 of 2008 is said to be pending.  The O.P.
itself is of the year 2006.   It is stated that the main relief prayed for in
the O.P. itself is for the custody of the minor female child by name Pranavi by
the petitioner mother.  It is needless to say while deciding the interlocutory
application praying for temporary custody on the strength of the respective
stands taken by the parties and on the material available on record certain
findings would be recorded for the purpose of disposing of the interlocutory
application.  It is needless to say when parties adduced evidence, the learned I
Additional District Judge, Khammam might have to decide the main O.P. in the
light of the evidence, which may be adduced by the parties, not being influenced
by any of the findings recorded while deciding the interlocutory application.
However, in the light of the convincing reasons which had been recorded by the
learned I Additional District Judge, Khammam, especially the twin reasons which
had been referred to above that the respondent, the father of the minor girl is
looking after the minor girl by spending considerable amount in seeing that the
girl is well educated and also the other reasons recorded that the minor girl
expressed her unwillingness to go along with the mother before the learned
Magistrate, this Court as a revisional court cannot find fault with the order
made by the      learned I Additional District Judge, Khammam.  However, it is
stated that under the peculiar circumstances when such view was expressed by the 
minor child at the relevant point of time before the learned Magistrate, it is
needless to say that the learned I Additional District Judge, Khammam is at
liberty to interview the minor female child by name Pranavi in the event of the
learned I Additional District Judge, Khammam, requiring to do so in the facts
and circumstances of the case.  However, it is brought to the notice of this
Court that the minor female child is being retained by the respondent father
only with a view to adopt blackmailing tactics to extract some money from the
revision petitioner-mother.  This is only an assertion and this Court is not
inclined to express any opinion relating to this aspect.
20.     In the overall facts and circumstances of the case, this Court is inclined
to dispose of the civil revision petition with the following directions:
1. Let the revision petitioner-mother of the minor female child Pranavi be
permitted to visit the said minor on every Sunday with the permission of the
Head of the Institution of Triveni Talent School, Kothagudem.
2. If holidays intervene, let the revision petitioner visit the minor female
child Pranavi on any convenient day after obtaining prior permission from the
Head of the Institution at the convenience of both the minor child and the
mother as per the wishes of the minor child.
3. Let the O.P.No.1146 of 2006 itself be disposed of within a period of three
months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
21.     The civil revision petition is accordingly disposed of as indicated above.
No order as to costs.

?1 (1999) 2 SCC 228 
2 2006 (12) Scale
3 1997 (9) Supreme 220 
4 2005 (5) ALD 4 (DB)
5 2001 (3) ALD 454 (DB) 
6 AIR 1982 SC 792  
7 AIR 1982 SC  1276 
8 AIR 1971 AP 134  

