

THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE A. GOPAL REDDY AND THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE VILAS V.               
Criminal Appeal No.1339 of 2006 

24-12-2008 

Gangula Venkateswara Reddy and others.   

State of Andhra Pradesh represented by  Inspector of Police, Kurnool Taluq
Police Station, Kurnool District.

Counsel for appellants: Sri C.Padmanabha Reddy, 
                        learned  Senior Counsel for
                        Sri C. Praveen Kumar 

Counsel for respondents:  Additional Public Prosecutor

:Oral Judgment: (Per Hon'ble Sri Justice A.Gopal Reddy)

                  This appeal under Section 374 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure is preferred by A-1, A-2, A-4 to A-6 against the judgment dt. 18-9-
2006 passed in SC ST SC No.32/2005 on the file of Special Judge for SC & ST 
(POA) Act-cum-VI Additional District & Sessions Judge, Kurnool.
                    The appellants/A-1, A-2, A4 to A-6 along with A-3 who were
tried for the offences punishable under Section 302 IPC, alternatively, under
Sec. 3(2)(v) of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities)
Act, 1989 (for short "the Act") and 148 IPC.  The learned trial court convicted
the appellants for the offence under Section 3 (2) (v) of the Act and Sec.148
IPC and sentenced them to suffer rigorous imprisonment for life and to pay  fine
of Rs.1000/- each in default to suffer simple imprisonment for a period of six
months each and further convicted  them for the offence under Sc. 148 IPC and
sentenced them to suffer rigorous imprisonment for a period of  one year and to
pay a fine of Rs.500/- each in default to suffer simple imprisonment for a
period of three months each by  the impugned judgment.
                The substance of the charge against the accused is that on 6-3-2004
near the field of Balija Veerappa in between Obulapuram and Thadakanapalli
villages, they committed murder of Rogenna, who belonged to a member of 
Scheduled Caste, (hereinafter referred to as "the deceased") intentionally by
beating and stabbing him with pattudu sticks and knife.
                The case of the prosecution in brief is that, A-1 committed rape on
one Rani, who is the daughter of the junior paternal uncle of the deceased
Rogenna, for which the deceased  was eye witness. A case in crime in
Cr.No.19/2002 under Section 376 IPC was registered against A-1. After committal,
the case ie., SC No.1/2003 was coming up for trial on 4-3-2004. A-1 and his
relatives mooted a compromise with the deceased, for which, the deceased put a
condition that A-1 should marry the victim girl Rani by taking Rs.25,000/- as
dowry. A-1 and his relatives did not accept the   proposal of the deceased on
the ground that Rani belonged to Scheduled Caste. Due to that  they gave threat
to the deceased. As there was no compromise in SC No.1/2003, the case was   
adjourned to 8-3-2004. While so on 6-3-2004, the deceased and his brother
Harijana Sagidipogu Yesanna @ Sanjanna (P.W.1) went to their field at about 5 PM
to watch the ground nut crop.  The land of Harijana Sagidipogu Ramudu (P.W.2),
who is the son of the junior paternal uncle of the deceased, is also situated by
the side of the land of P.W.1. After sitting for some time at their field, the
deceased P.Ws.1 and 2 were proceeding to the village on their moped, which was 
driven by the deceased. At about 7 PM  when they reached near the land of Balija
Veeramma, A-1 to A-6 formed themselves into an unlawful assembly armed with  
sticks and knives stopped the moped. Immediately after stopping the vehicle,
P.Ws.1 and 2 got down from the vehicle. A-1 and A-2 beat the deceased with
sticks on the back of the head and caused him injuries. Then A-3 to A-6 attacked
the deceased and beat him and stabbed him with sticks and daggers. All the
accused threw the dead body of the deceased into a pit by the side of the road.
After damaging the moped they threw it in the land of Veeramma and went away 
from that place. P.Ws.1 and 2 went near the deceased and found him dead. Due to 
fear, P.Ws.1 and 2 went back to their field where the father of deceased-P.W.3
was staying and informed him of the incident. On his advise, out of fear, they
remained at the field till the next day morning.  On the next day morning,
P.Ws.1 to 3 came to the scene of offence and found the dead body. P.Ws.1 and 2 
while keeping P.W.3 to watch the dead body went  into the village and  informed
the incident to the wife of the deceased and her relatives.   Thereupon, P.W.1
went to the police station and gave Ex.P-1 written complaint before the
Assistant Sub-Inspector of Police-P.W.11 on 7-3-2004 at 7 AM. On which basis he 
registered a case in Cr.No.11/2004 under Sections 147, 148, 302 IPC r/w 149 IPC
and Sec. 3(2)(v) of the Act and submitted First Information Report covered under
Ex.P-15 to all concerned. He informed the registration of crime to P.Ws.13 and
14. P.W.13-Inspector of Police on receipt of information from P.W.11 reached the
scene of offence situated in between Tadakanapalli and Obulapuram village at 9
AM, conducted inquest over the dead body of the deceased in the presence of
P.W.9, P.Ws.10 and 11, examined P.Ws.1 to 5 and recorded their statements. The   
inquest report is marked as Ex.P-12.  He seized the material objects from the
scene of offence including one dagger, and prepared rough sketch of the scene of
offence covered under Ex.P17. He got the scene of offence photographed. He sent
all the material objects  to the Forensic Science Laboratory. He also sent the
dead body of the deceased for post-mortem examination. P.W.12-Pofessor and Head   
of the Department of Forensic Department, Kurnool Medical College conducted 
autopsy over the dead body the deceased and issued Ex.P-16-Post mortem report  
opining that the cause of death was due to shock and hemorrhage due to multiple
injuries.
                Since the case has to be investigated by an officer not below the
rank of Sub-Divisional Police Officer, P.W.14-Deputy Superintendent of Police
took up investigation and examined P.Ws.1 to 5 and 7 and recoded their
statements.  He arrested A-1 to A-6 on          9-3-2004 and after completion of
investigation and after receiving relevant reports, P.W.14 filed charge sheet
before the Judicial Magistrate of First Class, Kurnool. The learned Magistrate
took the charge-sheet on file as PRC No.5/2005 and made over the same to the 
Special Judge for SC & ST (POA) Act since the offence is exclusively triable by
Special Judge. The learned Special Judge took the case on file as SC ST SC
No.32/2005.  While A-3 was in judicial custody he died on 25-3-2004. On
committal, learned Special Judge framed charge under Sec.302 IPC  or
alternatively under Section 3(2)(v) of the Act and Sec.148 IPC, read over and
explained to the accused in Telugu. They pleaded not guilty.
                In order to prove its case, the prosecution examined 15 witnesses
and marked 26 documents and exhibited 15 material objects. On behalf of the
defence, no witness was examined, but Exs.D-1to D-3, relevant portions in
Sec.161 Cr.P.Cs., statements of P.Ws.1 to 3 respectively were marked. 
                Learned Special Judge though held that the prosecution established
to prove the guilt of the accused in committing the murder of the deceased
convicted them for the offence under Sec. 3(2)(v) of the Act and since the
accused were convicted for the offence under Sec. 3(2)(v) of the Act, no
conviction need be given for the offence under Sec.302 IPC. Learned Special
Judge further found the accused guilty for the offence under Sec. 148 IPC and
convicted accordingly. They were sentenced to imprisonment as aforementioned. 
Hence, this criminal appeal by A-1, A-2, A-4 to A-6.
                Sri C.Padmanabha Reddy, learned Senior Counsel for the appellants 
contended that in the absence of any conviction for the offence under Sec. 302
IPC, the appellants cannot be convicted for the offence under Sec. 3(2)(v) of
the Act on the ground that the deceased belonged to Scheduled Castes. For the
said proposition, he placed reliance on the judgment of the Supreme Court in
MASUMSHA HASANASHA MUSALMAN V. STATE OF MAHARASHTRA1. He further contended that                   
P.Ws.1 and 2 are planted witnesses for the prosecution as they have not lodged
report promptly with the police, though they witness the incident at 7 PM on 6-
3-2004 report was lodged 12 hours after the incident ie., 7 AM on 7-3-2004,
which improbabilises their presence and witnessing the incident. Further earlier
statement recorded under Sec. 161 Cr.P.C., by P.W.13-Inspector of Police has not
been produced nor furnished to the accused, and due to non-supply of the same,
the accused have deprived of their valuable right to cross-examine the
prosecution witnesses. Once Sec. 161 Cr.P.C., statement   is suppressed, a
presumption has to be drawn that the same is favouable to the accused. When 
P.W.14 admitted of recording statements of P.Ws.1 to 5 on 7-3-2004 which are the
earliest statements and which fact has also been admitted by him during the
course of trial, failure to supply the statements is fatal to the prosecution
case, therefore, the accused are entitled to acquittal. For the said
proposition,  he placed reliance on the judgment of his Court NANDIKANUMA 
LAKSHMAMMA  V. STATE OF ANDHRA PRADESH2.             
                Learned Additional Public Prosecutor appearing for the State, on the
other hand,  while supporting the judgment under appeal contended that the
accused have not complained of any prejudice before the trial court nor any
suggestion was made  to P.Ws.13 and 14 for non supply of statements recorded by  
them caused any prejudice. P.Ws.1 and 2 who are natural eye witnesses to the 
incident are going along with the deceased and witnessed incident. In SC
No.1/2003, A-1 is an accused for the offence under Sc.376, in which the deceased
was an eye witness, the prosecution established the motive of A-1 in eliminating
the deceased. P.Ws.1 to 3 were afraid to report the matter to the police as the
accused were armed with sticks and  daggers, hence mere delay in lodging report
is not fatal to the case of the prosecution.
                In the light of the rival submissions, the point that arises for
consideration in this appeal is: Whether the prosecution  is able to prove the
guilt of the accused  for the commission of the offence under Indian Penal Code
beyond reasonable doubt and whether for the offence under Indian Penal Code,
conviction and sentence imposed  for the offence under Sec. 3(2)(v) of the Act
by the court below is sustainable or not?
                P.W.1, who is the younger brother of the deceased, sets the criminal
law into motion by lodging a written complaint to P.W.11 at 7 AM on 7-3-2004, on
which basis P.W.11 registered a case in Cr.No.11/2004 under Sections 147, 148,
302 IPC r/w 149 IPC and Sec. 3(2)(v) of the Act and issued FIR covered under
Ex.P-5.  P.W.11 admitted in his cross examination that there is a difference in
between the signature appearing on Ex.P-15 and the signature appearing on Ex.P-
1. He also admitted that in Ex.P-1, it is not mentioned that Somanna asked the
deceased to enter into compromise with the accused in the rape case against A-1.
He reached the scene of offence prior to the arrival of CI to the scene.  P.W.1
deposed that he knows all the accused. A-2 is the elder brother of A-1. A-3 is
the father of            A-1. A-4 is the junior paternal uncle of A-1. A-5 is
the son of senior paternal uncle of A-1. A-6 is the relative of A-1. Two years
prior to the date of the death of the deceased, the daughter of his junior
paternal uncle by name Rani was raped by A-1 in their village, for which the
deceased was the witness in that case. A-1 refused to accept the proposal and
told him that he would see his end for making such a proposal by stating that
"how dare enough to ask him to marry Rani who belonged to Scheduled Caste".  On  
4-3-2004 his brother attended the court but the case was adjourned to 8-3-2004
as the accused failed to attend the court. On 6-3-2004 himself, the deceased and
his brother, Ramudu, went to their field, situated near Obulapuam village at 4-
30 PM on moped, there he talked to his father and Junior paternal uncle.  While
himself and the deceased were returning home by 6-30 PM, P.W.2, the son of his 
junior paternal uncle followed them in the same moped, driven by the deceased.
When they reached  the field of Balija Veeramma at about 7 PM  A-1 to A-6 came 
to them and stopped the moped. A-1 to A-4 came there with sticks and  A-5 and A-
6  with daggers. Seeing them, himself and P.W.2 got down and went  by the side
of the road. Immediately, thereafter A-1 and A-2 beat the deceased on the back
of the head of the deceased and the remaining four accused stabbed him with
daggers. Thereafter A-5 and A-6 stabbed the deceased on the right side of his
neck and on the right side of his abdomen. After he fell down, the accused on
thinking that he died threw him into a road side ditch.
Thereafter, on cutting away the wires of the moped threw  it into near by field
of Balija Veeramma. After all the accused went of the place, himself and P.W.2
went to their field, where his father P.W.3 was present and they informed him of
the death of the deceased. He asked them to stay in the field due to fear of the
accused. On the next day  morning, himself, P.Ws.2 and 3 came  to the dead body 
of the deceased  and  keeping P.W.3 there itself, himself and P.W.2 went to the
village and informed   about the death of the deceased to his sister-in-law and
his mother. Thereafter himself and P.W.2 went to the police station and he
lodged a report covered under Ex.P-1 to the police. After lodging Ex.P-1, police
came to the village and recorded his statement near the dead body. He also
recorded the statement of P.W.2 and his father. On the next day, he conducted
inquest over the dead body of the deceased and seized M.Os.1 to 15. On the next
day Deputy Superintendent of Police recorded his statement. His statement under
Section 164 Cr.P.C., was recorded by the Magistrate at Kurnool.  In the cross-
examination, he admitted that the distance between Kurnool and Chinnatakur my be 
about 10 to 12 KMs.  The field of Veeramma is situated at a distance of 2
furlongs from Gungulonikunta. The village Obulapuram is at a distance of one to
two furlongs from the field of Veeramma ie., the place where the offence alleged
to have taken place. Their field may be at a distance of 11/2 furlong from the
temple of Anajneyaswamy. He did not state before the police that himself and his
elder brother Rogenna went to the field on the date of offence at 2 PM. After
coolies left the field, himself and his father remained there and were talking
to each other. They were in the field upto 6-30 PM and left the field. There
were houses upto Obulpuram village. At a distance of 100 meters from the houses,
there is a school. They travelled to a distance of 3 furlongs from their field
to reach the field of Veeramma. There is a public telephone booth in their
village. There is telephone connection to the house of his deceased brother and
there may be telephone connection in Obulapurm village.  The bus which goes to
Bairapuram has to go to Tadakanapalli along their field. The said bus comes to
their village at 7 AM and the last bus comes to Bairapuram at 8 PM and leaves
Bairapuram at 8-30 PM for Kurnool.  Coolies of Bairapuram  as well as Obulpuram
attend to cooli work in their field. While the deceased was being beaten they
did not intervene as they were armed with daggers. They did not go to the field
where his father was available  along the road.  They did not try to inform
about the incident to anybody on phone by going to Obulapuram village.  Though
he did not mention in Ex.P-1 he stated before the police that his father advised
him not to go into the village after the incident. He does not remember whether
the deceased was the second accused in the murder case of Shabbir and he knows   
that the elder brother of Shabbir,  Meera Saheb was also murdered.  He also
admitted that a case was registered against him on the complaint of one Kistamma
alleging that he cheated her on collecting money from her as LIC Agent. He
admitted that while working under Prabhakar Reddy and thereafter he was having
cell phone. Even to-day he is having cell phone with him. After the offence, he
tried to contact police through cell phone but he could not get connection.
                P.W.2 who is the cousin of the deceased corroborated the
evidence of P.W.1 in all material particulars. In the cross-examination, he
admitted that while going to the field they have to cross Obulapuram village. By
the time when they reached the field of Balija Veeramma, A-1 to A-6 came there.
A-1 to A-4 were armed with pattudu sticks and A-5 and A-6 with daggers. He
cannot say which of the accused beat on which part of the deceased.  While the
deceased was being beaten by the accused they were standing at some distance and   
they did not run away due to fear.  After the accused leaving the place, they
went near the dead body to see it. After the incident   himself and his brother
did not talk to file a case. He did not inform about it by sending somebody else
to police station after going to Obulpuram. They informed about the death of the
deceased at about 7-30 or 8 PM.  Himself and P.W.1 did not ask his senior
paternal uncle and his father to inform about the death of the deceased to the
villagers in Tadakanaplli village.   While they were going to their field they
saw a bus was going to Kurnool from Bairapuram and it was passing at a distance
of 20 feet from their field.  In the house of the deceased and in his house
there are phones and the deceased was having cell phone in his pocket. They did
not take the cell phone from him.  During that time P.W.1 was also having cell
phone. Police came to their village on the next day morning. He cannot say which
police examined him. On the 2nd day of the incident, he was again examined by
some of the police.
                    P.W.3 who is the father of the deceased deposed that when he
went to his field to harvest ground nut crop, his younger brother and his son-
P.W.2 were present in the field. On that day, evening the deceased and P.W.1
came to  the field on a moped and were with him upto evening and thereafter they
went away on the moped.  After one hour, P.W.1 and 2 came to him and stated that 
sons of Venkateswara Reddy killed his son (deceased). He advised them to remain 
in the field. On the next day morning, himself, P.Ws.1 and 2 went to the dead
body of the deceased. He asked P.Ws.1 and 2 to go into the village to inform
about the death of the deceased while he remained at the dead body.  Police came
there and examined and recorded his statement. He admitted that he was examined  
by the police near the dead body.  His son-P.W.1 was also examined  near the
dead body and his signature was obtained on his statement. He admitted that on
information given by P.Ws.1 and 2 he thought of going to the dead body of the
deceased but he did not go due to fear of the accused. They did not go to
Obulapuram to inform about the death of the deceased. His deceased son was shown  
as accused in the murder case of Shabbir. P.W.4 is the wife of the deceased. She
deposed that  on coming to know about the death of her husband she went to the
dead body of her husband which was lying on the way to their field. About 2
years prior to the death of her husband,  Rani, the daughter of Dasthagiri was
raped by A-1 and  regarding the said incident, her husband took the Rani to
police station with the help of her husband she filed a case against A-1.  On
filing such case, her husband was asked to enter into compromise through Somanna  
and her husband refused   stating that he would not enter into compromise unless
the marriage of Rani was celebrated with A-1.  She admitted that there is phone
at her house and P.Ws.1 and 2 did not talk by phone after their return from the
field on the next day morning. P.W.8 is a photographer. P.W.9 who is a Panchayat
Secretary is a witness to the inquest report and observation panchanama. He
admitted in his cross-examination that as per Ex.P-13 groundnuts were not
separated from the plants that were harvested and they did not notice the heap
of groundnuts. No blood stains were noticed on the dagger-M.O.7. P.W.12 is the
then Mandal Revenue Officer, Kallur issued  a caste certificate of the deceased
covered under Ex.P-14 stating that the deceased belonged to SC (B) community. 
P.W.11-the then Assistant Sub-Inspector of Police, Ullindakonda Police Station
deposed that on receipt of complaint covered under Ex.P-1 he registered the same
as in Cr.No.11/2004 under Sections 147, 148, 302 r/w 149 IPC and S.3(2)(v) of
the Act and issued FIR      covered under Ex.P-15. He also sent copies of Ex.P-
15 to all the concerned.  He admitted that  there is difference in between the
signature appearing on Ex.P-15 and the signature appearing on Ex.P-1. P.W.12 who 
is working as Professor and Head of the Department of Forensic Department,
Kurnool Medical College deposed that he conducted postmortem examination and   
found 10 ante-mortem injuries as specified in the post-mortem certificate
covered under Ex.P-16. He further deposed that injuries 1,6,7,8 are possible by
sharp edged weapon like a dagger and the other injuries 2,3,4,5 and 9 are
possible with blunt object like stick According to Ex.P-16 the deceased died due
to shock and hemorrhage as a result of multiple injuries and the death occurred
about 18 hours  prior to post-mortem examination. P.W.13, the then Inspector of
Police, Taluk Police Station deposed that   on the information given by P.W.11
he along with his staff reached the scene of offence  at 9 AM and by the time he
went there P.W.11 and  his staff were present. After obtaining a copy of Ex.P-15
and on collecting panchayatdars ie., P.W.9, L.W.10 and L.W.11,  he held inquest
over the dead body of the deceased. During the course of inquest, he examined
P.Ws.1 to 5 and recorded their statements. He seized blood stained earth and
control earth, one dagger and  pair of chappal and moped  covered under M.Os.13,
14 , 7, 8 and 9 respectively  In the cross-examination, he admitted that
statements of P.Ws.1 to 5 recovered by him are not available with the court. He
denied a suggestion that he foisted a false case against the accused. P.W.14,
the then Deputy Superintendent of Police, Kurnool  deposed that on receiving
Ex.P-15 on 8-3-2004 at 10 AM he visited the scene of offence where CI of Police
came there and handed over CD file to him. He gone through the rough sketch of
the scene of offence, which was prepared by the Circle Inspector of Police under
Ex.P-17 and commenced the investigation. He examined P.Ws.1 and 2 at the scene   
of offence and recorded their statement. By that time Inspector of Police
examined P.Ws.1 and 2 at the time of inquest.  He admitted that  P.W.1 did not
state before him  specifically  that A-1 to A-4 were armed with sticks and A-5
and A-6 were armed with daggers. P.W.1 did not state before him specifically
that A-3 to A-6 stabbed the deceased with dagger. P.W.1 did not specifically
state that A-5 and A-6 stabbed the deceased on the right side of the neck and
right side of abdomen by using dagger. P.W.1 did not state before him that P.W.3
advised him not to go to the village after occurrence of the incident. P.W.1 did
not state before him that  two  days prior to 4-3-2004,  A-1 and his relatives
compelled the deceased to enter into compromise. P.W.1 did not state before him
that when the deceased refused for the proposal, A-1 threatened the deceased
that  he would see his end. Similarly P.W.1 did not state before him that A-1
threatened the deceased as 'MADIGOLLU MAMMULANU PENDLI CHESUKOMANTARA".  P.W.2                
did not state before him that his father was present at the agriculture land on
that day and P.W.1 came to the field at about 1-30 or 2 PM and deceased came to 
the field at    4-30 PM.  He himself duly verified the statements of the
witnesses recorded by the Inspector of Police. The said statements recorded by
the Inspector of Police were not field along with charge sheet.  P.W.15-Special
Judicial Magistrate of First Class who recorded Sec. 164 Cr.P.C., statements of
P.Ws.1 and 2 admitted that Ex.P-2 does not contain as A-3 and A-4 stabbed the 
deceased with dagger and A-5 and A-6 stabbed the deceased on the right side of
the neck and right side of the abdomen.
                We shall now deal with the submission of the learned Senior Counsel
that for non-supply of the statements recorded under Sec. 161 Cr.P.C., by P.W.3-
Insector of Police, whether the accused denied a fair trial?
                
             Under Section 161 Cr.P.C., the police officer may reduce into
writing any statement made to him in the course of examination under that
provision and if he does so he shall make separate and true record of the
statement of each such person whose statement he records. Sub-section (b) of
Section 173 Cr.P.C., authorizes the police officer to claim a sort of privilege
in respect of any statement recorded under Section 161 Cr.P.C., after giving
reasons as to why such statement may not be provided to the accused. Section 207 
Cr.P.C., adumbrates the Magistrate has to provide to the accused free of cost,
copies of statements recorded under sub-section (3) of 161 subject to the
exclusion in terms of Sec. 173(6) Cr.P.C., As per proviso to sub-section (1) of
Sec. 162  Cr.P.C., when any witness is called for the prosecution in such
inquiry or trial whose statement has been reduced into writing under sub-section
(3) of Sec.  161 any part of the statement, if duly proved, may be used by the
accused, and with the permission of the Court, by the prosecution, to contradict
such witness in the manner provided by Section 145 of the Indian Evidence Act,
1872.
                This Court in KOTA PEDA NAGESH V. STATE OF A.P3  while dealing with      
the question of suppression of  documents  by the prosecution held that it is
open to a Court to presume that the statements withheld would  become 
unfavourable to the prosecution if produced and non furnishing of the statements
recorded under Sec.161 Cr.P.C., has occasioned great prejudice to the accused.
                In In re K.PAPAIAH4  this court held that for non-supply of earlier
statement, the accused were denied   of a valuable right to cross-examine the
prosecution witnesses with the aid of  the earliest statements  recorded under
Section 162 Cr.P.C., and  which itself is a sufficient  ground  to vitiate the
entire trial of the case.
                    Justice J.C.Shaw speaking for the Bench in NOORKHAN V. STATE
OF RAJASTHAN5   held as follows:  
"The object of Sections 162, 173(4) and 207-A(3) is to enable the accused to
obtain a clear picture of the case against him before the commencement of the
inquiry. The sections impose an obligation upon the investigation officer to
supply before the commencement of the inquiry copies of the statements of
witnesses who are intended to be examined at the trial so that the accused may
utilize those statements for cross-examining the witnesses to establish such
defence as he desires to put up, and also to shake their testimony. Section
161(3) does not require a police-officer to record in writing the statements of
witnesses examined by him in the course of the investigation, but if he does
record in writing any such statements, he is obliged to make copies of those
statements available to the accused before the commencement of proceedings in 
the Court so that the accused may know the details and particulars of the case
against him and how the case is intended to be proved. The object of the
provision is manifestly to give the accused the fullest information in the
possession of the prosecution, on which the case of the State is based, and the
statements made against him. But failure to furnish statements of witnesses
recorded in the course of investigation may not vitiate the trial. It does not
effect the jurisdiction of the Court to try a case, nor is the failure by itself
a ground which affects the power of the Court to record a conviction, if the
evidence warrants such a course. The provision relating to the making of copies
of statements recorded in the course of investigation is undoubtedly of great
importance, but the breach thereof must be considered in the light of the
prejudice caused to the accused by reason of its breach, for Section 537 (465
(new) of the  Code of Criminal Procedure provides, amongst other things that
subject to the provisions contained in the Code no finding, sentence or order
passed by a court of competent jurisdiction shall he reversed or altered on
account of any error, omission or irregularity in the complaint, summons,
warrant, proclamation, order, judgment or other proceedings before or during
trial or in any inquiry or other proceedings under this Code, unless such error,
omission, irregularity or misdirection has in fact occasioned a failure of
justice." (para 15)

                    The Privy Council in KOTTAYA V. EMPEROR6  had an occasion to
consider the effect of non-production or supply one of the statements recorded
under Sec. 161 Cr.P.C., to the court or to the accused when two sets of
statements are recorded under Sec. 161 of the Code and after approving the ratio
laid down in BALIRAM TAKARAM V. EMPEROR (AIR 1945 Nag.1), wherein it was held       
that "Their Lordships would, however, observe that where, as in those two cases,
the statements were never made available  to the accused, an inference, which is
almost irresistible arises of prejudice to the accused. In the present case, the
statements of the witnesses were made available though too late to be effective,
and their contents are known. This by itself might not be decisive, but as
already noted, the Circle Inspector re-examined the witnesses whom the police
Sub-Inspector had examined, and did so on the same day. The notes of the 
examination by the Circle Inspector were made available to the accused at the
earliest opportunity, and when the note-book of the police Sub-Inspector was
produced towards the end of the prosecution case, counsel for the accused was in
a position to ascertain whether there was any inconsistency between the
statements made to the police Sub-Inspector  and those made later in the day to
the Circle Inspector. If any such inconsistency had been discovered,  this would
have been a  strong point for the  accused in their appeal, but no such point
was taken; indeed, the only complaint upon  this subject in the High Court was
that the police Sub-Inspector ought to be presumed to have prepared  a case
diary which he was suppressing. The High Court rejected this contention, rightly
as their Lordships think", held that   case falls under Se. 537 and the trial is
valid notwithstanding the breach of Sec. 162.
                     In GADDAM JAYARAMI REDY, IN RE7  this court after following
the judgment in BALIRAM TAKARAM V. EMPEROR (AIR 1945 Nag.1)  held as follows:       
"..It is  therefore  of utmost importance to know  their  earliest   versions
especially when the First Information Report is silent about P.W.2. It would
have offered the accused with   very valuable material to cross-examine those
witnesses. Why were these documents suppressed? The obvious answer is that they   
were not favourable to the prosecution. In circumstances like this, it is open
to a Court to presume that the statements withheld would be unfavourable to
prosecution if produced. At any rate, much value does not attach to the
testimony of these witnesses in such a situation."
                This Court in NANDIKAMMA LAKSHMAMMA (2 supra) after referring  to    
the judgment of the Privy Council in  KOTAYYA V. EMPEROR (6 supra) held that  
failure of prosecution to supply the statements recorded by P.W.17 by the
investigating officer  under Sec. 161 Cr.P.C.,  as well as the accused  is a
serious  lapse on the part of the prosecution, which had adversely affected the
rights of the appellants under Sec. 162 Cr.P.C.,  and Section 145 of the
Evidence Act, apart from infraction of Sec. 173 and 207 Cr.P.C.,
                Indisputably, in the present case, P.W.13-Inspector of Police during
the course of inquest examined P.Ws.1 to 5 and recorded their statements, which
were verified by the Sub-Divisional Police Officer, Kurnool, who examined the
witnesses on the next day as stated by P.Ws.1 and 2.  P.W.3 admitted that he was 
examined by the police while he was present near the dead body and thereafter he
was not examined by any one of the police.  In Ex.P-1-complaint, which is the
earliest report, P.W.1 has not stated that after the incident they went to the
field where P.W.3, father of P.W.1 was at the field and with whom he narrated
the incident and advised him to stay in the fields till the next day, which
resulted delay in lodging the report. There are discrepancies with regard to
manner of assault on the deceased in the evidence of P.Ws.1 and 2 and Ex.P-1 as 
well as Sec. 161  and 164 Cr.P.C., statements. In the FIR, it is stated by P.W.1
that accused persons armed with knives and sticks came there and among them A-1   
and A-2 beat the deceased with sticks  on his back of his head and the remaining
four accused beat the deceased with sticks and stabbed him. Whereas in the 
statement recorded under Sec.161 Cr.P.C.,  on the next day by the Sub-Divisional
Police Officer, P.W.1 stated that A-1 to A-4 were armed with sticks and the
remaining two accused armed with knives. In another statement recorded under
Sec. 164 Cr.P.C., by the Magistrate, P.W.1 stated that A-1 to A-4  beat the
deceased with sticks on his back of the head and A-5 and A-6 stabbed him.  In
the evidence before the Court, P.W.1 stated that A-1 to A-4 armed with  sticks
and A-5 and A-6 armed with daggers. A-1 and A-2 beat on the back of the head of
the deceased and thereafter all the remaining four accused stabbed him with
daggers.  Under these circumstances, it can safely presume that 161 Cr.P.C.,
statements recorded by P.W.13 are not favourable to the case of the prosecution
and they were purposefully suppressed by the prosecution. It is well settled
cross-examination is undoubtedly the greatest legal engine ever invented for
discovery of truth. Denial of an opportunity for cross-examination on the
earliest statements would result a fatal flaw and also infraction of fair trial
under Art. 21 of the Constitution.  When a suggestion was made to P.W.14 that he
admitted that he verified the statements of the witnesses recorded by Inspector
of Police which were not filed along with the charge-sheet, he has not claimed
any privilege in respect of statements recorded under Sec. 161 Cr.P.C., by
P.W.13 by giving reasons why such statements were not made available to the 
accused.  Therefore, we have no hesitation in coming to the conclusion that the
prosecution wantonly suppressed the earliest statements recorded, if which
produced will not substantiate the accusation made against the accused.
                From the evidence adduced by the prosecution, it is clear that P.Ws.
1 and 2 are alleged to be accompanied the deceased on the moped.  P.W.1 admitted  
that there is public telephone booth in their village and there is telephone
connection to the house of the deceased, which fact was admitted by P.W.4. They 
have not informed of the death of the deceased to any body by phone. P.W.2,
cousin of the deceased, admitted that they have to cross Obulapuram village to
go to the fields from the scene of offence. Once it is admitted that there are
telephone connections at Obulapuram village, they have not informed the same
either to P.W.4 or to the police. P.W.1 also admitted that there are houses upto
Obulapuram village.  P.W.1 admitted that a case was registered against him on
the complaint of one Kistamma  alleging that he cheated her on collecting money
from her as LIC agent, which shows that P.W.2 is an elite person  to lodge a
complaint or inform the police  with the cell phone possessed by him or can
contract from Obulapuram where telephone facility is available had they (P.Ws.1
and 2) have witnessed the incident. It is settled that mere delay in FIR is not
necessarily fatal to the case of the prosecution. However, fact that the report
was lodged belatedly is a relevant fact on which court must take note of. This
fact has to be considered in the light of other facts and circumstances of the
case.  Even as per the evidence, after attacking the deceased the accused left
the place to their village  Thadakanapalli but P.Ws.1 to 3 did not try to inform
about the incident to anybody even at  Obulapuram village nor to police on the
same day. Their conduct is quite unnatural  and delay in lodging  nor informing
the villagers about the incident has not been properly explained by the
prosecution, therefore their presence at the time of incident is also doubtful.
Therefore, it is presumed that due to delay in lodging FIR there is a
possibility of embellishment and false implication of the accused due to rivalry
between the prosecution party and the accused party.
                For the aforesaid conclusion reached by us, we are of the view that
the prosecution miserably failed to prove the guilt of the accused for the
offences charged under the Indian Penal Code beyond reasonable doubt and they 
are entitled to acquittal by extending benefit of doubt. We accordingly do so.
                We shall now deal with the submission that in the absence of any
conviction for the offence under Sec. 302 IPC whether the appellants can be
convicted for the offence under Sec. 3(2)(v) of the Act?
                Sec.3(2)(v) of the Act reads as under:
                3. Punishment for offences of atrocities:-
                (1) x x x ;
(2) Whoever, not being a member of a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe,-
(i) to (iv) x x x
(v) commits  any offence under the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) punishable
with imprisonment for a term of ten years or more against a person or property
on the ground that such person is a member of a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled 
Tribe or such property belongs to such member, shall be punishable with
imprisonment for life and with fine;
(vi) to (vii) x x x x.

                  From the above, it is clear that a person who commits any offence
under Indian Penal Code punishable with imprisonment for a term of ten years or
more against a person or property on the ground that such person is a member of
a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe shall be punishable with imprisonment for
life and with fine. The word "commit" means to perform an act, execute, carryout
or accomplish a crime.  Unless a person commits any offence under the Indian
Penal Code, punishment of imprisonment for life by invoking the above provision
does not arise. In other words, conviction can be on offence committed but mere
charge for commission of offence does not lead to the conclusion that a person
committed the offence. When a person is acquitted of charge for any offence
under the Indian Penal Code, by no stretch of imagination he can be convicted
for the offence under Sec. 3(2) (v) of the Act since commission of the offences
under the Indian Penal Code  has not been established by the prosecution beyond
reasonable doubt.

                             In Masumsha Hasanasha Musalman v. State of
Maharashtra8  the Supreme Court held that to attract the provisions of Section
3(2)(v) of the Act, the sine qua non is that the victim should be a person who
belongs to a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe and that the offence under the
Indian Penal Code is committed against him on the basis that such a person
belongs to a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe. In the absence of such
ingredients, no offence under Section 3(2)(v) of the Act arises.
                             In  Ramdas v. State of Maharashtra9  the Supreme
Court held that the mere fact that the victim happened to be a girl belonging to
a Scheduled Caste does not attract the provisions of the Act.
                       When the prosecution miserably failed to explain the
delay and there is a possibility of embellishment and false implication of the
accused due to rivalry between the prosecution party and the accused party,
unless accused committed an offence under Indian Penal Code is established, they
cannot be convicted under Sec. 3(2)(v) of the Act. The trial court without
recording any conviction and sentence for the offence under Sec. 302 IPC
convicted the accused for the offence under Sec. 3(2)(v) of the Act. When
prosecution failed to establish that the accused committed an offence under Sec.
3(2)(v) of the Act, conviction and sentence recorded by the trial court cannot
be sustainable and the same is accordingly set-aside.
                In the result, the Criminal Appeal is allowed, and the conviction
and sentences imposed on the appellants/A-1, A-2, A-4 to A-6 by the Special
Judge for SC & ST (POA) Act-cum-VI Additional District & Sessions Judge, Kurnool 
in SC ST SC No.32/2005, for the offences under Sec. 3(2)(v) of the Scheduled
Castes and Scheduled Tribes  (Prevention of Atrocities) Act and 148 IPC are set-
aside and they are acquitted of the said offences. The appellants/A-1, A-2, A-4
to A-6 shall be set at liberty forthwith, if they are not required in any other
case. The fine amount, if any, paid by the appellants/A-1. A-2,A-4 to A-6 shall
be refunded to them.

?1 (2000) 3 SCC 557 
2 2008(1) ALD (CRL) 532 (AP) 
3 1999(1) ALD (Crl) 519 (AP)
4 AIR 1956 ANDHRA 213    
5 AIR 1964 SC 286  
6 AIR (34) 1947 Privy Council 67
7 1959 An.W.R. 196  
8 (2000) 3 SCC 557 
9 (2007) 2 scc 170

