

THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE  G.V.SEETHAPATHY         
Criminal Revision Case No.94 of 2004

09-06-2008 

Issa Venkateswarlu. 

The State of A.P.,
Rep., by its Public Prosecutor.

Counsel for the Petitioner:  Mr.D.Kodanda Ramireddy

Counsel for the Respondent No: Public Prosecutor 

:ORDER:  

                This criminal revision case is directed against the judgment dated
19-01-2004 in Crl.A.No.29 of 2003, on the file of the V-Additional District and
Sessions Judge (Fast Track Court), Ananthapur, wherein the conviction of the
revision petitioner/A-1 for the offences under Sections 498-A IPC and Section 4
of the Dowry Prohibition Act and sentence of rigorous imprisonment for one year
and fine of Rs.500/- on each count, as imposed by the learned Judicial
Magistrate of the First Class, Guntakal, by judgment dated 18-02-2003 in
C.C.No.494 of 2000, were confirmed.

2.              Heard the learned counsel for the revision petitioner/A-1 and the
learned Additional Public Prosecutor for the respondent/State.  Perused the
records.

3.              The revision petitioner/A-1, along with his mother/
A-2 and sister/A-3, was prosecuted for the offences under Sections 498-A IPC and
Section 4 of the Dowry Prohibition Act in C.C.No.494 of 2000.  P.W.1, the de
facto complainant, is the wife
of the revision petitioner/A-1 and based on her complaint-Ex.P-1, the F.I.R-
Ex.P-2 was registered in Cr.No.63 of 2000.  After due investigation, the police
filed charge sheet against the revision petitioner/A-1 and two others for the
above said offences which were taken cognizance by the learned Magistrate in
C.C.No.494 of 2000. 
4.              According to the prosecution, the marriage of A-1 and P.W.1 was
performed on 07-07-1999 and at the time of marriage P.W.2, the brother of P.W.1,
spent Rs.1 lakh towards marriage expenses besides giving gold jewellery and 3
kgs of silver and also Rs.10,000/- to A-1 for his dress and that five months
after marriage, the accused started demanding dowry of Rs.2 lakhs and harassing
P.W.1 to bring the said amount from her parental house.  It is further alleged
that unable to bear the harassment, P.W.1 prevailed upon P.W.2 and with great
difficulty P.W.2 could procure a sum of Rs.1 lakh and gave the same to A-1 in
the presence of P.W.3, who is co-brother of A-1 and who arranged the marriage,
and other elders including P.W.4, an Advocate and also one Nagaraju, who is also
an Advocate and senior of P.W.4.  It is the further case of prosecution that
again after some months, the accused renewed their demand for additional dowry
again demanding payment of Rs.2 lakhs and resumed the harassment and when P.W.1     
pleaded her inability to fulfill the said demand, she was necked out of the
house by A-1.  It is further alleged that P.Ws.1 to 3 again approached the
accused to settle the dispute through mediation in the presence of the elders,
including P.W.4 and Nagaraju, who all advised A-1 to receive P.W.1 back, but the
accused refused to allow P.W.1 to enter into their house, unless their demand
was met.  It is further alleged that the accused even warned P.W.1 that she
would not remain alive if their demand for additional dowry was not met and,
therefore, P.W.1 had to take shelter in the house of her brother/P.W.2 ever
since, at Guntakal.  Thereafter, she gave the complaint-Ex.P-1 to the police at
Guntakal.
5.              In support of their case, the prosecution examined P.Ws.1 to 6 and
marked Exs.P-1 and P-2.  The accused examined D.Ws.1 and 2 who are stated to be    
residents of the same village of A-1.  On a consideration of the evidence on
record, the learned Magistrate found A-2 and A-3 not guilty of the offences and
acquitted them, but, however, convicted A-1 for the offences under Sections 498-
A IPC and Section 4 of the Dowry Prohibition Act and imposed sentence of
rigorous imprisonment for one year and fine of Rs.500/- on each count.
Aggrieved by the same, A-1 filed Crl.A.No.29 of 2003 and the learned Sessions
Judge dismissed the same and confirmed the conviction and sentence recorded  
against A-1.  Hence, the present revision.

6.              The main contention of the learned counsel for the revision
petitioner/A-1 is that the accused are admittedly residents of Chowdepally
village in Chittoor District and the alleged demand for additional dowry and the
alleged harassment are said to have taken place at Chowdepally and, therefore,
the learned Judicial Magistrate of the First Class at Guntakal has no
jurisdiction to take cognizance of the alleged offences.  He would further
contend that even according to P.W.1, there was no physical harassment and, 
therefore, the conviction of A-1 based on vague allegation of mental harassment
is not sustainable, especially when A-2 and
A-3 were found not guilty and acquitted on the basis of the same evidence.

7.              The learned Additional Public Prosecutor, on the other hand, would
submit that the demand for additional dowry and subjecting P.W.1 to mental
harassment coupled with physical act of necking her out of the house and refusal
to take her back and further threatening P.W.1 with dire consequences over her
life in the event of their demand not being fulfilled, cumulatively amount to
cruelty within the meaning of Section 498-A IPC and P.W.1 having suffered mental
harassment even at Guntakal while staying with her brother/P.W.2 on account of
the unjustifiable conduct of A-1 over illegal demand, a part of cause of action
certainly arose even at Guntakal and, therefore, the learned Magistrate at
Guntakal had every jurisdiction to take cognizance of the offences.  He would
further contend that to constitute an offence under Section 498-A IPC it is
always not necessary that there shall be physical acts of harassment amounting
to cruelty and even mental harassment, with a view to coerce P.W.1 or her
brother to meet the unlawful demand of A-1 for additional dowry, would
constitute the offence.

8.              The learned Magistrate has, on proper appreciation of the evidence
on record and in view of the cogent and consistent evidence of P.Ws.1 to 4,
recorded a finding that the revision petitioner/A-1 did, in fact, make demand
for additional dowry of Rs.2 lakhs and subjected P.W.1 to harassment over such
demand and that with a view to settle the dispute P.W.1 paid Rs.1 lakh in the
presence of PWs.3 and 4 and after keeping quiet for some time, A-1 resumed his
demand and harassment again, seeking payment of Rs.2 lakhs.  The evidence on  
record further establish that the mediation attempted by P.W.2 in the presence
of PWs.3, 4 and others failed as A-1 was adamant and insisted upon payment of 
Rs.2 lakhs for taking back P.W.1.  The contention of the learned counsel for the
revision petitioner/A-1 that P.Ws.2 and 3 are interested witnesses and no
reliance can be placed on their testimony, is untenable.   P.W.2 is the brother
of P.W.1 and he performed the marriage of P.W.1, their father not being alive
and P.W.3 is the co-brother of A-1, who arranged the alliance.  P.Ws.2 and 3
are, therefore, crucial witnesses to depose about the facts within their
personal knowledge and hence most competent witnesses.  In a matrimonial dispute 
like the present one, the hapless victim would naturally confide in her
brother/P.W.2 and brother-in-law/P.W.3 and their intervention with a view to
some how settle the dispute, is only natural.  P.W.2 is the person who actually
paid the amount of Rs.1 lakh in the presence of P.Ws.3, 4 and others.

9.              In STATE OF WEST BENGAL V. ORILAL JAISWAL AND ANOTHER1, the Apex              
Court held as under:

         "The High Court has expressed doubts about the genuineness of the case of
physical torture and abuses made by the husband and the deceased for the absence  
of any independent evidence given by the neighbours and co-tenants about such
physical assault or the abuses hurled on the wife by the accused.  We have
indicated that ordinarily it is not expected that physical torture or the abuses
hurled on the wife by the husband and the mother-in-law should be made in such a
way as to be noticed by the tenants living in the adjoining portions of the
house.  It is also not the case of the prosecution that the deceased was
physically assaulted so violently that the neighbours came to know about such
assault.  It is also not the case that abuses used to be hurled loudly so that
the tenants had occasions to hear them.  It was therefore not necessary to
examine neighbours or tenants to prove the prosecution case.  In the instant
case, the evidence about physical and mental torture of the deceased has come
from the mother, elder brother and other close relations.  Such depositions by
close relations, who may be interested in the prosecution of the accused, need
not be discarded simply on the score of the absence of corroboration by
independent witnesses.  Whether the evidence of interested witness is worthy of
credence is to be judged in the special facts of the case."

Mere relationship of P.W.1 is, therefore, no ground to discard the testimony of
P.Ws.2 and 3 and it cannot be branded as interested testimony. P.W.4, a
practising Advocate, is an independent witness, who fully corroborated the
testimony of P.Ws.1 to 3 regarding payment of Rs.1 lakh by P.W.2 to A-1 in his
presence and in the presence of his senior Sri Nagaraju and others.  P.W.4's
evidence further corroborates the evidence of P.Ws.1 to 3 regarding failure of
mediation when A-1 again demanded payment of   
Rs.2 lakhs for second time.  P.W.4 categorically stated that himself and his
senior Sri Nagaraju and other villagers of Chowdepally were present at the time
of mediation and accused refused to receive P.W.1 unless the amount was paid as 
demanded and hence the panchayat failed. There is absolutely no reason to reject
the testimony of P.W.1, who is a practising Advocate and an independent witness.
Even the testimony of D.Ws.1 and 2, the villagers of Chowdepally, shows that
P.W.4 and his senior were present at the time of mediation.  An effort was made
by the accused to show that the mediation was in connection with demand of P.W.2 
to send P.W.1 with him over medical check up and not over any demand for dowry. 
It is highly improbable and hard to believe that there would have been any
occasion for mediation by elders including two practising Advocates if the
dispute was only regarding taking P.W.1 by P.W.2 for medical check up.  The
finding of the learned Magistrate, as confirmed by the learned Sessions Judge,
that there was in fact a demand by
A-1 for additional dowry of Rs.2 lakhs and he persisted in that demand in spite
of payment of Rs.1 lakh by P.W.2 and sending P.W.1 out of the house, warning her
with dire consequences and refusing to take her back unless the demand is
fulfilled, is based on proper appreciation of the evidence on record and,
therefore, does not call for any interference.
10.             The question which then arises for consideration is whether there
was any such harassment amounting to cruelty within the meaning of Section 498-A 
IPC, which reads as follows:-

"Whoever, being the husband or the relative of the husband of a woman, subjects
such woman to cruelty shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to three years and shall also be liable to fine."


A plain reading of the above section would disclose that harassment of the woman
where such harassment is with a view to coercing her or any person related to
her to meet any unlawful demand for any property or valuable security or on
account of failure by her husband or any person related to her to meet such
demand amounts to cruelty, which is punishable.  The explanation defines the
expression 'cruelty' and clause (a) pertains to willful conduct which is of such
a nature as is likely to drive the woman to commit suicide or to cause grave
injury or danger to life, limb or health (whether mental or physical) and clause
(b) deals with harassment with a view to secure fulfillment of an unlawful
demand or when such harassment is on account of failure to fulfill such demand.

11.             In SHOBA RANI v. MADHUKAR REDDY2, the Apex Court held that the       
demand of dowry by the husband or his parents amounts to cruelty.

12.             In the complaint-Ex.P-1 and also in her evidence, P.W.1 stated that
A-1 threatened that if she made any attempt to enter his house, without
fulfilling the demand for additional dowry, she would not remain alive and hence
having no other go, she
had to take shelter with her brother/P.W.2.  P.W.2 also testified that A-1
threatened that if P.W.1 comes back without money, 
there was no guarantee to her life.  Thus, there was a clear threat endangering
her life in the event of P.W.1 returning to A-1's house empty handed.  The said
threat to the life of P.W.1 unleashed by
A-1 clearly amounts to cruelty within the meaning of Section 498-A IPC.  That
apart, the willful conduct of A-1 in demanding additional dowry of Rs.2 lakhs
and persisting with such demand even after the same was partially fulfilled by
payment of Rs.1 lakh and his refusal to heed to the advice of elders to take
back P.W.1 and insisting upon payment of Rs.2 lakhs before P.W.1 can be allowed 
to enter into his house, would certainly cause grave injury or danger to her
health, mental if not physical which also amounts to cruelty within the meaning
of Section 498-A IPC.  Further, the above conduct of A-1 in his persistence to
secure fulfillment of the unlawful demand for payment of dowry, would certainly
constitute harassment and such harassment also amounts to cruelty for the
purpose of Section 498-A IPC.  The proven acts and conduct of A-1 clearly
attracts the ingredients of offence under Section 498-A IPC.  The demand of A-1
for additional dowry and his acceptance of
Rs.1 lakh towards the same and his further demand for payment of Rs.2 lakhs more 
as additional dowry, which aspects are all duly established by the evidence on
record, clearly attract the offence under Section 4 of the Dowry Prohibition
Act.

13.             Regarding the contention of the learned counsel for the revision
petitioner/A-1 over the question of jurisdiction, though
A-1 and P.W.1 resided at Chowdepally in Chittoor district and P.W.1 was in fact
necked out of house at Chowedpally, the mental harassment was suffered by P.W.1  
wherever she was in view of the illegal conduct of A-1 over an unjustifiable
demand.  Simply because the physical act of sending her out of the house took
place at Chowdepally in Chittoor District, it cannot be said that the Court at
Guntakal had no jurisdiction inasmuch as P.W.1 suffered mental harassment at 
Guntakal.  It is not for pleasure that P.W.1 has gone to the house of P.W.2 at
Guntakal nor was it an occasional visit by a sister to her brother's house.
P.W.1 had to take shelter in the house of her brother/P.W.2 at Guntakal only
because of the unlawful conduct of A-1 in sending her out of the house and
because P.W.1 had no alternative, it cannot, therefore, be said that while P.W.1
remained in the house of P.W.2 as a dependant and living on his charity, she was
free from mental harassment.  The conduct of A-1 in sending P.W.1 out of the
house in view of her failure to bring additional dowry as demanded and further
threatening her on her life in the event of her making any effort to come back
empty handed and the plight of P.W.1 necessitating her to take shelter in her
brother's house for her survival, would certainly result in her suffering mental
harassment while at Guntakal.  The harassment of P.W.1 and the willful conduct
of A-1 in subjecting her to harassment over illegal or unlawful demand for
additional dowry which demand and harassment persisted even while P.W.1 remained   
at Guntakal, would certainly confer jurisdiction on the learned Magistrate at
Guntakal to take cognizance of the said offences.

14.             In RAMESH VENKAT PERUMAL V. STATE OF A.P3 this Court held as         
follows:

        "If a married woman appears to stay at her parents' house in order to meet
the illegal demands of her husband or relatives of her husband, naturally she
suffers mental agony even during her stay at her parents' house and hence, it is
a continuing offence and continues during her stay at her parents' house".

15.             In VALLURI RAMACHANDRA RAO & OTHERS V.STATE OF A.P.,4 this Court            
reiterated the principle laid down in the above decision.

16.             In BASHEER MOAZAM V. STATE OF A.P.,5 this Court held as follows:     

        "The three provisions, namely, Sections 177 to 179 of Cr.P.C., indicate
that in the case of offence under Section 498-A of IPC, the case can be filed by
the aggrieved wife/woman at a place where the demand was made for dowry or 
property thereby causing cruelty and also at a place where the woman was forced
to live, that is to say, the consequence that ensued as a result of cruelty. To
give an illustration, after marriage if the wife is subjected to cruelty by the
husband or by his relatives at one place and due to such harassment, the wife is
forced to go either to her parents place or a friend's place, there is nothing
in law which prohibits the wife to initiate criminal action at a place where she
is forced to live as a consequence of being subjected to cruelty."

17.             In view of the decisions cited supra and in the light of the
evidence on record in the present case establishing that P.W.1 was subjected to
harassment even while she was at Guntakal in view of the unlawful demand for
additional dowry by A-1 coupled with threat on her life, it is held that the
learned Magistrate at Guntakal had every jurisdiction to take cognizance of the
offence and try the accused for the same.

18.             In the circumstances, the conviction of the revision petitioner/A-1
for the offences under Sections 498-A IPC and Section 4 of the Dowry Prohibition
Act and the sentence of rigorous imprisonment for one year and fine of Rs.500/-
on each count imposed by the Magistrate which were confirmed by the learned 
Sessions Judge in the appeal, do not call for any interference in exercise of
revisional jurisdiction by this Court, as the impugned judgments of the Courts
below do not suffer from any illegality or material irregularity.

18.             In the result, the criminal revision case is dismissed.  The learned
Judicial Magistrate of the First Class, Guntakal shall issue necessary warrants
against the revision petitioner/A-1 for serving the remaining part of sentence.

?1 AIR 1994 SC 1418  
2 A.I.R 1988 SC 121 
3 1998(1) ALT (Crl.) 1 (AP)
4 (2007(1) ALT (Crl.) 293 (AP)
5 2005(2) ALT (Crl.) 463 (AP)

