

THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE B.PRAKASH RAO AND THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE L. NARASIMHA                  
Criminal Appeal No. 362 of 2006

22-02-2008 

Bitla Gangaram. 

The State of A.P., represented by its Public Prosecutor,
High Court of A.P., Hyderabad.

COUNSEL FOR THE APPELLANT: Smt A. Gayathri Reddy         

COUNSEL FOR THE RESPONDENT: Public Prosecutor         

:JUDGMENT: (per Sri LNR,J)  

The appellant-A1, his father-A2 and mother-A3, were tried by the Court of IV
Additional District and Sessions Judge (Fast Track Court), Siddipet in
S.C.No.295 of 2005, on three charges.  The first charge was that all the accused
have subjected Naveena, the wife of A1, to cruelty by demanding additional dowry
and thereby, committed an offence punishable under Section 498-A IPC.  The
second charge was that the appellant committed the murder of his wife Naveena on
the intervening night of 17/18.04.2004, by throttling her neck with saree.  In
the alternative, all the accused were charged with the offence of committing
dowry death of the deceased and thereby committed an offence punishable under 
Section 304-B IPC.  Through its judgment, dated 25.01.2006, the trial Court
acquitted A2 and A3. The charge under Section 498-A IPC was held not proved 
against the appellant.  However it convicted the appellant, of the offence
punishable under Section 302 IPC and sentenced him, to undergo rigorous 
imprisonment for life. Hence, this appeal.
The deceased was married to the appellant about 2 or 3 years prior to April,
2004.  The mother of the deceased submitted the complaint-Ex.P8 at 1130 hours on 
18.04.2004, stating that they gave about two tulas of gold, 20 tulas of silver
and Rs. 20,000/- to the appellant at the time of marriage, apart from some
utility articles.  She stated that after the marriage, the appellant started
harassing and abusing her daughter on several occasions and once she has given a
sum of Rs.3,000/-, and again demand was said to have been made for Rs.5,000/- 
for his employment at Hyderabad.  A panchayat was also said to have been held to
reconcile the differences on two or three occasions. She is said to have
received information that her daughter died and she suspected that the appellant
might have killed her daughter by pressing the throat.  Crime was registered by
the Police and the investigation was taken up.  Inquest was conducted through
Ex.P6 and thereafter, post mortem vide Ex.P10.  Charges as indicated above were
framed and all the accused pleaded not guilty.  The trial Court found the
appellant alone as guilty of committing the offence under Section 302 IPC.
Smt A. Gayathri Reddy, learned counsel for the appellant submits that there is
neither eyewitness account, nor circumstantial evidence, to prove that the
appellant committed the murder of the deceased.  She contends that the person,
who gave Ex.P8, was not available for examination as a witness, due to her death
and thereby nothing mentioned in Ex.P8 can be taken into account. She contends 
that P.W.1, the father of the deceased, has no knowledge about the occurrence
and the rest of the witnesses are from the village of P.W.1. She contends that
even to suspect the involvement of the appellant in the incident, the
prosecution ought to have proved the presence of the appellant in the village at
the relevant point of time and that is totally missing. She further contends
that the medical evidence is not all accords with the allegations contained in
the charge.
Learned Public Prosecutor submits that having regard to the disputes between the
appellant and the deceased, preceding the occurrence and absence of any 
explanation from the appellant, the only inference that can be drawn is that he
committed the offence. He further submits that the circumstantial evidence
provides necessary links to connect the appellant, with the occurrence.
P.Ws.1 and 2 are the father and brother, respectively, of the deceased. P.W.3 is
an elderly person, who is said to have settled the marriage between the
appellant and the deceased. P.W.4 stated that he is acquainted with the deceased
as well as her marriage with the appellant, and about the disputes that have
arisen between them. P.W.5 was declared hostile. P.W.6 is a panch to the
inquest.  P.W.7 was declared hostile. P.W.8 is the Mandal Revenue Officer, who
conducted the inquest. P.W.9 is the Sub-Inspector, who registered the case on
receiving the complaint-Ex.P8. P.W.10 is the Investigating Officer. P.W.11 is
the Doctor, who conducted the post mortem of the deceased. 
Admittedly, there is no direct evidence in this case, against the appellant. The
prosecution depended upon circumstantial evidence. It is not in dispute that the
appellant was married to the deceased. It was urged that the appellant used to
harass the deceased for additional dowry and that because the deceased was not 
able to satisfy the demands, he has done her to death.
To enable the Court to draw an inference about the commission of murder of the
deceased by the appellant, two circumstances are required to be proved. The
first is that, the appellant and the deceased were living, or seen, together
just before the occurrence, and the second is that, in all probability, the
appellant alone may have committed the offence. The second circumstance has to 
derive support from the nature of allegations, on the one hand, and the medical
evidence, revealing the cause of death, on the other. Further, the second
circumstance referred to above would arise if only the first one is proved.
It is rather surprising and curious that the prosecution has not chosen to
examine any witness to prove that the appellant was in his village, at a time,
when the offence is said to have taken place. P.Ws.1 to 4 and 6 are from Irkodu
village i.e., the native place of P.W.1. They cannot be expected to speak about
the presence of the appellant in his native village i.e., Pothareddipet village
on the date of occurrence. P.W.5, who hails from that village, was declared
hostile. P.W.7, who is resident of an altogether different place, was examined
as a witness for arrest of the appellant.  The incident took place in April and
the arrest is said to have taken place in August.  Even, this witness was
declared hostile. Another surprising feature of the case is that even for
inquest, a person from Irkodu, the native place of P.W.1, i.e., P.W.6 was
chosen, as though none is available from Pothareddipet village.
Apart from there not being any evidence to prove that the appellant was in the
village when the incident occurred, there is ample material to suggest that he
was a person, habituated to go about the other places, and that hardly, he used
to reside in his native village. In his chief-examination, P.W.1 stated as
under;
"My daughter questioned her husband as to why he is not attending to any work.
My daughter and her husband went to city to eke out their livelihood.  Again, A1
and his wife returned to my house and continued to stay there on the ground that
A1 was unwell. A1 towards his treatment on one occasion went to Vikarabad and 
did not return for about one month. In order to verify the same, my wife and
daughter together went to Vikarabad. As they found A1 was well, again he was
brought to my house".

From this, it becomes evident that within a short span after the marriage, the
appellant was living either at Hyderabad or at Vikarabad or at the house of A1.
This shows his conduct and habit. There is no evidence to show that he was in
the village as on the date of occurrence. His presence in that village cannot be
guessed. 
Strictly speaking, the second question does not arise for consideration, since
there is nothing on record to show that the appellant was in the village on the
date of the occurrence.  If we examine the evidence in relation to the other
circumstances, the doubt, if any, becomes clarified.  The allegation against the
appellant is that he throttled the neck of the deceased with a saree. Therefore,
the medical evidence must correspond with this allegation. The post mortem
certificate, marked as Ex.P10, reveals several injuries on different parts of
the body. P.W.11, who conducted the post mortem, found the following injuries:
"1.  Contusion dark coloured 2" in width over front of neck on thyroid cartilage
and below extending from below left ear to below right ear.  Ante mortem clot
present on cut section.
2. Contusion 2"x2 on right side of lower neck with skin 1"x1" peel oway.  Ante
mortem clot present on cut section.
3. Abrasions six in number on right side of chest each 1 x 1/8" ante mortem clot
present.
4. Abrasion on right elbow 1 1/2 "x2" abrasion on left wrist 1'2'.   Abrasion on
left axilla, skin peeled oway 1"x2".  Abrasion on the back 1"x1 1/2".   Ante
mortem clot present on cut section.
5. White erosions with irregular margins around the wrist and at the lower part
of the chest at the lower border of blouse".

From him, it was elicited that the hyoid bone of the deceased was intact.  The
injuries, which are relatively serious in nature on the other parts of the body,
such as hands, legs, armpit part etc., are not at all explained. The possibility
of such injuries being inflicted, if any one had just throttled the neck of the
deceased, is almost bleak. Therefore, the very basis of the charge is slippery
and is not supported by the medical evidence.  Under these circumstances, it is
not at all safe to convict the appellant.
We, accordingly, allow the appeal, and the conviction and sentence recorded in
S.C.No.295 of 2005, on the file of the
IV Additional District and Sessions Judge (FTC) Siddipet,
dated 25.01.2006, against the appellant are set aside. He shall be set at
liberty, forthwith, unless his presence is needed in any other case.

