

THE HONOURABLE SRI  JUSTICE B.SESHASAYANA REDDY               
Criminal Appeal No.66 of 2002

11-03-2008 

Abdul Raheem  

The State of Andhra Pradesh, Rep.by 
Public Prosecutor, High Court of AP

Counsel for the Appellant: Sri C.Praveen Kumar

Counsel for the Respondent : Addl. Public Prosecutor

:JUDGMENT:   

1.      This Criminal Appeal is directed against the judgment
dated 20-11-2001 passed in Sessions Case No.56 of 2001 on the file of the IV-
Additional Metropolitan Sessions Judge, Hyderabad, whereby and whereunder, the 
learned Additional Sessions Judge found A1-
Abdul Raheem and A2-Sayeeda Bee @ Sayeeda guilty for the offences under Sections    
304-B and 498-A IPC, convicted them accordingly and sentenced each of them to 
undergo rigorous imprisonment for a period of 7 years for the offence under
Section 304-B IPC and rigorous imprisonment for a period of 3 years and to pay a
fine of Rs.500/-, in default to suffer simple imprisonment for three months for
the offence under Section 498-A IPC.
2.      The prosecution case in brief is :-
        A1-Abdul Raheem is son of A2- Sayeeda Bee @ Sayeeda.  P.W.1-Putli Bai is   
mother of P.W.2-Mohd Ghouse and Fatima Begum.A1 married Fatima Begum on 12-03-       
1997. At the time of marriage, P.W.1 gave a cash of Rs.10,000/- and presented
one tola of gold and furniture etc. Jahez articles presented at the time of the
marriage have been detailed in the list, which has been exhibited as Ex.P1.  A1
and A2 looked after Fatima Begum for about one year without any discomfort.
Rather it can be said that Fatima Begum had happy marital life for about one
year.  Thereafter, A1 and A2 started harassing Fatima Begum for additional dowry
and resorted to physical assaults. Fatima Begum used to inform the harassment 
meted out by her in the hands of the accused to her mother and brother whenever
she happens to visit them. It is further alleged that A1 demanded Rs.10,000/- as
additional dowry, which has been complied with by P.W.1. Two years after the
marriage, a female child was born to Fatima Begum.  On the eve of the birth of
the child, P.W.1 gave one tola of gold and cash of Rs.5,000/- to A1.  Being not
content with the money received from P.W.1, A1 demanded her to give mulgi 
situated at Natarajanagar. P.W.1 has two mulgies at Natarajanagar. She did not
oblige A1 as she has two sons whom she intends to give the two shops, one to
each.  As the demand of A1 has not been met by P.W.1, A1 and A2 used to beat   
Fatima Begum. A1 also demanded money from P.W.1 to get an auto licence, but   
P.W.1 refused to oblige his demand.  P.W.1 received a telephone call on 26-09-
2000 with regard to admission of Fatima Begum in Osmania General Hospital with 
burn injuries on her person.  P.W.1 along with her son P.W.2 rushed to the
hospital and found Fatima Begum with burn injuries on her person.  Even before
they reached the hospital, an intimation was sent to the VI-Metropolitan
Magistrate at Hyderabad with regard to the admission of Fatima Begum in Osmania 
General Hospital with burn injuries on her person.  Ex.P6 is the intimation sent
to the Magistrate. P.W.6-M.Rambhadra Rao, VI-Metropolitan Magistrate, Hyderabad  
received Ex.P6 and proceeded to Osmania General Hospital.  He recorded the dying 
declaration of Fatima Begum in the presence of
Dr D.B.N.Prasad, who certified the fit state of mind of the declarant.  Ex.P7 is
the dying declaration of Fatima Begum recorded by P.W.6. 
Fatima Begum stated in her dying declaration that she caught fire accidentally
while cooking and that her in-laws extinguished flames and admitted her to
hospital.  P.W.7-Syed Jalal Hussain, Sub-Inspector of Police, Asifnagar,
received intimation from Osmania General Hospital on 26-09-2000 at 8.00 p.m with
regard to the admission of Fatima Begum in the hospital with burn injuries. He
deputed B.Krishna, H.C.6033, to Osmania General Hospital for recording the
statement of Fatima Begum.  The said Head Constable recorded the statement of 
Fatima Begum, which has been exhibited as Ex.P10. It is the version of Fatima
Begum in Ex.P10-statement that on 26-10-2000 at about 11.00 hours, her husband  
(A1) quarreled with her since he lost his auto licence and beat her with hands
at about 11.30 hours.  Her statement further reads that her in-laws abused her
in filthy language and thereupon, she poured kerosene on her and lit a
matchstick so as to threaten her husband (A1) and thereby she caught in flames
and that her husband (A1) and her aunt (A2) brought her to hospital. The Head
Constable handed over Ex.P10 statement of Fatima Begum to the S.H.O., Asifnagar.  
P.W.7, Sub-Inspector of Police, Asifnagar received Ex.P10 and registered a case
in Crime No.235 of 2000 for the offence under Section 498-A IPC and issued
Ex.P11, F.I.R.  P.W.9-R.G.Shiva Maruthi, Sub-Inspector of Police, took up
investigation, visited the scene of offence situated at H.No.12-2-418/B/6,
Viswasnagar Colony, Hyderabad and conducted scene of offence panchanama and     
seized particularly burnt cloth pieces and white kerosene plastic tin, which
have been exhibited as M.O.1 and M.O.2, under the cover of Ex.P2-panchanama in  
the presence of P.W.3 and another namely Ismail Khan.  On 28-09-2000, P.Ws.1 and  
2 approached him and informed that 
Fatima Begum wanted to disclose some more facts regarding the incident. 
Therefore, he rushed to the Osmania General Hospital and recorded the statement
of Fatima Begum and sent a requisition to the Magistrate for recording the
statement of Fatima Begum once again.  P.W.6 received Ex.P8 requisition on 28- 
09-2000 at 1.10 p.m.  He proceeded to Osmania General Hospital and recorded the 
dying declaration of Fatima Begum.  The dying declaration has been exhibited as
Ex.P9.  Fatima Begum stated in Ex.P9 that her husband Abdul Raheem (A1) and her   
in-law
Sayeeda Bee (A2) used to quarrel with her on petty matters and abuse her and
three days back at 1.00 p.m, her aunt (A2) and her husband (A1) poured kerosene
and set her on fire and that her husband (A1) and aunt (A2) extinguished flames
and brought her to hospital. On 30-09-2000 at 6.00 a.m Fatima Begum succumbed to  
burn injuries while undergoing treatment.  P.W.9 received death intimation on
30.09.2000 at 7.10 a.m.  He sent a requisition to RDO to depute MRO to conduct
inquest over the dead body of Fatima Begum (hereinafter referred to as "the
deceased"). P.W.8-G.Vijaya Kumar, MRO held inquest on the dead body of the  
deceased in the presence of P.W.4-Mohd Ghouse and another person viz., Smt   
Kareemunnisa.  During the course of investigation, he examined P.Ws.1 and 2 and 
recorded their statements, which have been exhibited as Exs.P12 and P13.  After
the inquest, the dead body was sent for post mortem examination. P.W.5-
Dr.P.Srinivas Rao conducted post mortem examination on the dead body and issued  
Ex.P5 post mortem report opining that the deceased died due to burns.  P.W.10 -
V.Rama Krishna, Inspector of Police, Asifnagar Police Station took up
investigation and altered Section of Law from 306 IPC to 498-A and 302 IPC and
filed Ex.P14 memo of alteration of Section of Law. He arrested A1 and A2 on 12-
10-2000 and 03-11-2000 respectively and sent them for remand. After completion
of investigation, he laid charge sheet before the IX-Metropolitan Magistrate,
Hyderabad. 
3.      The learned Magistrate took the charge sheet on file as PRC
No.19 of 2001 and committed the case to the Metropolitan Sessions Judge as the 
offence under Section 302 IPC is exclusively triable by a Court of Session.  The
learned Metropolitan Sessions Judge took the case on file as S.C.No.56 of 2001
and made over the same to the IV-Additional Metropolitan Sessions Judge for
disposal according to law.
4.      The learned IV-Additional Sessions Judge, on hearing the prosecution and
the accused, framed two charges against the accused.  Firstly, for the offence
under Section 498-A IPC and secondly, for the offence under Section 302 IPC.  He
read over and explained the charges to the accused, for which the accused
pleaded not guilty and claimed to be tried.
5.      To bring home the guilt of the accused for the offences with which they
stood charged, prosecution examined 10 witnesses and proved 14 documents and   
exhibited two material objects. The plea of the accused was one of total denial
of the case.
6.      The learned Additional Sessions Judge, on hearing the prosecution and the
accused and on considering the material brought on record, found the accused
guilty for the offences under Sections 498-A and 304-B IPC, convicted them
accordingly and sentenced them as stated supra.  However, the learned Additional
Sessions Judge found the accused not guilty for the offence under Section 302
IPC and acquitted them accordingly. The accused have filed this Criminal Appeal
assailing their conviction and sentence for the offences under Sections 498-A
and 
304-B IPC. 
7.      Heard learned counsel appearing for the appellants/accused and the learned
Additional Public Prosecutor appearing for the respondent/State.
8.      Learned counsel appearing for the appellants/accused submits that there is
no consistency in the dying declarations of the deceased and therefore, no
reliance can be placed on any one of the dying declarations, in which case the
conviction and sentence of the appellants/accused for the offences under
Sections 498-A and 304-B IPC is not legal and proper and the same is liable to
be set aside.  The learned counsel took me to all the three written dying
declarations and two oral dying declarations to convince that there is no
consistency with regard to the version of the incident.  In support of his
submissions, reliance has been placed on the following decisions:-
State of A.P. v. Shaik Moin1,  State of Punjab v. Parveen Kumar2,  Chinnamma v.
State of Kerala3,  Nallapati Sivaiah v. Sub-Divisional Officer, Guntur, A.P.4

Learned counsel also submits that none of the dying declarations speaks of dowry
demands and in which case, the death of the deceased cannot be categorized as a 
dowry death and thereby conviction under Section 304-B IPC is wholly
unwarranted.
9.      The Learned Additional Public Prosecutor submits that the dying
declaration recorded by the Magistrate for the second time clearly speaks of the
appellants/accused as persons responsible for causing burn injuries to the
deceased and the version of the incident spoken to by the deceased in the dying
declaration recorded by the Magistrate for the second time has been corroborated
by the oral dying declaration spoken through P.Ws.1 and 2 and in which case the
conviction and sentence of the appellants/accused for the offences under
Sections 498-A and 304-B IPC is legal and proper and the same is not liable to
be interfered with.
10.     I do not wish to make the judgment bulky by referring to the various
decisions of this Court and the Supreme Court with regard to the proposition of
law laid down on the acceptance of the dying declarations.  It is suffice to
refer to the latest decision of the Supreme Court in Nallapati Sivaiah's case (4
supra), wherein it has been stated that the dying declaration must inspire
confidence so as to make it safe to act upon. Whether it is safe to act upon a
dying declaration depends upon not only on the testimony of the person recording
dying declaration - be it even a Magistrate but also on the material available
on record and the circumstances including the medical evidence. The evidence and
the material available on record must be properly weighed in each case to arrive
at proper conclusion. The Court must satisfy to itself that the person making
the dying declaration was conscious and fit to make statement for which purposes
not only the evidence of persons recording dying declaration but also cumulative
effect of the other evidence including the medical evidence and the
circumstances must be taken into consideration. It is unsafe to record
conviction on the basis of a dying declaration alone in cases where suspicion is
raised as regards the correctness of the dying declaration.  In such cases, the
Court may have to look for some corroborative evidence by treating dying
declaration only as a piece of evidence.
11.     In case of multiple dying declarations, the Supreme Court in Parveen
Kumar's case (2 supra) has observed that the mere fact that two different
versions are given, but one name is common in both of them cannot be a ground
for convicting the named person.  The Court must be satisfied that the dying
declaration is truthful if there are two dying declarations giving two different
versions, a serious doubt is created about the truthfulness of the dying
declarations.
12.     This case rests on the dying declarations of the deceased.  The
prosecution pressed into service three written dying declarations and two oral
dying declarations of the deceased. The first dying declaration of the deceased
came to be recorded by the Magistrate on 26-09-2000, which has been exhibited as
Ex.P7. The second dying declaration came to be recorded by the Head Constable on  
26-09-2000 at 21.30 hours and it has been exhibited as Ex.P10. The third dying
declaration of the deceased came to be recorded on 28-09-2000 at 1.35 p.m and it
has been exhibited as Ex.P9.  The oral dying declarations of the deceased are
spoken by P.Ws.1 and 2.  As per Ex.P7, the deceased caught fire while cooking.
It can be said that the deceased caught fire accidentally.  She did not
attribute anything to either her husband (A1) or her mother-in-law (A2). In the
second dying declaration, which has been exhibited as Ex.P10, the deceased 
stated that she herself set fire so as to threaten her husband (A1) and her
mother-in-law (A2). In the third dying declaration recorded by the Magistrate,
which has been exhibited as Ex.P9, the deceased stated that her husband (A1) and 
her aunt (A2) poured kerosene and set her on fire.  While coming to oral dying
declarations, it is stated by P.W.1 that the deceased informed her of being set
on fire by her husband (A1).  For better appreciation, I may refer to the
evidence of P.W.1 in her own words and it is thus:-
"I asked my daughter as to what happened.  She stated that she does not know 
about the licence.  Thereafter both the accused beat her and took her to the bed
room.  After going into the bed room, both of them poured kerosene on her and A1
set fire with a matchstick.  Thereafter both the accused brought her to the
hospital and got admitted. When she was admitted in the hospital, Magistrate
came and recorded her statement." 

The second oral dying declaration has been spoken out by P.W.2.  According to
P.W.2, he was informed by the deceased that both the accused set fire.  For
better appreciation, I may refer to the evidence of P.W.2 in his own words and
it is thus:-

"We saw that my sister was with burn injuries and asked her as to what happened.
Then she replied that both the accused poured kerosene on her and set fire due
to which she received burn injuries and she did not disclose the real facts to
the Magistrate as they have threatened to kill her.  She further stated that she
was set fire by both the accused in their bedroom.  On that we went to the
police station and informed them that the accused did not inform us regarding
the incident though we were residing nearby the house of the accused and
requested them to call the Magistrate again as the deceased did not give the
real picture because of threat by the accused."
13.     It is the evidence of P.Ws.1 and 2 that deceased did not inform the real
facts because of the threats hurled by the accused.  The last written dying
declaration of the deceased came to be recorded on 28-09-2000 at 1.35 p.m by the
Magistrate.  The deceased did not whisper of the threats allegedly hurled by the
appellants/accused. There is no explanation from the deceased for exculpating
the accused in her earliest dying declaration, which came to be recorded by the
Magistrate on 26-09-2000. Any explanation for exculpating the accused in the
commission of the offence in the first dying declaration and inculpating them in
the second dying declaration must come from the mouth of the declarant-deceased. 
It is not for P.Ws.1 and 2 to explain as to why the deceased did not attribute
anything to her husband (A1) and mother-in-law (A2) in her first dying
declaration.  P.W.1 admits of her being with the deceased from
26-09-2000 to 30-09-2000.  If it is the case of P.W.1 that the deceased did not
reveal the true facts because of threats hurled by the accused, nothing
prevented her from informing the same to the police immediately.  The very fact
that she kept silent till 28-09-2000 indicates that the second dying declaration
of the deceased, recorded by the Magistrate, is a tutored one. Therefore, once
the second dying declaration recorded by the Magistrate is eschewed, there is no
evidence on record to connect the appellants/accused with the commission of the
offence.  The trial Court has not correctly appreciated the evidence brought on
record and thereby erred in recording conviction of the appellants/accused for
the offences under Sections 498-A and 304-B IPC. 
14.     Accordingly, this Criminal Appeal is allowed setting aside the conviction
and sentence of the appellants/accused for the offences under Sections 498-A and
304-B IPC and they are acquitted of the same.  The bail bonds furnished by them
shall stand cancelled. The fine amount, if any, paid by the appellants/accused
shall be refunded to them.

?1 2004 (6) SCC 34 
2 2005 (9) SCC 769 
3 2004 SCC (Cri) Supp 209 
4 AIR 2008 (SC) 19 

