

THE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE R. KANTHA RAO         
Criminal Revision Case No.1366 of 2010 

11-09-2009 

Sama Subhash Reddy.   

S.Lalitha @ Lalithamma and three others.

Counsel for the Appellant: Mr.M.V.Durga Prasad 

Counsel for the Respondent Nos.1 to 3:  Mr.C.Praveen Kumar 
Counsel for the Respondent No.4:  PUBLIC PROSECUTOR      

:JUDGMENT:   

        This criminal appeal is filed by the de facto complainant against the
order of acquittal, dated 14.11.2002 passed by the V Additional Sessions Judge
(Fast Track Court), Ranga Reddy at L.B. Nagar in S.C.No.110 of 2001.

2.      The de facto complainant is the elder brother of the deceased-Rani. The
first respondent is the mother-in-law, second respondent is the husband and the
third respondent is the father-in-law of the deceased.  They were tried by the
learned Additional Sessions Judge for the charges under Sections 302 and 498-A
of IPC and were acquitted of the said charges by judgment, dated 14.11.2000 in
S.C.No.110 of 2001.  The State did not prefer any appeal, but the de facto
complainant preferred the appeal against the order of the acquittal passed by
the learned Additional Sessions Judge.
3.      A preliminary objection has been raised by the learned counsel appearing
for the respondents that against the order of acquittal passed by the learned
trial Court in a case which was instituted upon a police report there is no
provision in the Criminal Procedure Code enabling the de facto complainant to
prefer an appeal against the said acquittal.

4.      According the learned counsel appearing for the respondents, the appeal
being not maintainable, is liable to be dismissed at the threshold without going
into merits of the case.
        
5.      As Against this, the learned counsel appearing for the appellant/de facto
complainant contended that the de facto complainant can also prefer an appeal
and in the alternative his submission is that even if the de facto complainant
prefers an appeal out of mistake, the same cannot be rejected in limini, but
this Court can treat the said appeal as revision as having been filed under
Sections 397 and 401 of Cr.P.C. and the same can be disposed of as Criminal
Revision Case on merits.

6.      The legal position on the issue is no longer res integra. In a case
instituted upon a police report, the State alone can file an appeal to the High
Court against the order of acquittal passed by the Sessions Judge and not the de
facto complainant.

7.      In JAGBIR AND ANOTHER v. STATE OF PUNJAB1, the Apex Court held as follows:       
"When the cognizance of the case was taken upon a police report under Section
190(1)(b) Cr.P.C. it is the State alone which could file an appeal in the Court
against the order of acquittal under Section 378(1) of Cr.P.C. after obtaining
leave under sub-section 3 thereof and not the complainant who could only file an
application under Section 401 of Cr.P.C. for revision of that order.  The High
Court therefore, was not at all justified in entertaining the appeal of the
complainant and disposing the same in the manner aforesaid.  On this score
alone, we allow the appeal and restore the order of the trial Court. The High
Court will now treat the memorandum of appeal filed by the complainant as an
application for revision of the order of the Sessions Judge, qua the two
appellants only, and dispose of the same in accordance with law."

8.      Therefore, though the appellant in the present case who is the de facto
complainant and the brother of the deceased cannot file an appeal against the
order of acquittal passed by the learned Sessions Judge, he can certainly file a
revision under Section 401 of Cr.P.C. In the present case, however, the
appellant/de facto complainant filed an appeal by mistake of understanding of
the relevant legal provisions instead of filing revision, which Section 401
Cr.P.C. enables him in view of the judgment above referred, though wrongly an
appeal has been filed by the de facto complainant, it cannot be rejected
outright but this Court can treat the same as revision filed under Section 401
of Cr.P.C. and dispose of the same on merits.

9.      Nevertheless, the petition challenging the order of acquittal filed by the
de facto complainant is registered as an appeal, it will hereinafter will be
referred as 'revsion' since it has been treated so by this Court and the parties
will be referred as 'revision petitioner' and the 'respondents'.

10.     The brief facts relevant for considering the revision petition, which
sprang out from Ex.P-1 report lodged by PW-1 may be stated as follows:

        About 14 years prior to lodging of the F.I.R. by the de facto complainant
(PW-1), his father died and thereafter, PW-1 took over the responsibilities of
joint family including the marriage of the deceased who is his younger sister.
The first respondent (A-1) is no other than the paternal aunt of PW-1 and the
deceased. In the year 1998, the marriage of the deceased was performed with the
second respondent (A-2), out of the agreed amount of dowry of Rs.3,50,000/-, PW-
1 paid an amount of Rs.1,00,000/- and gave 20 tolas of gold  and household
articles worth Rs.80,000/-, after the marriage, all the respondents (accused)
started harassing the deceased to pay the remaining amount of dowry, whereupon 
PW-1 paid an amount of Rs.1,50,000/- to the respondents, but they made a further
demand of dowry of Rs.50,000/- and tortured the deceased mentally and
physically.  Thereafter the deceased was blessed with a male child and
subsequent to the birth of the male child, the respondents again resorted to
subjecting the deceased to maltreatment with a demand to get a further sum of
Rs.50,000/- as additional dowry from PW-1.  When 
PW-1 went to the in-laws' house of the deceased to invite her for the festivals
of Dasara as well as Deepavali, the respondents 1 and 2 refused to send her with
PW-1 to her parental home.  From the beginning, the deceased used to tell PW-1
about the harassment and cruelty caused by the respondents demanding her to get 
the balance of dowry amount and additional dowry and on 22.11.1999 at about 1.00
p.m. while
PW-1 was at his house, PW-5 informed him over phone that his younger sister (the
deceased) died of burn injuries.  Subsequently PW-1, his younger brother and
other relatives rushed to the house of the respondents and found the dead body
of the deceased, which was fully burnt lying at the house of the respondents. He
also found the tongue of the deceased protruded.  Thereafter PW-1 lodged a
report with the Shamshabad police on the same day at about 2.45 p.m. stating
that all the respondents caused the death of the deceased and thereafter poured
kerosene over her body and set the dead body on fire.

11.     On the strength of the report lodged by PW-1, the police Shamshabad
registered a case in Crime No. 304 of 1999 under Sections 302 and 498-A of IPC.
The Inspector of Police (PW-13) who investigated into the offence, filed the
charge sheet against the respondents after completing investigation.

12.     While the matter was pending before the learned trial Court, respondent
No.3 died and the case against him was abated by order dated 14.06.2001, but
subsequently the learned Additional Sessions Judge framed a charge under Section 
302 of IPC against A-1 and also framed another charge under Section 498-A of IPC
against A-1 and A-2.

13.     The prosecution in order to establish the guilt of the respondents 1 and 2
for the above mentioned charges, examined PWs.1 to 15, marked Exs.P-1 to P-8 and  
M.Os.1 to 5. PW.1 is the brother of the deceased and PW.2 is the wife of PW.1.
PWs.3 to 8 are circumstantial witnesses.  PW.9 is a photographer who 
photographed the dead body under Exs.P.7 to P.11 and negative sheet Ex.P.12. 
PW.10 is the panch for the panchanama of scene of incident under Ex.P.13 and 
preparation of sketch map Ex.P.14.  PW.11 is the panch for inquest under Ex.P.15
conducted by Mandal Revenue Officer (PW.14). PW.15 is the Medical Officer who  
conducted postmortem and gave opinion that the death of the deceased was on 
account of burn injuries and PWs.12 and 13 are the Investigating Officers.

14.     The respondents 1 and 2 did not propose to examine any witnesses nor did
they mark any documents on their behalf.        On a consideration of the entire
evidence on record, the trial Court acquitted the first respondent of the charge
under Section 302 of IPC and also acquitted respondents 1 and 2 of the charge
under Section 498-A of IPC.

15.     Now the question requires determination in this revision is as to the
powers of this Court while exercising it's jurisdiction under Section 401 of
Cr.P.C. and the order which it supposed to pass, having regard to the facts and
circumstances of the case.

16.     The learned counsel appearing for the respondents submitted the following
judgments to appraise the Court on the aspect that while exercising powers under
Section 401 of Cr.P.C., this Court cannot convert the finding of the acquittal
into one of conviction and that only in exceptional circumstances this Court can
set aside the order of acquittal.

1) LOGENDRANATH JHA AND OTHERS v. SHRI POLAI LAL BISWAS2.             
2) MAHENDRA PRATHAP SINGH v. SARJU SINGH AND ANOTHER3               
3) PAKALAPATI NARAYANA GAJAPATHI RAJU AND OTHERS v. BONAPALLI PEDA APPADU AND                     
ANOTHER4    
4) K. CHINNASWAMY REDDY  v. STATE OF ANDHRA PRADESH AND ANOTHER5.                  

17.     There is no dispute about the said proposition laid down in the judgments
relied upon by the learned counsel and the decisions do not lay down any
proposition that this Court under no circumstances can set aside the order of
acquittal. The legal impediment is only that this Court cannot convert a finding
of the acquittal into one of conviction, which has been specifically provided in
sub-section 3 of Section 401 of Cr.P.C.

18.     In GURSHINDER SINGH v JOGA SINGH AND ANOTHER6 the Apex Court dealing with           
a summary dismissal of revision by a private party against acquittal passed by
the High Court held that the revision was disposed of by the High Court through
a cryptic order "No ground to interfere. Dismissed", in a case requiring a
detailed scrutiny and evaluation of evidence, particularly because no appeal
against acquittal was filed by the State, the Apex Court remitted the matter
back to the High Court for disposal of revision afresh after considering the
merits of the case.

19.     In RAM BRIKSH SINGH AND OTHERS v AMBIKA YADAV AND ANOTHER7 the Apex Court                
referring to its earlier decisions relating to the power of the High Court under
Section 401 of Cr.P.C. held that the High Court can set aside the order of
acquittal and remit the case for retrial where material evidence is overlooked
by the trial Court.

20.     Not only in the judgments above referred, the Apex Court in a catena of
decisions held that the revisional Court can set aside the order of acquittal
passed by the trial Court and remit the case for retrial.  However, the Court of
revision cannot set aside the order of acquittal passed by the trial Court on
the mere ground that the trial Court has not appreciated the evidence in a
proper way. The revisional powers setting aside the order of acquittal have to
be sparingly and exceptionally exercised when there is a manifest error of law
and procedure and only to prevent the gross miscarriage of justice.  If the
material evidence available on record is totally overlooked by the trial Court
or when the findings of the trial Court are perverse, the revisional Court can
set aside the order of acquittal and order for retrial.  Therefore, this Court
cannot exercise the powers of Court of appeal under Section 386 of Cr.P.C. and
convert an order of acquittal into conviction, it can certainly set aside the
order of conviction and order retrial, when the public justice demands such a
course.

21.     I have perused the material papers, depositions of the witnesses and the
judgment of the trial Court, which is the subject matter of the challenge in
this revision.  This Court is not supposed to express an opinion that the trial
Court ought to have appreciated the evidence in a particular way. This Court can
only examine as to whether the appreciation of evidence is totally perverse in
clear disregard of all the material facts borne out from the testimony of the
witnesses, non-application of mind to the relevant provisions of law as well as
evidence forthcoming in the case, and ultimately as to whether the judgment was
rendered in a way resulting in totally miscarriage of justice.

22.     It is true that PWs.3 to 8 who are the independent witnesses did not state
about the respondents subjecting the deceased to cruelty and harassment in
connection with demand of dowry and they were treated hostile by the
prosecution.  But, there is evidence of PW-1, the elder brother of the deceased
and PW-2, the wife of PW-1.  They have categorically spoken to the fact of the
respondents harassing the deceased and subjecting her to cruelty with a demand
of additional dowry in detail, which is obvious from their depositions. The
medical evidence discloses that there was bleeding from the nostrils and mouth
of the deceased and the tongue was protruded, there was also mild bleeding from
vagina, and in the opinion of the autopsy surgeon, the death was due to deep
burns.  Therefore, the death of the deceased was undoubtedly otherwise than
under normal circumstances and within four years of her marriage.

23.     The learned trial Judge stated in para 14 of the impugned judgment that as
per the version of PW-1, his evidence relating to the harassment caused by the
respondents to the deceased is based on the information he had from the deceased
and also that PW-1 did not mention either in Ex.P-1 or in 161 Cr.P.C. statement
that the accused demanded money either when he visited their house or when they 
visited his house.  The learned trial Judge went on to state that PW-2 stated
that the deceased informed her over telephone about the respondents demanding 
dowry but he did not state before the police about the harassment caused by the
respondents in connection with dowry. Perusal of Ex.P-1 as well as the police
statements of PWs.1 and 2 clearly indicates that they spoke about the
respondents harassing the deceased with a demand to get the balance of dowry 
amount and also additional dowry. Therefore, the finding of the learned trial
Judge on this aspect is factually incorrect.

24.     The evidence of PW-2 regarding the respondents subjecting the deceased to
cruelty with a demand for dowry may be based on the information furnished by the
deceased to them.  But the learned trial Court did not examine the evidentiary
value of the testimony of PWs.1 and 2 with reference to Section 32 of the
Evidence Act. The impugned judgment also does not refer to the presumptions
available under Sections 106, 113-A and 113-B of the Evidence Act.  The judgment
was rendered by the learned trial Judge in a casual and mechanical way without
discussing the evidence on record and without examining the evidence in
accordance with law.  In my view, the learned trial Judge rendered the judgment
in utter disregard of the material evidence before him and also in utter
ignorance of the relevant provisions of law which have to be applied having
regard to the facts and circumstances of the case. The trial Court also did not
frame the appropriate charges. The impugned judgment, therefore, resulted in a
flagrant miscarriage of justice as rightly contended by the learned counsel
appearing for the revision petitioner (the appellant) and is liable to be set
aside in this revision.

25.     Consequently, the judgment passed by the learned trial Judge acquitting
the respondents 1 and 2 for the offences under Sections 302 and 498-A of IPC is
set aside and the matter is remitted back to the trial Court for retrial.  The
trial Court is directed to frame appropriate charges, conduct the trial afresh
and render the judgment considering the material evidence available on record in
the light of the provisions of law applicable to the fact situation emerging
from the evidence on record.  The trial Court has to keep in mind that
conducting retrial does not mean that the entire evidence, which is already
brought on record will be erased. The trial Court has to reassess the evidence,
which is already on record and also receive any evidence oral and documentary
adduced by both parties and render the judgment afresh by assigning convincing
reasons for the conclusions reached by it.  The trial Court has to dispose of
the case within four months from the date of receipt of copy of the order in
this revision.  The revision, therefore, succeeds and the same is allowed.

?1 AIR 1998 SC 3130  
2 AIR (38) 1951 SC 316 
3 AIR 1968 SC 707  
4 AIR 1975 SC 1854  
5 AIR 1962 SC 1788  
6 1999 SCC (Cril) 1311
7 2004(7) SCC 665 

