

THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE B. CHANDRA KUMAR          
Criminal Revision Case No. 231 of 2004

05-06-2009 

Bolla Sivanagi Reddy

State of A.P., rep. by Public Prosecutor,
High Court of A.P., Hyderabad.

Counsel for the petitioner: Sri Bal Reddy

Counsel for the Respondent: Public Prosecutor

:Judgment: 

        This Revision Case is directed against the judgment dated 11.02.2004,
passed in Criminal Appeal No. 475 of 2001 by the
VI Additional Sessions Judge (Fast Track Court), Guntur, whereunder and whereby
the conviction and sentence imposed against the petitioner for the offence
punishable under Section 498-A IPC was confirmed, however, the petitioner was
acquitted for the offence punishable under Section 307 IPC.
2.      For the sake of convenience, the parties are hereinafter referred to as
they are arrayed in the trial Court.
3.      The brief facts of the case are as follows.  The accused is the husband of
PW.1.  They were married in the year 1985 and set up their family at
Veerlapalem, Guntur District.  The case of PW.1 is that they lived happily till
they were blessed with a son and subsequently the accused started ill-treating
her and assaulted her physically.  At the time of their marriage, her parents
gave Rs.35,000/- to the accused towards dowry.  However, the accused was 
demanding to secure more money from her parents.  Due to the continuous 
harassment, she was compelled to lodge a police complaint in the year 1987,
based on which a case in Crime No.36 of 1987, under Section 498-A IPC, was 
registered and the same was numbered as C.C. No. 129 of 1987.  However,  
subsequently, the parties compromised the matter and consequently PW.1 had   
withdrawn her complaint.  Then PW.1 joined the accused and they were blessed 
with female child in the year 1992.  The further case of PW.1 is that again the
accused started harassing her demanding more dowry from her parents and she was  
compelled to leave the house of the accused and started residing with her
parents.  There was exchange of legal notices.  However, again on the
intervention of the elders, the matter was compromised and PW.1 joined the
accused.  It is also her case that the accused addicted to vices and again the
accused started harassing her.  Her further case is that on 18.08.2000, when the
accused started abusing her, she went into the cattle shed and the accused came
behind her holding a crow bar and tried to stab her, however, she escaped.  On
the same day evening at about 5.00 PM the accused poured kerosene on her and  
tried to lit match stick, then she ran into the house and bolted the door from
inside and remained in the house throughout the night without opening the door.
The accused did not return to the house during night time and on the next day
morning again the accused assaulted her and driven her out from the house.  Then
she returned to her parents house and gave a report Ex.P1 to the police on
20.08.2000, based on which the police registered the case in Crime No.111 of
2000 under Section 498-A IPC. 
4.      The learned Magistrate had taken the cognizance for the offences
punishable under Sections 498-A and 307 IPC, and after furnishing the copies of
documents to the accused, he committed the case to the Court of Session. 
Charges under Sections 498-A and 307 of the Indian Penal Code were framed 
against the accused and the accused pleaded not guilty and claimed to be tried.
5.      On behalf of the prosecution, besides PW.1, PWs.2 to 4 were examined and  
Exs.P1 to P4 were marked during trial.  The accused denied all the incriminating
circumstances appearing in the evidence against him when he was examined under  
Section 313 of the Code of Criminal Procedure and no defence evidence was
produced on his behalf.
6.      The learned Additional Assistant Sessions Judge, FAC of Principal
Assistant Sessions Judge, Tenali, by judgment dated 24.09.2001, in S.C. No. 1043
of 2000, convicted the accused for the offence punishable under Section 498-A
IPC and sentenced to suffer Rigorous Imprisonment for a period of two years and
to pay a fine of Rs.500/- in default to suffer simple imprisonment for one more
month.   The accused was also convicted for the offence punishable under Section
307 IPC and sentenced to suffer Rigorous Imprisonment for a period of five years
and also to pay a fine of Rs.1000/- in default to suffer simple imprisonment for
two more months. 
7.      As indicated above, the appellate Court found the accused guilty for the
offence punishable under Section 498-A IPC and confirmed the sentence imposed by  
the trial Court, but however, acquitted him for the offence punishable under
Section 307 IPC.
8.      Sri Bal Reddy, learned Senior Counsel appearing for the petitioner,
submitted that when the appellate Court has not believed the version of PW.1 for
the offence punishable under Section 307 IPC on some analogy the accused should  
have been given benefit for the offence punishable under Section 498-A IPC.  He
has submitted that unless the harassment is for dowry, the ingredients of
Section 498-A IPC are not attracted and PW.1 did not specify as to why she was
harassed and the allegations of PW.1 are vague.  He further submitted that the
previous history shows that PW.1 is in the habit of filing false cases against
the petitioner and the Courts below have failed to appreciate the evidence on
proper perspective. He further submitted that the Civil Court granted divorce to
the parties and that there is delay of two days in giving report to the police.
9.      Learned Public Prosecutor, on the other hand, submitted that though the
accused continuously harassed PW.1, on the advise of elders and in the interest
of family, she had compromised the matter with the accused on two occasions and 
joined the company of the accused, however, there was no change in the attitude
of the accused and that the accused had continuously harassed PW.1 and since the  
harassment is demanding dowry the ingredients of Section 498-A IPC have been 
attracted and the evidence on record shows that the dispute is with regard to
land given by the father of PW.1 and this clearly shows that the acts committed
by the accused come within the ambit of Section 498-A IPC.
10.     Since the appellate Court has found the accused not guilty for the offence
punishable under Section 307 IPC, the discussion has to be confined to Section
498-A IPC, for which the accused was ultimately found guilty and convicted.
11.     Section 498-A IPC is as follows:
        498-A. Husband or relative of husband of a woman subjecting her to
cruelty:- Whoever, being the husband or the relative of the husband of a woman,
subjects such woman, to cruelty, shall be punished with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to three years and shall also be liable to fine.

        Explanation:- For the purposes of this section "cruelty" means-

a) any willful conduct which is of such a nature as is likely to drive the woman
to commit suicide or to cause grave injury or danger to life, limb or health
(whether mental or physical) of the woman; or
b) harassment of the woman, where such harassment is with view to coercing her
or any person related to her to meet any unlawful demand for any property or
valuable security or is on account of failure by her or any person related to
her to meet such demand. 

12.     In view of the above wordings of Section 498-A IPC, we have to see whether
there was harassment of PW.1 with a view to coerce her to meet any unlawful
demand for the property by the accused.  As seen from the evidence, it appears
that the father of PW.1, who is examined as PW.2, has given Ac.4-00 of land to
PW.1 at the time of marriage.  According to PW.1, her parents gave Rs.35,000/-
to the accused at the time of marriage.  However, she has admitted that her
parents handed over Rs.35,000/- to her father-in-law towards her Pasupukunkuma
and for management of the same.  It is also her specific case that the accused
was demanding her to secure more money from her parents.  It is also her case
that her father gifted Ac.4-00 of land to her at the time of her marriage and a
gift deed was also executed in her favour, but it was misplaced.  The said land
was disposed of in the year 1995 and according to PW.1 the sale proceeds were 
handed over to the accused.  Though PW.1 admitted that this fact was not stated
in her statement before the police, but a reading of the entire evidence shows
that the issue of selling Ac.4-00 of land is an admitted fact.  The stand of the
accused, as seen from the suggestions given to PW.1, is that PW.1 was demanding  
separate residence and that she was forcing the accused to get land from his
father and his senior paternal uncle.  PW.2 also deposed that at the time of
marriage he gave Rs.35,000/- to PW.1 towards Pasupukunkuma and that the accused    
was harassing PW.1.  He also deposed that he gifted Ac.4-00 of land to PW.1
towards Pasupukunkuma and that the said land was sold in the year 1985 or 1986 
and that the sale proceeds were not deposited in the name of PW.1 till 1998.  He
says that he gave that amount to PW.1 subsequently.  This appears to be one of
the reasons for the disputes between the parties.  However, a reading of the
evidence of PWs.1 and 2 gives an impression that there were disputes between the
accused and PW.1 with regard to land gifted to PW.1 by her father at the time of
marriage and when the land was sold subsequently, but the sale proceeds were not
given to PW.1 immediately after the sale of such land.  PW.3 is the resident of
the same village and he knows the accused and PWs.1 and 2 and he speaks about   
the disputes between the parties and with regard to compromise effected between
them and with regard to information furnished by PW.1 about the attack made on
her on 18.08.2000.  PW.4 is the Investigating Officer in this case.  Certain
omissions have been brought on record in the evidence of PW.4 that PW.1 did not
state before him with regard to dowry of Rs.35,000/- paid to the accused at the
time of her marriage.
13.     The evidence of PW.1 appears to be corroborated by the evidence of PW.2 
and contents of Ex.P1 with regard to harassment of the accused demanding her to
secure money from her parents.  Therefore, the evidence of PW.1 proves that the
accused has harassed her and forced her to secure money from her parents.  It is
settled law that a part of the evidence of a witness can be accepted while
rejecting other part of the evidence.  Therefore, even if the version of PW.1 is
disbelieved in respect of offence under Section 307 IPC, it does not come in the
way of believing her version in respect of offence under Section 498-A IPC.  The
delay of two days in giving complaint etc., are minor issues and need not be
given much weight.  The previous litigations and subsequent divorce between the
parties does not make the version of PW.1 untrustworthy.  In view of the same,
the ingredients of Section 498-A IPC have been established by the prosecution
and the judgments of the Courts below, as far as the appreciation of evidence on
this aspect, appears to be on correct perspective.  Therefore, the conviction of
the accused for the offence punishable under Section 498-A IPC stands confirmed.
14.     Though while dealing with Revision Petition, there is no need to
re-appreciate the evidence, but in the interest of justice, I have gone through
the entire evidence once again and satisfied that the Courts below have
correctly come to the conclusion that the charge under Section 498-A IPC stands
proved against the accused.
15.     Learned counsel for the petitioner/accused submitted that the petitioner's
son is studying B. Tech III year and his daughter has completed Intermediate and
that he is paying maintenance of Rs.3000/- per month to PW.1 and the parties are
residing separately, and therefore, no purpose would be served by confirming the
sentence of imprisonment as imposed by the Courts below and considering the 
facts and circumstances of the case the sentence of imprisonment may be modified 
and that the accused is prepared to pay compensation to PW.1. 
16.     The question of sentence is always a difficult and in many cases a
delicate matter for the Court.  In many cases, the victim is forgotten.  What is
the effect of sentence, imposed against the accused, both on the accused as well
as on the victim and those who are depending on them has to be taken into
consideration.  When the earning member of the family is convicted and sentenced
to imprisonment, the family may loose the source of income.  The family of the
accused may consist of the wife, minor children and old aged parents.  Even when
an accused is sentenced to imprisonment, it may be in the interest of the
society or may act as deterrent to the others who are intending to commit
similar offences and may be useful for protection of the public and public
order, but in many cases it may not be helpful in any manner to the victim.  We
have heard that there is a practice in Tribal community i.e., when a person is
murdered, the offender who committed the murder will be called to a panchayat
and the panchayat elders take a decision directing such offender to work in the
family of the murdered person and all his earnings would go to such family.
Thus, the tribal community seems to have taken into consideration the financial
crisis that would be undergone by the members of the family of the murdered
person.
17.     There are two theories of punishment.  One is punitive and the other is
reformative.  The main philosophy of reformative theory is to give an
opportunity to the accused to join the main stream of the society and to bring a
change in him so as to make him a useful member of the society.  Whether the
punitive theory has to be followed or reformative theory has to be followed must
depend upon the facts and circumstances of each case.  The factors such as the
gravity of the offence, its impact on the society and the public interest have
to be taken into consideration.  The offences against the society such as
Narcotic drug cases, food adulteration cases, smuggling and white-collar
offences may require suitable punishment.  Similarly, the offences against human
body i.e., murder, rape and kidnapping and the offences against women and
children warrant adequate punishment, but where in a case for the first time an
agriculturist or village artisan is involved in petty quarrels and trespass
cases (Sections 323, 324, 447, 448, 504 and 506 IPC) the Courts should be
lenient.  The circumstances under which the offence was committed should be
taken into consideration.  There are no hard and fast rules laid down.  In
fixing punishment, the Judge has to take into consideration the facts and
circumstances of each case and use his discretion in a judicious manner.  The
nature of offence, the circumstances in which it was committed, the provocation,
if any, the antecedents of the offender, and his age and character must be taken
into consideration.  The sentence in each case should be proportionate to the
nature and gravity of the offence.
18.     In Indo-China Steam Navigation Co. v. Jasjit Singh1, the Supreme Court
observed as follows:
        "................It is true that modern criminology does not encourage the
imposition of severe or savage sentences against criminals, because the
deterrent or punitive aspect of punishment is no longer treated as a valid
consideration in the administration of Criminal law.  But it must be remembered
that ordinary offences with which the normal criminal law of the country deals
are committed by persons either under the pressure of provoked and unbalanced
emotions, or as a result of adverse environments and circumstances, and so,
while dealing with these criminals who, in many cases, deserve a sympathetic
treatment and in a few cases, are more sinned against than sinners, criminal law
treats punishment more as a reformative or corrective than as a deterrent or
punitive measure............"

19.     In Karamjit Singh v. State (Delhi Admn.)2, the Supreme Court observed
thus:
        "Punishment in criminal cases is both punitive and reformative.  The
purpose is that the person found guilty of committing the offence is made to
realize his fault and is deterred from repeating such acts in future.  The
reformative aspect is meant to enable the person concerned to relent and repent
for his action and make himself acceptable to the society as a useful social
being.  In determining the question of proper punishment in a criminal case the
Court has to weight the degree of culpability of the accused, its effect on
others and the desirability of showing any leniency in the matter of punishment
in the case.  An act of balancing is what is needed in such a case, a balance
between the interest of the individual and the concern of the society weighing
the one against the other.  Imposing a hard punishment on the accused serves a
limited purpose but at the same time, it is to be kept in mind that relevance of
deterrent punishment in matters of serious crimes affecting society should not
be undermined.  Within the parameters of the law an attempt has to be made to
afford an opportunity to the individual to reform himself and lead life of a
normal, useful member of society and make his contribution in that regard.
Denying such opportunity to a person who has been found to have committed 
offence in the facts and circumstances placed on record would only have a
hardening attitude towards his fellow beings and towards society at large.  Such
a situation, has to be avoided, again within the permissible limits of law."
        
20.     As observed earlier the victim is always forgotten.  What is the effect of
convicting the accused upon the victim has to be taken into consideration.  In
many cases, it may not have any effect on the future life of the victim and the
victims will be left without any remedy to the injury or loss caused to them.
Then what is to be done?  The important questions that arise are whether the
society should take care of such victims? and whether the accused can be asked
or directed to compensate the victim?.
21.     Section 357 Cr.P.C., which deals with compensation, is as follows.
        357. Order to pay compensation - (1) When a Court imposes a sentence of 
fine or a sentence (including a sentence of death) of which fine forms a part,
the Court may, and where a person against whom an offence is committed belongs  
to Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes as defined in Clauses (24) and (25) of
Article 366 of the Constitution of India except when both the accused person and
the person against whom an offence is committed belong either to such castes or
tribes, the Court shall, when passing judgment, order the whole or any part of
the fine recovered to be applied-

(a) in defraying the expenses properly incurred in the prosecution;

(b) in the payment to any person of compensation for any loss or injury caused
by the offence, when compensation is, in the opinion of the Court, recoverable
by such person in a Civil Court;

(c) when any person is convicted of any offence for having caused the death of
another person or of having abetted the commission of such an offence, in paying
compensation to the persons who are, under the Fatal Accidents Act, 1855 (13 of
1855), entitled to recover damages from the person sentenced for the loss
resulting to them from such death;

(d) when any person is convicted of any offence which includes theft, criminal
misappropriation, criminal breach of trust, or cheating, or of having
dishonestly received or retained, or of having voluntarily assisted in disposing
of, stolen property knowing or having reason to believe the same to be stolen,
in compensating any bona fide purchaser of such property for the loss of the
same if such property is restored to the possession of the person entitled
thereto.

(2) If the fine is imposed in a case which is subject to appeal, no such payment
shall be made before the period allowed for presenting the appeal has elapsed,
or, if an appeal be presented, before the decision of the appeal.

(3) When a Court imposes a sentence, of which fine does not form a part, the
Court may, and where a person against whom an offence is committed belongs to  
Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes as defined in Clauses (24) and (25) of
Article 366 of the Constitution of India except when both the accused person and
the person against whom an offence is committed belong either to such castes or
tribes, the Court shall, when passing judgment, order the accused person to pay,
by way of compensation, such amount as may be specified in the order to the
person who has suffered any loss or injury by reason of the act for which the
accused person has been so sentenced.  

Provided that the Court may not order the accused person to pay by way of
compensation any amount, if both the accused person and the person against whom  
an offence is committed belong either to the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled
Tribes (vide amendment by A.P. Act No.21 of 1993 with effect from 03.09.1993)

(4) An order under this section may also be made by an Appellate Court or by the
High Court or Court of Session when exercising its powers of revision.

(5) At the time of awarding compensation in any subsequent civil suit relating
to the same matter, the Court shall take into account any sum paid or recovered
as compensation under this section.

22.     Sub-section 1 of Section 357 Cr.P.C. deals with the imposition of fine and
payment of compensation from the amount of fine i.e., the whole or any part of
the fine.  Sub-section 3 of Section 357 Cr.P.C. deals with the situation where
fine does not form part of the sentence imposed by a Court.  In such a case, the
Court can order the accused to pay compensation to the person who has suffered
loss or injury by reason of the act for which the accused person has been
sentenced.  The basic difference between Sub-sections 1 and 3 is that in the
former case the imposition of fine is the essential requirement, while in the
later even in the absence of imposition of fine the Court is empowered to direct
payment of compensation.  Sub-section 4 makes it clear that the appellate Court
and the High Court may exercise the power while exercising appellate or
revisional powers.
23.     The above Sub-sections make it clear that even in case of sentence, of
which fine does not form a part, the Court has been empowered to award
compensation to the person, who is suffered loss or injury by reason of the
offence.
24.     In Hari Kishan v. Sukhbir Singh and others3, the Supreme Court observed
thus:
        "Section 357(3) is an important provision but Courts have seldom invoked
it.  Perhaps due to ignorance of the object of it.  It empowers the Court to
award compensation to victims while passing judgment of conviction.  In addition
to conviction, the Court may order the accused to pay some amount byway of 
compensation to victim who has suffered by the action of accused.  It may be
noted that this power of Courts to award compensation is not ancillary to other
sentences but it is in addition thereto.  This power was intended to do
something to reassure the victim that he or she is not forgotten in the criminal
justice system.  It is a measure of responding appropriately to crime as well as
reconciling the victim with the offender.  It is, to some extent, a constructive
approach to crimes.  It is indeed a step forward in our criminal justice system.
We, therefore, recommend to all Courts to exercise this power liberally so as to
meet the ends of justice in a better way.
The payment by way of compensation must, however, be reasonable.  What is  
reasonable, may depend upon the facts and circumstances of each case.  The  
quantum of compensation may be determined by taking into account the nature of 
crime, the justness of claim by the victim and the ability of the accused to
pay.  If there are more than one accused they may be asked to pay in equal terms
unless their capacity to pay varies considerably."
        
25.     Coming to the facts of the present case, considering the history of the
case and prolonged disputes between the parties and the fact that both the
children of the parties are studying and that the accused is aged about 50
years, I feel that if the sentence of imprisonment is not modified, the children
of the accused, who are upcoming in their life, will be the victims,
particularly the daughter, who is to be married in near future, will be an
indirect victim due to the quarrels between PW.1 and the accused.  Therefore, I
deem it just and reasonable to modify the sentence.
26.     While modifying the sentence, the interest of PW.1 and her future needs
also should be taken into consideration.  She may be getting the support from
her parents at the initial stage, but at present it appears that she may not get
any help from her parents side.  Now, there are none to look after PW.1.  Of
course, it is informed that the accused is paying a sum of Rs.3,000/- per month
towards maintenance to PW.1 and that the same is sufficient for her maintenance.
As the age advances, PW.1 may require medical expenses or any other unforeseen   
requirements.  In the circumstances, I feel that if a reasonable amount is
directed to be paid by the accused to PW.1, it may meet her future needs and may
be some security in her future life.  Therefore, it is just and reasonable to
award reasonable compensation to her under Section 357(3) Cr.P.C. 
27.     At this stage, learned counsel for the petitioner/accused, after
ascertaining from the accused, submitted that the accused with great difficulty
may be in a position to pay Rs.1,00,000/-, but however the maintenance amount of
Rs.3,000/- per month being paid to his wife may be taken into consideration and
a direction may be given to the lower Court to modify the order of maintenance.
28.     As far as the question of maintenance is concerned, the order granting
maintenance seems to have been made vide separate proceedings.  More over,  
claiming maintenance is the right of the victim and the same cannot be disturbed
in these proceedings.  It is made clear that the amount of compensation ordered
to be paid is not in lieu of maintenance or as lump sum amount towards
maintenance.  This is in addition to the maintenance amount as compensation for
the loss and injury caused to the victim of an offence under Section 498-A IPC.
29.     In the circumstances, I consider it just and reasonable to direct the
accused to pay a sum of Rs.1,00,000/- towards compensation to the victim i.e.,
to his wife.  Therefore, instead of confirming the sentence of imprisonment for
two years, I feel that if the sentence is modified to the extent of the period
of imprisonment already undergone by the accused and further if the accused is
directed to pay compensation of Rs.1,00,000/- to PW.1, the same will meet the
ends of justice.
30.     In the result, the Criminal Revision Case is allowed in part.  The
conviction of the petitioner/accused for the offence punishable under Section
498-A IPC is confirmed.  But, however, the sentence of imprisonment is modified
as follows.  The petitioner/accused is directed to pay compensation of
Rs.1,00,000/- (Rupees One Lakh only) to PW.1 within a period of two months from
the date of receipt of a copy of this judgment.  On payment of such
compensation, the sentence of imprisonment imposed against the  
petitioner/accused for the offence under Section 498-A IPC stands modified to
the extent of the period already undergone by him and the fine already imposed
by the trial Court, failing which the conviction and sentence imposed by the
trial Court for the offence under Section 498-A IPC stands confirmed.

?1  AIR 1964 SC 1140  
2 AIR 2000 SC 3467  
3 AIR 1988 SC 2127  

