

THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE B.N.RAO NALLA        
Criminal Revision Case No.76 of 2005

15-12-2009 

B.Krishna 

State of A.P.

Counsel for the petitioner: Mr.C.Praveen Kumar

Counsel for respondent: The Public Prosecutor

:ORDER:  

        This criminal revision case is filed against the judgment in Criminal
Appeal No.91 of 2004, dated 31.12.2004, on the file of the Court of the V
Additional Metropolitan Sessions Judge - cum - Mahila Court, Hyderabad, whereby
and whereunder the conviction and sentence passed by the XXII Metropolitan
Magistrate - cum - Mahila Court, Hyderabad vide order dated 04.03.2004 in
C.C.No.176 of 2000 was confirmed in respect of A.1, and set aside against A2 and
A3.
2.      `The brief facts of the case are that the deceased-de facto complainant
was married to accused No.1 on 25.05.1989, that accused No.1 was given  
Rs.80,000/- towards dowry, that thereafter they lived happily for one year, that
thereafter petitioner/accused No.1 started harassing her to bring additional
dowry of Rs.50,000/- and on that ground he used to pick up quarrel with her at
the instance of his parents every night and used to beat her mercilessly, and
that his parents, brothers and sisters used to instigate him to demand
additional dowry from her.  It was also her case that though she displayed her
inability to meet his demand, he did not spare her.  That in the meanwhile she
gave birth to three children.  That at the instigation of accused Nos.3 and 4,
accused No.1 poured kerosene on her person with an intention to do away with her
life, however, she saved herself somehow.  That in the year 1996 the petitioner-
accused No.1 beat her mercilessly till she suffered multiple injuries including
fracture of her backbone.  Thus, on 07.01.1996 she was hospitalized and was
discharged on the same day.  That the X-ray taken on 09.02.1996 disclosed
fracture of backbone.  That being unable to bear with the brutal behaviour,
assault, harassment and ill-treatment by him on account of not bringing
additional dowry, she started living with her parents from January 1996 along
with her children.  That petitioner-accused No.1 never cared to visit them or to
know their welfare.  That on 01.11.1998 she along with her children with an
intention of joining the company of her husband - accused No.1, went to her
matrimonial home.  However, she was subjected to abuses and beatings by accused   
Nos.1 to 4 proclaiming that she would not be allowed into their house unless she
complies with their demand of additional dowry.  That on the same day while she
was returning to her parents place along with her children, neighbours informed
that petitioner-accused No.1 contacted second marriage and that they also begot
a son who is named, Pawan, aged about eight months, and that they were living at
Kartikeyan Nagar, Nacharam.  All these facts she has stated in her private
complaint before the Court, which she preferred against the accused on
09.12.1998 while she was living with her parents.   The said private complaint
was preferred under Section 200 of Code of Criminal Procedure, before the Court
of XXII Metropolitan Magistrate, Hyderabad, against accused Nos.1 to 4 for the
offences under Sections 498-A IPC and Section 494 read with Section 34 of IPC,
and also for the offences under Sections 4 and 6 of the Dowry Prohibition Act.
The said complaint on being referred to the Police a case in Crime No.114 of
1998 was registered against accused Nos.1 to 9 for the said offences by W.P.S.
North Zone, Begumpet.  However, the Police laid charge sheet against accused
Nos.1 to 4 only for the said offences.  That the deceased Vijayalaxmi was under
the treatment of Dr.G.Prasada Rao, Consultant and Psychiatrist attached to
Sagarlal Memorial and other Hospitals, for major depression disorder between
08.02.1996 and 22.12.1998. 
3.      In support of its case the prosecution examined P.Ws.1 to 6 and got marked
Exs.P.1 to P.14 on its behalf.  However, no witnesses were examined and no
documents were marked on behalf of the defence. 
4.      Taking into consideration the evidence of prosecution witnesses as well as
the material brought on record, the trial Court found accused Nos.1 and 2 not
guilty for the offences under Section 494 IPC, and A3 and A4 not guilty for the
offence under Section 494 IPC read with Section 34 IPC and the trial Court also
found accused Nos.3 and 4 not guilty for the offences under Sections 4 and 6 of
the Dowry Prohibition Act and acquitted them.  That the trial Court on finding
accused No.1 guilty for the offence under Section 498-A IPC, convicted and
sentenced him to suffer rigorous imprisonment for three years and to pay a fine
of Rs.1000/-, in default, to suffer simple imprisonment for four months.  That
again the trial Court finding accused No.1 guilty for the offences under
Sections 4 and 6 of the Dowry Prohibition Act convicted and sentenced him to
suffer rigorous imprisonment for one year and to pay a fine of Rs.500/-, in
default, to suffer simple imprisonment for two months.  That on finding accused
Nos.3 and 4 guilty for the offence under Section 498-A IPC, the trial Court
convicted and sentenced them to suffer simple imprisonment for six months and to
pay a fine of Rs.1000/- each, in default, to suffer simple imprisonment for one
month. 
5.      So far as the factum of death of the deceased/de facto complainant is
concerned, the prosecution has not brought on record any material to show the
date, time, place and the circumstances in which she died.  It is to be found in
the evidence of P.W.3, who is one of the locality elders and who was also elder
to the marriage of de facto complainant with the petitioner-accused No.1, that
Vijayalaxmi died about two years back (his evidence was recorded on 30.04.2003).
The learned trial Judge in his judgment has recorded in paragraph 9 that
"beating the victim severely and neglecting for a long period even without
providing her medical treatment which ultimately ended with the death of the
victim is nothing but cruelty  on the  part of accused No.1".  However, the
learned Judge has not mentioned the fact as to when, where and how the de facto
complainant died, may be for want of the relevant material being brought on
record by the prosecution.
6.      Learned Counsel for the petitioner-A1 submitted that Ex.P.1 - complaint,
is not a substantive piece of evidence as the maker of it is no more now, and
neither it can be treated as dying declaration.  More so, the contents of it do
not, in any way, disclose that it was given by the deceased disclosing the
circumstances leading to her death.  Learned Counsel further submitted that as
per Ex.P.1-complaint, the deceased was subjected to beating and ill-treatment at
the hands of accused No.1 at the instigation of other accused in the year 1996,
and that the said private complaint was filed before the Court of the XXII
Metropolitan Magistrate - cum - Mahila Court, Hyderabad, in the year 1998.  And
that meanwhile, the relationship between the accused and the deceased continued 
to remain strained.  Therefore, it is contended that Ex.P.1 - complaint, lost
its sanctity in view of abnormal delay of about two years.  It is further
contended that both the Courts below had lost sight of the fact that during such
gap of two years the de facto complainant was staying with her parents, and that
herself and the revision petitioner - accused No.1, were not on visiting terms
during the said period.  As such, it cannot be said that the deceased was
subjected to continuous harassment for additional dowry.  Learned Counsel also
contends that P.Ws.1 and 2 are none other than the parents of the deceased and
whereas P.W.3 is the locality elder and was also the elder at the time of
marriage of the de facto complainant with the petitioner - accused No.1 and as
such they are interested witnesses, and both the Courts below ought to have
taken the said fact into consideration while appreciating their evidence.
Learned Counsel further submitted that so far as the injuries on the person of
the de facto complainant are concerned, no material is brought on record by the
prosecution, much less, the evidence of medical witnesses.  Therefore, that the
deceased suffered physical injuries at the hands of accused No.1 is doubtful.
It is also contended that the prosecution has, in fact, failed to prove both
physical and mental harassment meted out to the deceased de facto complainant. 
That the evidence of P.Ws.1 to 3 in this regard ought not to have been
considered by both the Courts below as P.Ws.1 and 2 are related witnesses and 
P.W.3 is an interested one.  At the most, according to the learned Counsel the
evidence of P.Ws.1 to 3 could be said to be only hearsay.  It is further
contended that the revision petitioner contacting second marriage was
disbelieved by the trial court and he was acquitted therefor, and as such, that
part of the matter is not relevant for this case.  Lastly, learned Counsel
submits that there is no material brought on record by the prosecution
sufficient to warrant the conviction of accused No.1 for the offences under
Section 498-A of IPC and for the offences under Sections 4 and 6 of the Dowry
Prohibition Act.  It is further submitted that so far as accused Nos.3 and 4 are
concerned they are acquitted by the appellate Court for the offences under
Section 498-A of IPC.  In the circumstances learned Counsel prayed that this
revision case may be allowed by setting aside the impugned judgment of the
appellate Court.
7.      On the other hand, learned Public Prosecutor supported the impugned
judgment of the appellate Court stating that the said Court after considering
the entire material on record and hearing both sides confirmed the order of
conviction and sentence passed by the trial Court against accused No.1 by
acquitting accused Nos.3 and 4 for the offences under Section 498-A of IPC and
as such the impugned judgment of the appellate Court does not in any way warrant
interference.
8.      Ex.P1, complaint filed by the deceased-defacto complainant before the
learned XXII Metropolitan Magistrate, Hyderabad under Section 200 Cr.P.C. does
not loose its sanctity by the death of its maker since the contents thereof
spoken to are corroborated by the evidence of PWs 1, 2 and 3 which is to the
effect that the deceased-defacto complainant was harassed, assaulted and ill-
treated for the sake of additional dowry by the petitioner-A1. Therefore, the
contention raised by the learned counsel in this regard is not acceptable to
this court.
9.      The abnormal delay of two years period in filing the private complaint by
the deceased-defacto complainant is not fatal to the case of the prosecution as
she was subjected to harassment on account of additional dowry for quite a
longtime though she was blessed with three children, aged 9 years, 6 years, and
4 years and that due to physical injuries including backbone fracture suffered
by her at the hands of the petitioner-A1 allegedly at the instigation of A3 and
A4, she became, as per the medical and other evidence, mental wreck for which
she was compelled to take psychiatric treatment from PW.5, Doctor attached to
Sagarlal memorial hospital. From these circumstances, it can be inferred that
she was made to suffer mentally till the time of her filing the private
complaint. Therefore, the said contention canvassed by the learned counsel has
got to be turned down.
10.     Coming to the evidence of PWs 1, 2 and 3, it is contended that since they
are related and interested witnesses, their evidence not sufficient and the same
is not safe to base the conviction.
11.     To put it in a single sentence, it is contended that the evidence of PWs 1
to 3 is nothing but hearsay. However, it is well settled that the relationship
or interestedness is not a ground to brush aside the evidence of the prosecution
witness provided their evidence is reliable, truthful and trustworthy. The only
requirement is that the court should be cautious in appreciating such evidence.
Both the courts below appear to have exercised such precaution while
appreciating the evidence of PWs 1 to 3 in coming to the conclusion that the
petitioner-A1 was guilty of the offences under sections 498-A IPC and 4 and 6 of
the Dowry Prohibition Act.  So far as the appellate is concerned, it went ahead
even in finding A3 and A4 not guilty of the offence under Section 498-A IPC and
as such, acquitted them of the charge for the said offence. Therefore, the
evidence of PWs 1, 2 and 3 is trustworthy in material particulars in proving the
prosecution case. That being so, no additional material is brought on record by
way of raising legal pleas or otherwise that the appellate court has committed
any error or irregularity in confirming the order of conviction and sentence
passed by the trial court against A1. However, the learned counsel for the
petitioner submitted that since the case pertains to the year 1998 and since
this petitioner-A1 is facing the ordeal of the legal proceedings against him at
the trial court as well as the appellate court and also at the level of this
court, a lenient view may be taken with regard to quantum of sentence and the
same may be reasonably be reduced.  
 12.    However, the learned Public Prosecutor supported the impugned judgment and 
order of the appellate Court.  He posed a question to himself in this context
that how could a man having committed acts of harassment, cruelty and assault
against his helpless wife though blessed with three children be shown any
leniency.
13.     Having regard to the facts and circumstances of the case and also having
regard to the submissions made by either side for and against and also having
regard to the fact that the petitioner-A1 was acquitted by the trial court for
the offence under Section 494 IPC for Bigamy, this court is in agreement with
the statement made by the learned counsel to some extent. As such, this court is
of the view and doth hereby order as under:
        That while maintaining the conviction of the petitioner-A1, the sentence
imposed on him of rigorous imprisonment for three yeas for the offence under
Section 498-A IPC is modified and is reduced to rigorous imprisonment for one
year, while maintaining the fine of Rs.1,000/- and in default, simple
imprisonment for four months, and also while maintaining his conviction and
sentence of rigorous imprisonment for one year and fine of Rs.500/-, in default,
simple imprisonment  for two months for the offence under Sections 4 and 6 of
the Dowry Prohibition Act. Both the sentence shall run concurrently.
14.     With this modification, this Criminal Revision Petition is disposed of.
The petitioner-A1 is entitled to set off as per Section 428 Cr.P.C.

