

THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE G.V.SEETHAPATHY          
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1311 OF 2000 AND CRL.R.C.NO.1508 OF 1999           

23-01-2009 

The Public Prosecutor, High Court of A.P., Hyderabad.

M.Krishnaiah 

Counsel for the Appellant : Public Prosecutor

Counsel for the Respondent: Mr.C.Praveen Kumar  

CRL.R.C.No.1508 of 1999  
R.Kanthamma             ..Petitioner

Vs.

M.Krishnaiah and another        ..Respondents 

Counsel for the Petitioner              : M.Sreeramulu Reddy  

Counsel for the Respondent No.1 :  Mr.C.Praveen Kumar         
Counsel for the Respondent No.2 :  Public Prosecutor       

:COMMON JUDGMENT:       

This criminal appeal and the criminal revision case arise out of the judgment
dated 03.09.1999 in Crl.A.No.178 of 1998 on the file of the III Additional
Sessions Judge, Tirupati, wherein the said appeal filed by the accused was
allowed setting aside the conviction of the accused for the offence under
Section 306 IPC and sentence of rigorous imprisonment for three years and fine
of Rs.1,000/- imposed by the learned Assistant Sessions Judge, Puttur by
judgment dated 10.11.1998 in SC No.399 of 1996.  The present appeal is filed by
the State against the impugned judgment of acquittal passed by the learned
Additional Sessions Judge, Tirupati and the criminal revision case is filed by
the de-facto complainant.

2.  As both the matters arise out of the same impugned judgment, they are being
heard together and disposed of by this common judgment. 

3. The case of the prosecution, in brief, is as follows:
The accused was a resident of Berivanikandriga, working as trainee in Computer
Section, Apollo Hospital, Madras. Jayasankar-complainant-PW.1 is a resident of
Govindappakandriga and elder brother of the deceased Bharathi. Rudra Kanthamma-  
PW.2, who is the maternal aunt of the deceased Bharathi, is the wife of PW.4
Srinivasulu Naidu. As they had no issues, they brought up the deceased and got
her educated.   The deceased was the daughter of one Janardhan Naidu (LW.4) and 
she completed her post graduation. She used to visit Govindappakandriga now and
then. The accused had maternal aunt at Govindappakandriga and he used to visit
the said village during holidays.
 About two years prior to the incident, the accused saw the deceased at
Govindappakandriga and developed friendship with her. The accused, who was 
experienced in trapping innocent girls, wrote many letters expressing his deep
love for her and won the heart of the deceased. The deceased also expressed her
willingness to marry the deceased. The accused was visiting Puttur and meeting
the deceased at her aunt's house to the knowledge of others.  He also developed
physical contact with the deceased on the false promise of marriage.  Later, the
accused developed evil idea of extracting dowry from the deceased and wrote
letters to her expressing his demand for dowry to the extent of two lakhs,
besides gold.
On 25.07.1995 also, he wrote such letter to the deceased. The deceased felt sad,
as she knew the poverty of her parents. The letter written by the accused caused
depression in the mind of
the deceased. She waited for some time expecting change in the mind of the
accused, but the accused was adamant. The deep depression caused by the letter  
of the accused drove the deceased to take the extreme step of putting an end to
her life. She, therefore, committed suicide by hanging on 16.02.1996 at 10 a.m.
in the house of her aunt at Puttur. On receiving complaint Ex.P.1 from PW.1, the
Sub-Inspector of Police-PW.18 registered a case in Cr.No.21 of 1996 and
investigated.  The investigation revealed that persistent demand of dowry by the
accused compelled the deceased Bharathi to commit suicide.  After completion of
the investigation, the Sub-Inspector of Police filed charge sheet for the
offence under Section 306 IPC.

4. The learned Assistant Sessions Judge, Puttur framed charge under Section 306
IPC against the accused and the accused pleaded not guilty.

5. In support of their case, the prosecution examined PWs.1 to 18 and marked
Exs.P.1 to P.19. No oral evidence was adduced on behalf of the accused, but
Exs.D.1 to D.19 were marked. 

6. On consideration of the evidence available on record, the trial Court found
the accused guilty of the offence under Section 306 IPC and convicted him for
the same and imposed sentence of rigorous imprisonment for three years and also
to pay fine of Rs.1,000/-, in default to suffer simple imprisonment for one
year.

7. Aggrieved by the same, the accused preferred an appeal in Crl.A.No.178 of
1998 before the III Additional Sessions Judge, Tirupati. By judgment dated
03.09.1999, the said appeal was allowed setting aside the conviction and
sentence imposed by the trial Court and consequently the accused was acquitted.

8. Aggrieved by the same, the present appeal is filed by the State and criminal
revision case is filed by PW.2.

9. Arguments of the learned Additional Public Prosecutor appearing for the
appellant-State, learned counsel appearing for the revision petitioner and the
arguments of the learned counsel for the accused were heard. Perused the record.

 10. Learned Additional Public Prosecutor would contend that the letters Exs.P.2
and P.3 clearly establish the persistent demand on the part of the accused for
dowry and the letter Ex.P.2 which was received by the deceased on the previous
day of her committing suicide proved to be the last straw on the camel's back
and drove the deceased to take the extreme step of ending her life, as she was
aware that it was impossible for her parents to meet the said demand on account
of their poverty. She would, therefore, contend that Ex.P.2 letter written by
the accused was the proximate cause for the commission of suicide by the
deceased and, therefore, writing of such letter by the accused amounted to
abetment within the meaning of Section 107 IPC. She would also point out that
Ex.P.2 was produced before the police immediately after the occurrence and the
inquest report also refers to Ex.P.2 and the lower Appellate Court erred in
observing that it was produced one month later. She would also contend that the
lower appellate Court erred in reversing the judgment of conviction passed by
the trial Court by relying upon the letters produced by the defence, which were
written in between Exs.P.2 and P.3.

11. Learned counsel for the accused, on the other hand, would contend that there
was no mens rea on the part of the accused or any intention to instigate or aid
or abet the deceased to commit suicide and the letter Ex.P.2 does not constitute
abetment within the meaning of Section 107 IPC. He would further contend that
any amount of humiliation does not amount to causing abetment. 
        12. It is not disputed and is borne out by the evidence on record
particularly the letters exchanged between the deceased and accused that they
were in love with each other and were contemplating to marry.  While so, the
deceased committed suicide on 16-02-1996.  The prosecution alleges that on the
previous day i.e., 15-02-1996 the deceased received letter-Ex.P-2 written by the
accused which had driven the deceased to take the extreme step of committing
suicide owing to deep depression and dejection caused on account of the contents
of the said letter.  The prosecution relies upon another letter Ex.P-3 which was
written earlier by the accused on 25-07-1995 as the cause for setting in mood of
dejection in the mind of the deceased due to change of attitude on the part of
the accused.  In between the two letters, several letters were exchanged and
some of them received by the accused were marked on 'D' series as Exs.D-1 to D-
8, D-18 and D-19.  Some of the letters received by the deceased from the accused
were marked as a bunch under Ex.P-4.  In Ex.P-3 dated 25-07-1995, the accused  
while expressing his love to the deceased and feeling sorry for the troubles she
was faced with and assuring that everything would be solved and discounting the
proposal to marry secretly had further suggested three measures, which he hoped
would solve the problem. Firstly, he thought that if P.W.2, the aunt of the
deceased, could arrange more than two lakhs and good amount of gold, the problem 
would be solved, secondly he advised her to study M.A very seriously so that she
could command respect from his parents and thirdly the deceased should 
compromise with her parents also.  He also expressed confidence that he would
change his father's mind, but it may take some time.  Finally, he assured the
deceased that their marriage would take place in a grand way and he insisted
that it is better to have the marriage through the parents so that they will not
get any problem in future.  As can be seen from the letter Ex.P-3 and bunch of
other letters, there appeared to be some response from the parents of both sides
for the marriage between the deceased and the accused and the accused was trying 
to evolve ways and means of convincing the elders of both sides to have the
marriage performed under the aegis of the elders in a respectable way instead of
going through secretly.  Ex.P-3 does not contain any demand as such for payment 
of dowry or gold as a consideration for the marriage, but only a suggestion from
the accused that if P.W.2, who was fostering the deceased, could arrange for
such payment, things would become easier in convincing his parents.  The
subsequent letters that transpired between the accused and the deceased would 
show that they have not taken the suggestion by accused for arranging cash and
gold seriously and they continued their contact and correspondence as usual.  A
perusal of those letters that followed Ex.P-3 would not disclose that there was
any change in the mind of the accused regarding his love for the deceased or
that he started putting any conditions for fruition of love into marriage.  The
letter-Ex. P-2 received by the deceased on the previous day is alleged to have
upset the deceased so much that she was driven to commit suicide on the next day 
of receiving it.  A close scrutiny of the letter-Ex. P-2 would only show that
the accused was cursing himself and was feeling sorry for the change of attitude
on the part of the deceased.   Even in Ex.P-2, the accused expressed his love
for the deceased.  Of course, in Ex.P-2 he stated that he cannot adjust with the
deceased and advised her to take her own decision saying that may be it was the
last and final letter from him.  He further stated that he would commit suicide
if anything happens to her life.  There is no demand for payment of any cash or
gold
or any other conditions put forward in the letter-Ex.P-2 for the marriage to
take place. On the other hand, Ex.P-2 would
disclose that the deceased and accused had developed some misunderstandings   
towards one another. There is nothing in
Ex.P-2 that would amount to instigating, let alone aiding the deceased to commit
suicide.  Even assuming that on seeing the letter-Ex.P-2 the deceased became
depressed and dejected and decided to end her life, there is nothing in the
contents of Ex.P-2 to suggest that the accused was in any way responsible for
the extreme step taken by the deceased.  The accused is charged with the offence
under Section 306 IPC, which renders a person who abets the commission of 
suicide by another, liable for punishment.  The expression 'abetment' is defined
under Section 107 IPC in the following terms:
        
        107. Abetment of a thing
A person abets the doing of a thing, who--
First--Instigates any person to do that thing; or
Secondly--Engages with one or more other person or persons in any conspiracy for
the doing of that thing, if an act or illegal omission takes place in pursuance
of that conspiracy, and in order to the doing of that thing; or

Thirdly--Intentionally aids, by any act or illegal omission, the doing of the
thing.


In order to establish the ingredients of the offence under Section 306 IPC, the
prosecution has to show that the abetment was of the kind as defined in Section
107 IPC.  There is nothing in Ex.P-2 to show that the accused in any way
instigated or intentionally aided by any acts or omissions in the commission of
suicide by the deceased.

        13. It is well settled that mens rea is necessary to constitute
instigation. Any amount of abuse or threat or humiliation without the necessary
intention, does not amount to instigation.  Intentional aiding and instigation
need not be reflected by specific words or in any particular form and could be
discerned by the conduct also.  In V.ADINARAYANA V. STATE OF A.P1, this Court    
relying on the decision of the Apex Court in SHRIRAM V. STATE OF U.P (AIR 1975   
SC 175) held that threatening words used by the accused are not sufficient to
constitute instigation.  In V.SHANKARAIAH V. STATE OF A.P.2, this Court held  
that the deceased committing suicide on account of cancellation of marriage with
A-1 after it was settled, does not amount to instigation on the part of the
accused, simply because the deceased was humiliated by the accused. This Court  
further observed that various High Courts have taken a view that merely because
a person was feeling insulted or humiliated, due to the comments or utterances
made by the accused, the accused cannot be said to be guilty of the offence
under Section 306 IPC.

        14. In a recent decision in SOHAN RAJ SHARMA V. STATE OF HARYANA,3 the         
Apex Court held that in cases of alleged abetment of suicide there must be proof
of direct or indirect acts of incitement to the commission of suicide.  The mere
fact that the husband treated the deceased-wife with cruelty is not enough.

        15. In the present case, the letter-Ex.P-2, which according to the
prosecution is the proximate cause for the commission of suicide, does not
disclose that the accused had in any way induced or instigated or intentionally
aided or assisted in the commission of the suicide by the deceased.

        16. The learned counsel for the revision petitioner-P.W.2 would invite
attention to a decision in DAMMU SREENU AND ANOTHER V. STATE OF A.P4 wherein          
this Court held that if it can be said that acts and omissions of the accused
would certainly drive a person of ordinary prudence to commit suicide, the
element of mens rea would certainly be present with the accused.  In the above
case, A-2 was the wife of the deceased and A-1 was her paramour.  On facts, it
was found that the behaviour and attitude of A-1 and A-2 was not one which could
be countenanced by any civilized society and any person placed in the position
of deceased would have either done some wrong to A-1 to rescue his wife A-2, or
to commit suicide and the deceased has chosen the latter.
On evidence, it was also found that apart from causing humiliation to the
deceased, the acts of the accused caused the members of the family of the
deceased as well as A-2, to hide their faces in shame.  It was, therefore, held
that the outrageous acts resorted to by A-1 and A-2 can safely be held as
constituting abetment of the suicide by the deceased.  In the present case, no
such situation exists and the decision cited is not applicable to the facts on
hand.  It cannot be said that the contents of Ex.P-2-letter are such that any
person of ordinary prudence would be driven to commit suicide after receiving
the said letter. If the deceased felt dejected or disappointed on receiving
letter-Ex.P-2, there were so many ways and means of remedying the situation,
especially when she was in constant communication with the accused since a long 
time.  Resort to the extreme step of ending the life on seeing the contents of
the letter-Ex.P-2 is not warranted on the part of any person of ordinary
prudence.  Under those circumstances, it must be held that the lower appellate
Court has on proper appreciation of the evidence available on record and on a
careful scrutiny of the contents of the letters exhibited in evidence by both
sides had rightly held that the ingredients of the offence under Section 306 IPC
are not attracted to the facts of the present case. The impugned judgment of the
learned Additional Sessions Judge, Tirupati setting aside the conviction and
sentence recorded by the trial Court against the accused and consequently
finding him not guilty of the offence under Section 306 IPC is, therefore, held
not liable to be interfered with.  There are absolutely no valid or justifiable
grounds or compelling and substantial reasons to interfere with the order of
acquittal passed by the learned Additional Sessions Judge, Tirupati.  There are
no merits in the appeal filed by the State or in the revision case filed by
P.W.2. 

        17. In the result, both criminal appeal and the criminal revision case are
dismissed. 

?1 2000 Crl.L.J 1182
2 2002 CRI.L.J.3201 
3 2008(3) AICLR 31 
4 2003(1) ALT (Crl.) 568 (A.P)

