

THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE P.S. NARAYANA        
Tr.C.M.P.No.44 of 2009 

13-03-2009 

Chilakamarthi Jayanthi
Naga Mallika w/o.Ravi Kumar 

Chilakamarthi Ravi Kumar 

Counsel for petitioner : Sri Syed Shareef Ahmed

Counsel for respondent : Sri Krishna Mohan Shikaram 

:ORDER:  

1.              This Court ordered Notice Before Admission on         30-1-2009 and
granted interim stay for a period of four weeks.
2.              Transfer CMP MP No.151/2009 is filed by the respondent to vacate the
interim stay granted by this Court on 30-1-2009.
3.              The Counsel on record made submissions and also further made a  
request to dispose of the Transfer CMP and hence the Transfer C.M.P. itself is
being disposed of.
4.              The Counsel for the petitioner had taken this Court through the
contents of the affidavit filed in support of the Transfer C.M.P. and would
maintain that in the facts and circumstances of the case, inasmuch as the
convenience of the wife to be taken into consideration, the transfer to be
ordered.
5.              On the contrary, the Counsel for respondent had taken this Court
through the contents of the counter affidavit filed in support of the vacate
application and would maintain that in the light of the same, it may not be just
and proper to order transfer.  The learned Counsel also relied on certain
decisions to substantiate his submissions.
6.              Heard the Counsel. 
7.              The  Transfer C.M.P. is filed under Section 24 of the Code of Civil
Procedure praying for transfer of O.P.No.1049/08 on the file of Family Court,
City Civil Court, Hyderabad to be tried along with F.C.M.C.No.61/2008 on the
file of Family Court, Anantapur and to pass such other suitable orders.
8.              It is stated by the petitioner that her marriage was celebrated with
the respondent on 13-5-2007 at New Nallakunta Community Hall, Hyderabad as per  
Hindu rites and customs.  After marriage, both the petitioner and the respondent
went to Kerala for Honeymoon and returned to Bangalore and started living in a
rented single bed room and the respondent left for Canada and retu7rned in
November 2007 and is not interested in happy life and thus created a story and
filed O.P.No.1049/2008 on the file of Judge, Family Court, City Civil Court,
Hyderabad under Section 13(1)(ia) of Hindu Marriage Act and sought for a decree
for dissolution of marriage and the same is pending consideration.  It is
further stated that the petitioner filed F.C.M.C.No.61/2008 on the file of
Family Court, Anantapur seeking maintenance and also gave a report against the
respondent, his father and mother under Section 498-A I.P.C. r/w. Section 4 of
the Dowry Prohibition Act at Mahila Police Station, Anantapur, which was
registered as Cr.No.30/2008 and the matter is under investigation.  It is
further stated that the respondent is attending the Court Family Court,
Anantapur and as a counter-blast the respondent filed the O.P. for dissolution
of marriage with false allegations that the petitioner has no knowledge about
the Hindu customs and performance of poojas etc.  It is further stated that the
petitioner being a lady dependent on her old parents is unable to travel from
Anantapur to Hyderabad and it is also stated that she apprehends danger to her
life and hence prayed for transfer of F.C.O.P.No.1049/2008 on the file of Judge,
Family Court, City Civil Court, Hyderabad to the Court of Judge, Family Court,
Anantapur to be tried along with F.C.M.C.No.61/2008.
9.              In the counter affidavit filed by the respondent/husband it is
stated that the respondent filed O.P.No.1049/2008 on the file of the Judge,
Family Court, City Civil Court, Hyderabad for granting decree of dissolution of
marriage and the Family Court ordered notice to the petitioner and adjourned the
matter to 20-11-2008.  As the summons was not returned within the date of
adjournment i.e., 20-11-2008, the matter was adjourned to 17-12-2008 and
directed the respondent to issue fresh process and adjourned the matter to 12-2-
2009.  On 12-2-2009 the petitioner appeared in person before the Family Court,
Hyderabad and filed a memo stating that this Court had granted stay for four
weeks.  However, it is pertinent to note that no order copy had been appended to
the said memo.  Further it is stated that the petitioner had not specifically
mentioned the actual dates of filing of F.C.M.C.No.61/2008 and the complaint
under Section 498-A I.P.C. r/w. Section 4 of Dowry Prohibition Act in
Cr.No.30/2008.  The petitioner suppressed these facts with a malafide intention.
The documents filed along with the Transfer C.M.P. would clearly speak that the
petitioner filed F.C.M.C.No.61/2008 on 23-10-2008 and the complaint in
Cr.No.30/2008 was lodged on 6-11-2008 whereas the respondent filed 
O.P.No.1049/2008 on 10-10-2008.  Thus it is clear that it is the respondent who
initiated the legal proceedings first and thereafter the petitioner filed both
M.C. and the complaint at Anantapur.  Further, the respondent denied the
allegation that he attended the Family Court at Anantapur and as a counterblast
he filed the O.P. for dissolution of marriage.  It is further stated that the
petitioner had not stated the reasons for seeking the transfer of the case.
Reliance was placed on Sujata Mohanty Vs. Rudra Charan Mohanty 1.   
10.             These are the respective stands taken by the parties.
11.             The Counsel for the respondent also placed reliance on Sushma Mishra 
Vs. Mithilesh Kumar Mishra 2 wherein while explaining the meaning of the word or
expression "resides" it was held that it should be more than a temporary stay
and has to be of permanent character.  The learned Counsel for the respondent
also placed reliance on the decision referred (1) supra wherein the learned
Judge of Orissa High Court observed at paras 2 and 3 as hereunder:-
"Learned Counsel for the opposite party-husband resists such prayer of the
petitioner contending that the petitioner is not a Purda Nashin lady.  She is
rather quite used to travelling and she has no difficulty as stated by her.
Further, relying on the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of Kamaljit
Kaur Vs. Prince Singh Chhabra, reported in 2006(1) O.L.R. 456, he submits that
only on the ground that the wife is not able to travel alone the case should not
be transferred from one Court to another.  He stressed on the observation of the
Supreme Court in the said decision which is as follows:
"No ground is made out by the petitioner except to say that being a lady it is
not safe for her to travel from Dhanbad, Jharkhand to Rourkela, Orissa.  In our
view, this is no ground for transfer at all".

        After perusing the decision cited above, and the materials available on
record this Court declines to transfer the case from Cuttack to Rourkela, but
then in consonance with the ratio of the decision of the Supreme Court supra
directs the husband-opposite party to pay all expenses for the to and fro travel
of the petitioner from Rourkela to Cuttack along with a companion in train in a
reserved 2nd class berth and their stay at Cuttack in a sophisticated hotel on
each and every occasion she is required to come to Cuttack. The learned Judge,
Family Court, Cuttack shall assess the said expenses which the husband-opposite 
party shall send to the petitioner, in advance, by demand draft so as to reach
her two weeks before her travel".

12.             Whatever may be the discrepancy relating to the dates of filing or
otherwise, the fact that the Maintenance Case is pending on the file of Family
Court, Anantapur is not in serious controversy.  No doubt, certain further
details had not been referred to in the affidavit filed in support of the
Transfer C.M.P., but that by itself, it cannot be said that the ground raised by
the petitioner is not a bona fide ground for transfer.  The convenience of the
wife always may have to be taken into consideration while deciding the Transfer
C.M.Ps. under Section 24 of the Code.
13.             In the light of the same, O.P.No.1049/2008 on the file of Family
Court, City Civil Court, Hyderabad is hereby withdrawn and transferred to the
Family Court, Anantapur to be disposed of in accordance with law.
14.             The Transfer C.M.P. is ordered accordingly.

?1 I (2008) D.M.C. 708
2 I (2009) DMC 130 

