

THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE G.V.SEETHAPATHY          
Criminal Petition No.7710 of 2008

20-04-2009 

Thota Sambasiva Rao and two others  

State of A.P. rep.by Public Prosecutor,
A.P.High Court, A.P., and another.

Counsel for the Petitioners: Miss.Habeeb Sheikh

Counsel for the Respondent No.1:  Addl. Public Prosecutor
Counsel for the Respondent No.2:  Sri G.Venkateswara Rao  

:ORDER:  

This petition is filed under Section 482 Cr.P.C. seeking to quash further
proceedings against the petitioners-A.1 to A.3 in Cr.No.498 of 2008 on the file
of Sastyanarayanapuram PS, Vijayawada.   

2. Heard both sides. Perused the record.

3. On a complaint given by the 2nd respondent herein, the police registered FIR
in Cr.No.498 of 2008 against the petitioners herein for the offence under
Section 498-A IPC. The first petitioner is the husband of the complainant. The
2nd petitioner is the mother of the first petitioner, 3rd petitioner is the
brother of first petitioner. According to the complainant, her marriage with
first petitioner-A.1 was performed on 12.04.2006 and at the time of the
marriage, Rs.2,00,000/- cash was given towards pasupu kumkuma, one gold chain  
and ring and other household articles wroth Rs.1,00,000/- and adapaduchu
lanchanam of Rs.25,000/- and Rs.2,00,000/- worth gold jewellery and Ac.3.00 of
agricultural land. It is further alleged by the complainant that few days after
the marriage, A.1 developed illicit intimacy with another woman and subjected
the complainant to harassment and left her at her parents' house till 20.06.2007
and took her to Hyderabad on 21.06.2007. But there also he continued harassment 
demanding additional dowry or else to agree for divorce. The complainant further
alleges that when she informed about the same to the petitioners 2 and 3, they
also supported A.1. It is further alleged in the complaint that on 01.10.2008
all the accused subjected the complainant physical and mental harassment 
demanding to bring additional dowry and she made telephone call to her father
and on his arrival, she informed him about the harassment meted out to her and
when the complainant's father questioned the accused about the same, they beat
the complainant and sent out of the house.

4. A perusal of the complaint thus disclose that specific allegations pertaining
to the alleged offence under Section 498-A IPC have been made against all the
accused. The truth or otherwise of the said allegations have to be ascertained
only after due investigation.

5. The other ground on which the petitioners seek quashing of the proceedings is
that all the alleged acts of ill-treatment and harassment have taken place only
at Hyderabad and no part of the cause of action arose at Vijayawada and
therefore, the police at Vijayawada have no jurisdiction to investigate and such
investigation, without jurisdiction, would amounts to abuse of process of law.

6. In that connection, learned counsel for the petitioners relied upon a
decision in 'Y.Abrahmam Ajith vs. Inspector of Police, Chennai1' wherein the
Apex Court held on the facts of the said case that 'no part of cause of action
arose at Chennai and therefore the Magistrate at Chennai has no jurisdiction to
deal with the matter and therefore the proceedings were quashed and the
complaint was directed to return to the complainant for filing the same in the
appropriate Court, if so she choose'.

7. In the above case, the application was filed under Section 482 Cr.P.C. for
quashing proceedings in CC No.3532 of 2001 on the file of the Court of XVIII
Metropolitan Magistrate, Saidapet, Chennai. A private complaint was filed by the
Inspector of Police, which was referred by the learned Magistrate to the police
and after investigation, charge sheet was filed by the police and the accused
filed petition under section 482 Cr.P.C. alleging that the learned Magistrate
has no jurisdiction even to entertain the complaint as no part of cause of
action arose at Chennai. When the complaint itself discloses after 15.04.1997
the complainant left Nagercoil and came to Chennai and staying there and all the
alleged incidents took place at Nagercoil, the complainant therein contended
that part of cause of action arose at Chennai as well and some of the alleged
offences are continuing offences and by virtue of Section 178[c] Cr.P.C., the
learned Magistrate at Chennai was having jurisdiction. The above decision
related to the case where territorial jurisdiction of the Court to deal with the
case was involved. Further on facts, it was found in the above case that the
complainant herself left the house of the husband at Nagercoil on 15.04.1997 and
came to Chennai.  On the factual scenario in the above case, it was held that
logic of Section 178[c] Cr.P.C. would not apply.

8. In the present case, the investigation is still pending and no charge sheet
is filed before any Court. FIR is made only to set the criminal law into motion.
FIR need not contain all the details of all the incidents and events that have
taken place since the time of the marriage, till lodging of the complaint, which
constituted the ingredients of the alleged offence. If the investigation
discloses that any incidents or events have taken place at Vijayawada,
attracting the ingredients of the alleged offence under Section 498-A IPC, the
police at Vijayawada would certainly have jurisdiction to investigate. Even
otherwise, going by the averments in the complaint, the marriage took place at
Vijayawada and cash, jewellery and other items by way of dowry and lanchanams  
were given at the time of the marriage and A.1 having developed illicit intimacy
with another woman, subjected the complainant to harassment in various ways and 
left her at her parental house till 20.06.2007 at Vijayawada. Thus, according to
the complainant, the conduct of A.1 in having illicit intimacy with another
woman and leaving the complainant at her parental house at Vijaywada,
constituted the acts of ill-treatment and harassment within the meaning of
Section 498-A IPC. Further, the allegation in the complaint even after shifting
to Hyderabad, harassment over demand for additional dowry continued unabated and 
having no other alternative and unable to bear the physical and mental
harassment, she had complained to her father and when he questioned the accused  
about the same, the complainant was beat and sent out of the house. It is
therefore not a case where the complainant has voluntarily left the house of the
accused on her own but it is a case where she was beat and sent out as per the
averments in the complaint and having no other go she had to take shelter in her
parents house at Vijayawada. The mental harassment on account of continued  
desertion of the complainant by the husband for no fault of hers, therefore,
continued to be suffered by the complainant even while she was staying at
Vijayawada and subjecting the complainant to such harassment over demand for 
additional dowry would certainly attract the provisions of Section 498-A IPC.
The harassment need not always be in the form of physical assault and even
mental harassment also would come within the purview of Section 498-A IPC. When  
such harassment is meted out with a view to coerce the complainant to meet
unlawful demand for any property or valuable security or is on account of her
failure to meet such demand, it amounts to cruelty and the husband and his
relative, whoever subjects the woman to cruelty commits offence punishable under
Section 498-A IPC.  The continued desertion of the complainant by the husband
demanding her to bring additional dowry or asking her to agree for divorce in
the event of her failure to meet such demand would certainly constitute mental
harassment and the complainant continues to be subjected to such harassment even  
while staying at her parental house at Vijaywada, where she was forced to take
temporary shelter having no other alternative. The decision cited is therefore,
not applicable to the facts of the present case. On the facts and circumstances
in the present case, it must be held that part of cause of action arose at
Vijayawada and the offence alleged under section 498-A IPC is found to be
continuous offence in the present case and therefore, the police at Vijayawada
are certainly entitled to investigate.

9. The other decision cited by the learned counsel for the petitioners in 'Bhura
Ram vs. State of Rajasthan2' is also a case where after investigation charge
sheet was filed before the Court of Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate, Sri
Ganganagar and it was contended by the accused that the said Court had no 
jurisdiction to try the offence as the cause of action arose within the
jurisdiction of another Court. The said decision is also not applicable to the
present case where investigation is still pending and no charge sheet is filed
as yet.

10. In 'Satvinder Kaur vs. State (Govt. of NCT of Delhi)3', the Apex Court held
as follows:
"The High Court committed a grave error in accepting the contention of the
respondent that the investigating officer had no jurisdiction to investigate the
matters on the alleged ground that no part of the offence was committed within
the territorial jurisdiction of the police station at Delhi. The appreciation of
the evidence is the function of the courts when seized of the matter. At the
stage of investigation, the material collected by an investigating officer
cannot be judicially scrutinized for arriving at a conclusion that the police
station officer of a particular police station would not have territorial
jurisdiction. In any case, it has to be stated that in view of Section 178 [c]
Cr.P.C., when it is uncertain in which of the several local areas an offence was
committed, or where it consists of several acts done in different local areas,
the said offence can be enquired into or tried by a court having jurisdiction
over any of such local areas. Therefore, to say at the stages of investigation
that the S.H.O., Police Station Paschim Vihar, New Delhi was not having
territorial jurisdiction, is on the face of it, illegal and erroneous. That
apart, Section 156(2) contains an embargo that no proceeding of a police officer
shall be challenged on the ground that he has no territorial power to
investigate. The High Court has completely over looked the said embargo when it
entertained the petition of respondent 2 on the ground of want of territorial
jurisdiction."

11. In 'Neraturi Chakradhar Rao vs. State House Officer, Huzurnagar4', this
Court after referring to the above decision of the Apex Court and also the
decision in 'Trisuns Chemical Industry Vs. Rajesh Agarwal' (1999(2) ALT (Crl.)
405 (SC)], held that 'the petitioners cannot seek to quash the proceedings
initiated against them altogether.  However, it is open to them to take such a
plea before the Judicial Magistrate of First Class, Huzurnagar, before the trial
is commenced and if the learned Magistrate is convinced about the want of
territorial jurisdiction, he can follow the procedure as envisaged under Section
201 of the Code.'

12. In the above case also after investigation into the private complaint
referred to the police under Section 156(3) Cr.P.C. a charge sheet was filed and
the same was taken cognizance by the learned Judicial Magistrate of I Class,
Huzurnagar. It is held that 'on the ground of want of territorial jurisdiction,
the proceedings cannot be quashed altogether and such a plea can be taken before
the learned Magistrate before the trial is commenced'.

13. In the present case, the matter is only at the threshold stage of
investigation and in the light of the proposition laid in Satvinder Kaur's case
(3rd supra), further investigation cannot be quashed on the ground of
territorial jurisdiction for the police to investigate.

14. In the circumstances and on the facts of the present case, it is held that
there are no valid or justifiable grounds to invoke inherent powers of this
Court under Section 482 Cr.P.C. to quash further investigation in Cr.No.498 of
2008 of Satyanarayanapuram PS, Vijayawada.   

15. In the result, the criminal petition is dismissed.

?1 (2004) 8 SCC 100 
2 2008 Crl.L.J. 3494
3 (1998) 8 SCC 728 
4 2005(3) ALT (Crl.) 15 (AP)

