

THE HONOURABLE SRI JUSTICE SAMUDRALA GOVINDARAJULU                
Criminal Petition No.3533 of 2010

22-06-2010 

Lanka Vani and another 

State of AP., rep. By the Public Prosecutor and another.

Counsel for the Petitioner : Sri Ravindra Bharati

Counsel for the 1st Respondent:  Public Prosecutor
Counsel for the 2nd respondent:        --

:ORDER:  

        The petitioners  1 and 2/A-2 and A-3 in C.C.No.588 of 2009 on the file of
II Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Vijayawada are questioning order
dated 04.01.2010 of the lower court passed therein, by which the lower court
permitted  filing of additional report as prayed for.  Originally, on report
given by the 2nd respondent/defacto-complainant, Gannavaram  police of
Vijayawada city registered case in Crime No.283 of 2009 for offence punishable
under Section 498-A IPC against A-1 to A-3.  A-1 is husband of the defacto-
complainant.  The petitioners 1 and 2/A-2 and A-3 are parents of A-1.  After
investigation, the Sub Inspector of Police, Gannavaram police station filed
charge sheet against A-1 only as sole accused in the lower court.  In the charge
sheet/final report, it is stated that the investigating officer who is the Sub
Inspector of Police caused enquiries in the neighbourhood at Visakhapatnam where
the defacto-complainant lead marital life with A-1, and examined two witnesses
and that the said evidence reveals that there is no substantial evidence
available against the petitioners 1 and 2 who are mother-in-law and father-in-
law of the 2nd respondent and that they are in no way concerned with harassment
as stated by the 2nd respondent and that therefore, their names are deleted from
the list of accused.  Further, it is stated in the charge sheet that witnesses
Nos.6 and 7 of the charge sheet stated that A-1 was only harassing the 2nd
respondent and that A-2 and A-3 are in no way concerned and they never involved
in harassment of their daughter-in-law.
        While so, the same Sub Inspector of Police, Gannavaram Police Station
filed memo in C.C.No.588 of 2009 in the lower court requesting  the lower court
to treat A-2 and A-3 as accused  in addition to A-1 as they also harassed their
daughter-in-law mentally and physically in demanding additional dowry; and
requesting the court to finalise the case as per additional charge sheet filed
in this case.  No provision of law is quoted in that memo by the Sub Inspector
of Police.  It is stated in that memo that during the course of further
investigation after filing of charge sheet and taking cognizance by the court,
he made further enquiry about involvement of A-2 and A-3 at Gannavaram and
examined four more witnesses and recorded their detailed statements in Part-II
case diary.  It is not stated in the memo at whose instance, he made further
investigation in this case after filing of final report/charge sheet under
Section 173(2) Cr.P.C in the lower court and after it was taken cognizance by
the lower court. No permission is taken by the investigating officer from the
lower court for making further investigation.  At this juncture, it would be
appropriate to refer to Hasanbhai Valibhai Qureshi v. State of Gujarat1  of the
Supreme Court dealing with the present situation and it was held therein:
"12. Sub-section (8) of Section 173 of the code permits further investigation,
and even dehors any direction from the Court as such, it is open to the police
to conduct proper investigation, even after the Court took cognizance of any
offence on the strength of a police report earlier submitted.  All the more so,
if as in this case, the Head of the Police Department also was not satisfied of
the propriety or the manner and nature of investigation already conducted..

13. In Om Prakash Narang and another v. State (Delhi Admn.,), (AIR 1979 SC 1791 
it was observed by this Court that further investigation is not altogether ruled
out merely because cognizance has been taken by the Court. When defective  
investigation comes to light during course of trial, it may be cured by further
investigation if circumstances so permitted.  It would ordinarily be desirable
and all the more  so in this case, that police should inform the Court and seek
formal permission to make further investigation when fresh facts come to light
instead of being silent over the matter keeping in view only the need for an
early trial  since an effective trial for real or actual offences found during
course of proper investigation is as much relevant, desirable and necessary as
an expeditious disposal of the matter by the Courts.  In view of the aforesaid
position in law if there is necessity for further investigation the same can
certainly be done as prescribed by law."

        After surveying case law on this subject including the above mentioned
reported judgment of the Supreme court in Hasanbhai, Single Judge of this Court
in Chetti Krishna Rao Vs. State of A.P.,2 upheld filing of additional charge
sheet  by C.I.D., against two more accused persons in addition to three accused
persons who were already charge sheeted by the local police.  It was held
therein:-

"There is no provision in the Code, which requires a permission of the
Magistrate to be obtained by the investigating agency before making further
investigation after having laid the charge-sheet at the culmination of
investigation.  On the other hand, sub-section (8) of Section 173 of the Code
posits that further investigation can be made by the investigating agency and
the provision does not require a previous permission of the Magistrate. However
the Apex Court in the interests of the independence of the magistracy and the
judiciary, in the interests of the purity of the administration of criminal
justice and in the interests of the comity of the various agencies and
institutions entrusted with different stages of such administration, held that
it would ordinarily be desirable that the police should inform the Court and
seek formal permission to make further investigation. The position seems to be
obvious.  Notwithstanding the fact that the provision germane in the context
for consideration does not explicitly obligate the police to obtain necessary
permission from the Magistrate for making further investigation, having regard
to the fact that already the Court has taken cognizance of the offence on the
charge-sheet filed by the investigating agency, the agency before making further
investigation in this case is expected to obtain formal permission from the
Magistrate in the interest of purity of the administration of criminal justice
and in the interest of the comity of various agencies and institutions entrusted
with different stages of such administration. The question germane for
consideration is the effect of failure to obtain necessary permission from the a
Magistrate by the investigating agency before making further investigation and
fi8ling a supplement charge-sheet.  Illegality, if any, in the investigation, in
my considered view, may not affect the merits of the case in the final analysis.
It is for the Court to convince from the facts in a given case about the truth
or otherwise of the charge levelled against the accused.  Anyway, such an
illegality has to be considered by the Trial court while appreciating the
evidence let in on either side in a given case, so as to see whether it a
affects the merits of the case or not.  But, in my considered view, that
illegality, if any, cannot be the ground to quash the proceedings at the
threshold."

        Thus, legal aspect under Section 173(8) Cr.P.C is clear to the effect that
even though law does not prescribe any prior permission to be taken by the
police officer from the Magistrate who already took cognizance of the case for
further investigation,  but it is ordinarily desirable that the police to inform
the court and seek formal permission to make further investigation when fresh
facts come to light instead of being silent about the matter.    In Chetti
Krishna Rao (2 supra) local police filed charge sheet against A-1 to A-3 for
offence under Section 304-A IPC as they were responsible for death of the
deceased, as  coach for swimming in Hotel Baskara Palace, Hyderabad, Assistant  
Manager of Health Club and security guard in the hotel posted near the swimming-
pool.  It was a case relating to death of a boy who went for coaching for
swimming.  Not satisfied with investigation of the local police, father of the
deceased put in a petition, on which C.I.D., took up further investigation and
filed additional charge sheet after further investigation against A-4 and A-5
for offences punishable under Sections 201, 202, 304-A, 336 and 338 IPC, as they
were also involved in that case as Director and Managing Director of Hotel
Baskara Palace where the incident occurred.

But, in the case on hand, originally the petitioners 1 and 2/A-2 and A-3 were
also shown as accused persons in FIR in Crime No.283 of 2009. After
investigation, the  Sub Inspector of Police who was the Investigating Officer
deleted names of A-2 and A-3 from this case and gave clean chit  to them on the
ground that witness Nos. 6 and 7 who are residents of Visakhapatnam where the 
2nd respondent lived with A-1 to A-3, ruled out complicity of A-2 and A-3 in
harassing the victim woman/2nd respondent.  Now the same Sub Inspector of Police 
makes somersault  by filing additional charge sheet with a memo by including A-2
and A-3 also as accused persons on the ground that he examined four more 
witnesses during the course of further investigation.  In the original charge
sheet, the Sub Inspector of Police did not state that he was making further
investigation in the matter and did not indicate to the court that he would file
record relating to further investigation in this case at subsequent point of
time.  Further, in the memo filed along with the additional charge sheet, he did
not mention any circumstances which prompted him to take up further
investigation in this case after he filed charge sheet under Section 173(2)
Cr.P.C.  This is not a case where any petition was filed by the defacto-
complainant to any higher police officers who directed the investigating officer
to make further investigation in this case.  This is not a case where another
superior or special investigating agency took up further investigation in this
matter and collected further evidence over and above the evidence collected by
the Sub Inspector of Police. Admittedly, no formal permission was taken by the
Sub Inspector of Police to make further investigation in this case from the
lower court after his final report/charge sheet was taken on file.  Thus, apart
from irregularity or illegality in not obtaining prior permission of the lower
court for further investigation, there is gross impropriety on the part of the
Sub Inspector of Police in taking up further investigation suo motu  and come to
a conclusion which is quite opposite to the conclusion which he arrived at
during the original investigation in so far as A-2 and A-3 are concerned.  He
made a clean U-turn about complicity of A-2 and A-3 in this offence.  Apart from
irregularity, illegality and impropriety committed by the Sub Inspector of
Police, it also casts shadow on his integrity.  If such things are allowed to
happen, then it would open flood gates of corruption to some of the police
officers who are corrupt and unscrupulous to conclude investigation in one way
after accepting bribe from one side and thereafter to come to a just opposite
conclusion if the other side passes on the bribe.  In the interest of justice,
such wide and unilateral discretion cannot be allowed to be exercised by the
investigating police officer in the administration of criminal justice though he
is part of criminal justice system.  He can exercise such power of further
investigation under Section 173(8) Cr.P.C only after obtaining former permission
from the Magistrate.
        In the case on hand, though the investigating officer/ Sub Inspector of
Police did not take prior former permission from the lower court for further
investigation, he wanted a post facto    approval or permission from the lower
court by filing the present memo.  The lower court also in a hurried manner gave
its seal of approval by simply perusing the record and without giving any
reasons for such approval.  In my opinion, the lower court also did not properly
exercise its jurisdiction of scrutiny.  The lower court did not address itself
as to why  the police officer did not take formal permission of the court prior
to entering upon further investigation.  This court is of the opinion that the
Sub Inspector of Police simply abused provisions of Section 173(8) Cr.P.C.  It
is evident that the Sub Inspector of Police has tilted from one side to another
side on some extraneous consideration.  The lower court also did not exercise
its jurisdiction on this subject properly and legally which resulted the police
officer abusing process of law.

        Further, on merits, in the light of evidence collected by the
investigating officer from witness Nos.6 and 7 mentioned in the charge sheet
which is totally in favour of A-2 and A-3, no Court is going to accept contrary
version which cropped up at later point of time.  Thus, on merits also A-2 and
A-3 have got fair chances of success even if trial of the case is allowed to be
taken up against them.  Allowing trial against A-2 and A-3 in the light of above
circumstances and above state of evidence, would only amount to legal and
procedural harassment to A-2 and A-3. Hence, proceedings in the lower court
against A-2 and A-3 are liable to be quashed.
        In the result, the petition is allowed quashing proceedings against the
petitioners 1 and 2 /A-2 and A-3 in C.C.No.588 of 2009 on the file of II
Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Vijayawada.

?1 2004 AIR SCW 2063   
2 2005(2) ALD (Crl.) 1 (AP)

