

THE HONOURABLE SRI JUSTICE D.S.R. VARMA AND THE HONOURABLE SRI JUSTICE RAJA.                   
Criminal Appeal No. 953 of 2006

09-04-2010 

Kukkala Govinda Raju 

The State  of AP, rep. By Public Prosecutor,
High Court of AP, Hyderabad. 

:JUDGMENT: (  Per Hon'ble Sri Justice Raja. Elango)

1.              This Criminal Appeal under Section 374(2) of Criminal Procedure Code
is directed against the judgment dated 26.6.2006 passed in S.C.No. 229 of 2000
by the learned V Additional Sessions Judge (Fast Track Court), Rajahmundry, East
Godavari District, whereunder and whereby the appellant/Accused No.1 was found 
guilty for the offence punishable under Sections 498-A, 302 and 201 IPC and
accordingly convicted and sentenced him to suffer rigorous imprisonment for one
year and to pay fine of Rs.500/-, in default to suffer simple imprisonment for
one month for the offence under Section 498-A IPC, to suffer imprisonment for
life and to pay a fine of Rs.500/- in default to suffer simple imprisonment for
one month for the offence under Section 302 IPC, and  to suffer rigorous
imprisonment for one year and to pay fine of Rs.500/- in default to suffer
simple imprisonment for one month for the offence punishable under Section 201
IPC.

2.              The accusation, which led to the trial of the accused is that on
27.2.1999  the accused beat the deceased with stick in blue and black and kicked
her on stomach indiscriminately till she died and he also tried to screen away
the evidence of the offence committed by him. The accused denied the said charge
and claimed for trial.

3.              The case of the prosecution projected, in brief, as unfolded during
the course of trial, is as follows:

4.              Accused A.1 to A.5 are the residents of Konarevupadu village, hamlet
of Dangeru. A.2 to A.5 are kinsmen of A.1. The deceased, Kukkala Gangabhavani  
was the daughter of Medisetti Papayamma (P.W.1) who is the resident of 
Matlacheruvu village, hamlet of Velampalem. The deceased Kukkala Gangabhavani   
was given in marriage to A.1 and at the time of marriage, her mother (P.W.1)
presented Ac.0.80 cents of landed property and cash of Rs.10,000/- to A.1
towards dowry. During the wedlock of the deceased with A.1, she gave birth to
one son, K.Tarun Chakravarthi (P.W.2) and one daughter K.Geetha Devi (L.W.3). 
A.1 used to beat and scold the deceased and subject her to all modes of cruelty
on the ground that the deceased brought insufficient dowry. Though the caste
elders settled the matters, but there was no change in the attitude of A.1.
Though in January 1999, P.W.1 sent Rs.3000/-through her son (P.W.3) to A.1. on a
demand made by him to purchase a television, however, he did not stop ill
treatment of his wife. Thereafter A-1 shifted his residence to Santhinagar of
Ramachandrapuram on the pretext of his studies in Law and also education of
children. A.1 got dissatisfied with the deceased for her failure to meet his
greedy demands and thereby torturing the deceased wife  physically by squeezing
her neck and sitting on her chest . A.1 also decided to marry another girl
capable of bringing much dowry and obtained her signatures on an affidavit,
stamp papers etc. with a view to write on them according to his convenience. On
27.2.1999 the deceased wife was tortured by A.1 persistently for the sale of her
80 cents of landed property. A.1 beat the deceased with a stick on her body and
kicked her on her stomach till she died in the presence of his son, P.W.2. In
the midnight, A.1 asked  his neighbour Pilli Gangadevi (P.W.5) to help him to
dispose of the dead body by throwing in canal and for that he offered Rs.300/-.
The said P. Gangadevi refused to extend any help. A.1 kept the body of the
deceased on a mat spread in the kitchen room and in the early morning informed
the house owner (P.W.4) and other neighbours about the death of his wife in the
previous night. P.W.4 found blood stained injuries on the mouth and nose of the
dead body of the deceased and suspected that death is not natural and sent his
son to P.W.1 at Matlacheruvu village to convey the death message.  On 28.2.1999
at about 10.00 A.M. P.W.1 and her relatives and also the relatives of A.1 came
to see the dead body. A.1 to A.5 made false promises to P.W.1 that they would
get some property settled by A.1 in the name of children (P.W.2 and L.W.3) and
prevailed over her not to take any action over the death of the deceased.  In
furtherance of their common intention to screen away the evidence, A.1 to A.5
took away the dead body of the deceased to Konarevupadu and cremated the same on   
28.2.1999 itself. A.1 also executed a confessional letter (Ex.P.6) scribed by
G.China Venkanna (P.W.6) and gave it to the house owner (P.W.4) and later 
vacated the house of P.W.4.

5.              Subsequently P.W.1 realized herself and gave a report to
Ramachandrapuram Police station on 3.3.1999 at 4.45 PM and her statement   
(Ex.P.1) was recorded by the Sub Inspector of Police (P.W.12), who registered
the same as F.I.R.No. 36 of 1999 (Ex.P.15). On the same day, P.W.13 inspected  
the scene of offence in the house of P.W.4 and prepared rough sketch (Ex.P.16)
and seized confessional letter (Ex.P.6) from P.W.4. On 4.3.1999, P.W.13 examined 
other witnesses and seized MPDO hall ticket of A.1, affidavit purported to be
written by accused on two pages, Rs.10/- stamp paper dated 23.2.1994 with
signature of the deceased, full white sheet of empty conquest paper with
signatures of the deceased, four sheets of empty white papers with the
signatures of the deceased from the house of K. Venkateswararao (P.W.7) who is 
the younger brother of P.W.1, who had secreted in the suit case of the accused,
which was taken away by  P.W.1 from the house of A.1 after the death of the
deceased. The Inspector of Police arrested A.1 on 12.3.1999, A3 to A5 on
15.3.1999 and A.2. on 17.3.1999 and sent them for remand. On 22.4.1999 the 
Inspector along with two mediators visited the house of P.W.1, verified the suit
case of A.1 kept by her and seized letters containing the handwriting of the
accused and the deceased and sent the same to F.S.L and on receipt of report, it
revealed that  A.1 prepared the affidavit as if it was given by the deceased to
her husband giving consent for second marriage. After completion of
investigation, the police laid charge sheet.

6.              In order to prove the guilt of the accused, the prosecution examined
P.Ws. 1 to 14 and marked Exs. P.1 to P.21. On behalf of the defence, D.Ws. 1 and 
2 were examined and Exs. D.1 to D.4 were marked.  

7.              After conclusion of the trial, the learned Sessions Judge found A.1
guilty for the offence punishable under Sections 498-A, 302 and 201 IPC and
accordingly convicted and sentenced him as stated supra.

8.              Assailing the correctness of the conviction and sentence imposed by
the learned Sessions Judge, the appellant/Accused No.1 preferred the present
Criminal Appeal.

9.              We have heard the learned Counsel for the appellant-Accused No.1 as 
well as the learned Public Prosecutor, who have taken us through the entire
evidence and the findings recorded by the Court below.

10.             In view of the rival submissions, and in the peculiar facts and
circumstances of the case, the most important point to be decided is, whether
the offence is committed; if offence is committed, whether the appellant/Accused
No.1 is responsible for the said offence; and whether the appellant/Accused No.1
is liable to be punishable for screening away of the said evidence.
        
11.             This is a case of death of the wife of the appellant herein. As
projected the case by the prosecution, the wife of the accused was done to death
by the appellant herein. Unfortunately, in this case to prove the fact that the
death was due to homicidal violence, the same was not proved by way of any
medical evidence due to the fact that the body was cremated three days prior to
the lodging of complaint in this case.

12.             The prosecution relied on the evidence of P.W.2, son of the
appellant and deceased, P.W.4 house owner, in whose house the accused resided   
together with the deceased wife and children, P.W.1, mother-in-law of the
appellant, P.W.6 who scribed Ex.P.6 and P.W.7, an elder of the same village.

13.             The prosecution in proving that the death of the deceased was due to
homicidal violence relied on the above said witnesses and statement made by the
appellant/accused to P.Ws, 1,2,4,6 and 8 which is in the nature of extra
judicial confession and also Ex.P.6 written by P.W.6 signed by the
appellant/accused herein.

14.             The learned Counsel for the appellant submitted that the statement
given by the appellant to the said witnesses cannot be construed as extra
judicial confession; the same is not in the nature of extra judicial confession,
and the said statement does not discloses any specific implication of the
accused to the said crime. The learned Counsel for the appellant relied on the
judgments of the Supreme Court in Mulk Raj Vs. State of Uttar Pradesh1, Om 
Prakash Vs. State of Uttar Pradesh2, Kanda Pandayachi @ Kandaswamy Vs. State of     
Tamilnadu3, Hans George Vs. State4, Mahender Vs. State of Hyderabad5 and Kaursen    
Vs. State of Panjab6.


15.             A perusal of the evidence brought on record, it is evident that the
said witnesses informed the Court that the accused accepted the responsibility
for the death of his wife and tried to conceal the said crime. But, at the same
time, as stated by the learned Counsel for the appellant that there is nothing
to suggest that the statement is in the nature of extra judicial confession.
Even though it cannot be construed as an extra judicial confession, the evidence
adduced by the witnesses can be scrutinized with due care and caution with the
aid of Sections 7 and 8 of the Evidence Act, which runs as follows:
"Section.7: FACTS WHICH ARE THE OCCASION, CAUSE OR EFFECT OF FACTS IN ISSUE:                
Facts which are the occasion, cause, or effect, immediate or otherwise, of
relevant facts, or facts in issue, which constitute the state of things under
which they happened, or which afforded an opportunity for their occurrence or
transaction are relevant.

Section.8: MOTIVE, PREPARATION AND PREVIOUS OR SUBSEQUENT CONDUCT: Any fact is                
relevant which shows or constitutes a motive or preparation for any fact in
issue or relevant fact.

The conduct of any party, or of any agent to any party, to any suit or
proceeding, in reference to such suit or proceeding, or in reference to any fact
in issue therein or relevant thereto, and the conduct of any person an offence
against whom is the subject of any proceeding, is relevant, if such conduct
influences or is influenced by any fact in issue or relevant fact, and whether
it was previous or subsequent thereto."


16.             In view of the same, this Court is of the view that P.W.1 stated
before the Court that she witnessed the dead body of the deceased and found some 
black marks on her neck and also she was able to identify blood strains in the
bed-sheet. The same was supported by the evidence of P.W.4, and, further the
evidence adduced by the prosecution to prove that the elders, P.W.1-mother-in-
law and P.W.4-house owner raised questions about the cause of death and also 
there were some deliberations among the elders and suspected  the appellant.
17.             As such, evidence of P.W.1,who is the mother of the deceased, runs
as follows:
"..... After reaching the house of the accused we found the dead body of the
deceased in the kitchen room lying flat on a mat. A blanket was covered over
half of the body and there was stains of blood to the blanket. I found
blackishenss on the neck and blood at the angle of the month and nose. On
enquiry my grand son Tharun Chakravarthi  informed me that A-1 killed the
deceased by kicking on her abdomen and beating her with a stick by placing a
cloth in her mouth on the previous night.

While I was in grief A-2t o A-5 an some others approached me and informed me 
that considering the future of the children they will get the property
transferred in the name of the children and that therefore I may not give any
report to the police...
...In our community family disputes will be settled by the caste elders. During
the life time of the deceased disputes arose between me and A-1 and between the
deceased and A-1....."

18.             The evidence of P.W.2, son of the deceased and appellant, runs as
follows:

"     In the morning of the next day I disclosed the incident to my maternal
grand mother and maternal uncles. Before their arrival I disclosed the incident
to my paternal grand parents also who came in the first instance. I am now
staying with my maternal grand mother..."

19.             The evidence of P.W.4, owner of the house where the appellant and
deceased resided, runs as follows:

".....I found her laying on a mat. I instructed him to lift the leg and hand of
the deceased, though he tried to left them, I observed them stiff as they are
not raising. I did not touch the body. A-1 enquired me as to what happened and
when I was thinking he himself stated that the deceased died. Against says that
A-1 enquired me chachipoyinda? A-1 again opened her eyes and then proclaimed her  
dead. I found blood marks at the angle of the mouth and the nostrils. I also
found blood mark on the bed sheet. By the time we went to see the deceased A-1 
covered the body completely with a bed sheet. The bed sheet contained blood
marks...

.........At about 9. a.m. the relatives and the elders on both sides came to the
village and had discussion with A-1 in a room in the portion of A-1. The
discussion went on till 2 or e p.m. Even without my asking after due
deliberations to avoid complications to me A-1 voluntarily executed of his own
accord a letter stating that he himself is responsible for the death of the
deceased and gave the letter to me. Ex.P.6 is the letter given to me which was
written by G.Chinavenkanna who is a retired teacher residing opposite to my
house..."

20.             The evidence of P.W.6,who is an independent witness, who prepared 
Ex.P.6, runs as follows:

"       On 28.2.1999 at about 7 a.m. the brother, father and other relatives of A-
1 approached me and requested me to scribe a paper making some arrangement for   
the children. According to their dictation I scribed Ex.P.6. The time mentioned
by me as 7 a.m. is incorrect and it was written by me at 11 a.m. (The witness
made the correction in his statement after going through Ex.P.6). A.1 signed and
also affixed his thumb impression. The elders that gathered attested the same.
After the execution of the paper and attested by the witnesses I signed the
paper as the scriber. Thereafter they took away the deceased..."

21.             The evidence of P.W.8, who is also an independent witness, runs as
follows:

"...When the elders of the village of A-1 expressed suspicion and questioned A-1
saying that it is not a natural death and you might have committed the murder.
A-1 confessed his committing the murder..........
.......Then they consulted A-1 questioning him as to whether he is prepared to
make arrangement for the children. A-1 agreed for transferring his property in
favour of his children. Then they consulted P.W.1, her brothers and us. Then all
of us accepted the proposal..."

        

22.             In view of the above, the said evidence adduced by the prosecution
clearly proves to the effect that the death of the wife of the appellant is not
a natural one. Further, the appellant herein also has not taken any step when
the death of the wife of the accused questioned by the witnesses stated above to
lodge a complaint and exonerated himself from the said accusation raised by the
witnesses.


23.             Even though there is no medical evidence available, it is not the
fault of the prosecution since the complaint was lodged by P.W.1 after the lapse
of three days. So there is no possibility of the investigation agency to adduce
any evidence by way of medical examination. The appellant cannot raise the point
when he has not taken any steps subjecting himself for the scrutiny of the
investigation agency by lodging a complaint regarding the death of his wife.
Further, this Court is of the view that any prudent man who lasts his wife all
of sudden without any ailment who is aged about only 35 years during the
matrimonial tie, the said person in the normal circumstances to subject the body
for medical examination to know the cause of the death. In this case there is no
explanation adduced by the accused either during the investigation or at the
time of examination under Section 313 Cr.P.C.

24.             When the accused with the help of the villagers prevented normal
legal procedures to be adopted, in such circumstances he has no right to
question the non-availability of any medical evidence. That is way he is rightly
convicted under Section 201 of the Indian Penal Code.

25.             Hence safely placing reliance on the above said witnesses, this
Court can come to the conclusion that the death is due to homicidal violence.

26.             When it comes to place reliance on the said witnesses, the learned
Counsel appearing for the appellant has raised a question as to whether these
witnesses can be believed?

27.             The main contention of the learned Counsel is that P.W.1 is not a
reliable witness in view of the fact that she categorically admitted in the
cross examination that she lodged a compliant since the appellant herein refused
to convey the property as promised by him in the name of her grand children.
Placing reliance on the said admission of P.W.1 the learned Counsel argued that
it shows the nature of P.W.1 who is very much interested in the property of the
deceased and aggrieved over the non conveyance of the said property, she lodged
a complaint and she is also a party to screening of evidence in the offence
committed by the offender. A meticulous perusal of the complaint as well as the
evidence adduced by P.W.1 discloses that P.W.1 even though helped the accused in  
the beginning, she is one who set the law in motion by lodging a complaint and
also it is the case of the P.W.1 in the interest of the grand-children that she
does not want to lodge a complaint. In the said circumstances, P.W.1 cannot be
said to have attracted the offence under Section 201. Further she truthfully
deposed before the Court. Without knowing that such evidence adduced by her will
be used against her clearly shows that she wants the culprit to be punished. The
conduct of P.W.1 is quite natural in view of the fact that she wanted to protect
the grandchildren in the absence of their mother.

28.             Further the learned Counsel for the appellant submitted that P.W.1's
evidence in connection with the occurrence is contradictory to the evidence of
P.W.2. According to P.W.1, she lodged complaint on the basis of information
given by P.W.2. When this fact being so, the contradiction in evidence of P.W.1
and P.W.2 is material in nature. On a perusal of evidence adduced by P.Ws. 1 and
2, there is a difference regarding the nature of attack by the accused on the
deceased. Admittedly P.W.1 lodged complaint on the information given by P.W.2. 
It is quite natural for some minor discrepancies to occur in connection with the
attack on the deceased since she is not the eyewitness to the occurrence.

29.             Further, the learned Counsel for the appellant assailed the evidence
adduced by P.W.2 who is the child witness and his evidence cannot be a ground to
convict the accused. This Court is also aware of the fact that placing reliance
on the evidence of said witness, conviction cannot be imposed upon a person,
but, at the same time, when the same is corroborated by other circumstances,
reliance can be placed safely on the evidence adduced by the child witness.

30.             P.W.4 is not an interest witness and also not related to either
party and he being the house owner, he deposed in a manner, which gains 
confidence of this Court. In his evidence, he deposed that the appellant called
him to his house and requested him to find out what happened to his wife.  When
he entered the kitchen he saw the dead body in the kitchen. At that time A-1
enquired P.W.4 what happened to her. Even prior to his answer, he informed that
the deceased died. Prior to that the appellant informed him that the deceased
died and also he stated that he found blood marks on the angle of mouth and the
nostrils and also on the bed sheet. Further he deposed that the relatives of the
appellant and the deceased arrived at the place of occurrence by 9.00 AM and
villagers in general also arrived there; all of them discussed in the room
portion of A.1. Further, he deposed that the accused/appellant herein executed a
letter that he himself is responsible for the death of the deceased and handed
over the letter to him. Even in the lengthy of cross-examination, nothing was
elucidated to disprove the evidence of P.W.1.

31.             As far as the evidence of P.W.2 is concerned, who is a child witness
and none other than the son of the appellant/accused No.1, deposed before the
Court that he saw his father beat his mother (deceased) with stick and also
stated that he witnessed blood strains and black marks on the right side of the
neck and informed the same to P.W.1. It is submitted by the learned Counsel for
the appellant that the said witness should not be relied on, since the child was
not examined by the trial judge in the manner prescribed by law. Even though the
learned trial Judge stated that he has satisfied that the child witness is
capable of understanding the questions, but he has not relied on the same in
such a way for the appraisal of the Court.  But on a perusal of the record, it
is evident that the satisfaction arrived at by the learned trial Judge is not
recorded in the appropriate format, but at the same time, the evidence relied on
by the trial Court more particularly by putting questions to the said witness
and replies given by the said witness clearly shows that the said witness is
capable of understanding the things and capable of giving evidence.

32.             Further, P.W.6 who is a scribe of Ex.P.6, which was signed by the
appellant herein admitting the responsibility for the death of the deceased, in
his evidence stated that A.1 approached him and requested to scribe  on a paper
making some arrangement for her (deceased) children. Accordingly he prepared 
Ex.P.6. The learned Counsel for the appellant submitted the said Ex.P.6 does not
disclose any such arraignment made by the appellant herein, and therefore, the
same cannot be believed to be prepared by P.W.6. The learned Public Prosecutor 
submitted that the evidence of P.W.6 clearly discloses that he is the author of
the said document since he has not only deposed in the Court but also identified
the said document after perusal, and, answered all the questions posed by the
defence placing reliance on the said document. Further, the learned Counsel
submitted that the signature found on the Ex.P.6 was not w2scientifically
examined by the investigating agency. The evidence of P.Ws. 4,6,7 and 8 clearly
shows that the said document was prepared at the request of the appellant
herein. So there is no reason to disbelieve the said document (Ex.P.6).

33.             Further, the evidence of P.W.8 also supports the evidence adduced by
the above said witnesses. More particularly P.W.8 is an independent evidence.
The relevant portion of evidence of P.W.8 reads as follows:

".....When the elders of the village of A.1 expressed suspicion  and questioned
A-1 saying that it is not a natural death and you might have committed the
murder, A-1 confessed his committing the murder. They consulted us. We stated 
that they may do whatever they like. Then they consulted A-1 questioning him as
to whether he is prepared to make arrangement for the children. A-1 agreed for
transferring his property in favour of his children. Then they consulted P.W.1
her brother and us. Then all of us accepted the proposal."

        
34.             The learned Counsel submitted that P.W.8 has admitted that the
appellant has not confessed to him. It is true that he has not stated in the
Chief examination that the appellant confessed to him, but he has stated in the
presence of elders of the village. Hence, there is nothing to reject the
evidence of the above said witness.
        
35              Therefore, this Court placing reliance on the said witnesses
concludes that the death of the deceased is not natural. Further, there is no
dispute that the appellant and the deceased lived together under one roof as
husband and wife.

36.             For the foregoing discussion, this Court concludes that the death of
the deceased  is not natural, but due to homicidal violence.

37.             Now, the question before us is, whether on the basis of the
available evidence, the appellant can be convicted for the offence punishable
under Section 302 IPC. That too, in the absence of any direct evidence and also
medical evidence to prove that the death of the deceased is due to homicidal
violence.

38.             In the facts and circumstances of the case, it is totally rests on
the circumstantial evidence. When the   prosecution proves  the crime whether
the appellant can be convicted safely concluding that the appellant is the
person who committed the offence  secretly.

39.             Once the prosecution proves that the death of the deceased is not
natural, but due to homicidal violence, the burden rests on the appellant
herein. Section 106 of the Evidence runs as follows:

"106.BURDEN OF PROVING FACT ESPECIALLY WITHIN KNOWLEDGE:  when any fact is               
especially within the knowledge of any person, the burden of proving that fact
is upon him"


40. In the present case, there is no dispute that

(i) the appellant and the deceased lived together under one roof.
(ii) the appellant  called P.W.4 to ascertain the fact as to what happened to
his wife and he himself informed P.W.4 that his wife died.
(iii) the  appellant has not taken any  step to establish that the death of the
deceased is natural one.

41.             If the offence takes place inside the privacy of a house and in such
circumstances where the assailant has all the opportunity to plan and commit the
offence at the time and  in circumstances of his choice, it will be extremely
difficult for the prosecution to lead evidence to establish the guilt of the
accused if the strict principle of circumstantial evidence is insisted upon  by
the Courts.

42.             A judge does not preside over a criminal trial merely to see that no
innocent man is punished. A judge also presides to see that a guilty man does
not escape. Both are public duties. The law does not enjoin a duty on the
prosecution to lead evidence of such character which is almost impossible to be
led or at any rate extremely difficult to be led. The duty on the prosecution is
to lead such evidence which it is capable of leading, having regard to the facts
and circumstances of the case. Here it is necessary to keep in mind Section 106
of the Evidence Act which says that when any fact is especially within the
knowledge of any person, the burden of proving that fact is upon him.  Where an
offence like murder is committed in secrecy inside a house, the initial burden
to establish the case would undoubtedly be upon the prosecution, but the nature
and amount of evidence to be led by it to establish the charge cannot be of the
same degree as it is required in other cases of circumstantial evidence.

43.             In the present case, the accused is also charged with the offence
punishable under Section 201 IPC. When the appellant herein screened away the 
evidence by cremating the body, the entire burden shifted to the
appellant/accused herein.

44.             In a case based on circumstantial evidence where no eye-witness
account is available, there is another principle of law which must be kept in
mind. The principle is  that when an incriminating circumstance is  put to the
accused and the said accused either offers no explanation or offers an
explanation which is found to be untrue, then the same becomes an additional
link in the chain of circumstances to make it complete.  The above said view of
us is fortified by catena of decisions of the Apex Court in Tamilnadu
Vs.Rajendran7, State of U.P. Vs. Dr. Ravindra Prakash Mittal8, State of
Maharshtra Vs. Suresh9, Ganesh Lal Vs. State of  Rajasthan10 and Gulab Chand Vs.   
State of M.P11.

45.             In the present case also, there is no explanation offered by the
appellant herein regarding the cause of death of his wife.

46.             Based on the above discussion and placing reliance on Sections 7,8
and 106 of the Evidence Act and also the decisions of the Apex Court in Trimukh
Maroti KikanVs. State of Maharashtra12, the conviction and sentence imposed on 
the appellant herein by the Court below for the offence punishable under
Sections 302 and 201 IPC are hereby confirmed 

47.             As far as the offence punishable under Section 498-A IPC is
concerned, as already pointed out by the learned Counsel for the appellant that
there is no proximity between the alleged cruelty and lodging of complaint, this
Court is of the view that the appellant cannot be convicted for the offence
punishable under Section 498-A IPC. 

48.             The Criminal Appeal is dismissed.

?1 AIR 1959 SC 902  
2 AIR 1960 SC 409  
3 AIR 1972 SC 66 
4 1964 Criminal Law Journal 640
5 AIR 1955 SC 792  
6 AIR 1974 SC 329. 
7  1999 (7) JT 348
8  1992 (3) JT 114
9 1999 (9) JT 513
10  2001 (9) JT  383
11  1995 (5) JT 373
12  2006 ALD (Cr) (2) 872.

*THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE NOOTY RAMAMOHANA RAO             

+Crl.A.No.1618 of 2006 

%28-01-2010  

#Kambam Sunil and another  

$State of A.P.

COUNSEL FOR PETITIONER: Mr.C. Praveen Kumar        

COUNSEL FOR RESPONDENTS: Public Prosecutor         

:JUDGMENT:   

Per the Hon'ble Sri Justice Nooty Ramamohana Rao  

        This Appeal is preferred by both the accused, who have been convicted for
an offence under Section 302 read with Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code, and
sentenced to suffer rigorous imprisonment for life and were also ordered to pay
a fine of Rs.5,000/- each and in default, to suffer simple imprisonment for six
months each. 
        The appellants were tried by the learned Principal Sessions Judge, West
Godavari at Eluru, in S.C.No.128 of 2006, for an offence punishable under
Section 302 read with Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code.
        The case of the prosecution is that, on 09-06-2005, PW-2 and the deceased
have gone to the house of one
Mr. Yesubabu, father of the accused, for attending to painting and whitewash
work of his newly constructed house.  At about 11-30 a.m., PW-10, younger sister
of the accused and daughter of Mr. Yesubabu, cried out for her brothers as she
has noticed the deceased peeping into the bathroom while she was taking bath.
The accused caught hold of the deceased and thrashed him using a painting brush.
PW-2, who was attending to the whitewash work on the front side of the building,
immediately rushed and tried to intervene so as to rescue the deceased from the
hands of the accused, but however, he has been pushed away.  PW-13, who was a   
neighbor of Mr. Yesubabu, upon hearing the shouts emanating from Yesubabu's  
house, intervened in the matter and tried to pacify the accused by suggesting
that the father of the deceased be summoned before further action in the matter
is undertaken.  She has pushed the deceased into a room on the southern side of
the house, which has a door, and bolted its door from outside.  She was waiting
for the father of the deceased to arrive by sitting beneath a Guava tree.
However, before PW-2 could inform and fetch PW-1, the father of the deceased,
PW-3 another painter, who works with PW-1 together with the elder brother of the
deceased, have reached the house of Mr. Yesubabu more with a view to ascertain 
the progress of the painting work undertaken by PW-2 and the deceased, there.
Coming to know of the events, it is the elder brother of the deceased, who
opened the door of the room, where upon he found the deceased lying on the
floor.  There was a rope hanging to a hook of the ceiling of the room and
another portion of the rope, which got snapped, was lying besides the body of
the deceased.  In the mean time, PW-1 also arrived at the scene and he has set
the investigation into motion by lodging Ex.P-1 FIR.
        In support of the prosecution case, 17 witnesses have been examined and 19
documents have been got marked as exhibits. 
        Excepting PWs-2, 7, 13, 14 and 15, we need not have to bother much about 
the rest of the witnesses and their evidences, as some of them are treated as
hostile and the evidence of the remaining witnesses is not so material for our
inquiry.
        PW-2 has specifically asserted that it is he and the deceased who had gone
to the house of Mr. Yesubabu, the father of the accused, for attending to
painting and white washing work of his newly constructed house and that he was
attending to white washing work on the front side, while the deceased was doing
painting work on the rear side and that he has heard the cries of the sister of
the accused calling out for her brothers by shouting "Annayya" (brother).  PW-2,
further asserted that he had seen both the accused beating the deceased using a
paintbrush, MO-5.  When he intervened, with a view to separate the deceased from
the accused, he was pushed aside.  He has also deposed that PW-13 prevented the  
accused from bearing the deceased further and it is she, who pushed the deceased
into the room and bolted the door from outside.  He further stated that at her
behest he has proceeded to fetch the father of the deceased, PW-1.  It took
quite some time for him to get the message to PW-1 and by the time he returned
to the scene, more than one hour or one hour fifteen minutes time has passed.
        PW-7, whose house is located in the neighborhood of the house of Mr.
Yesubabu, father of the accused, has deposed that two boys came to the house of 
Mr. Yesubabu to attend to the painting work and the deceased was one of them and 
that the deceased was found lying on the floor in a room in the newly
constructed house of Mr. Yesubabu. 
        PW-10 - sister of the accused has deposed that at about 11-30 a.m., while
she was taking bath in the bathroom, one of the two boys, who came to attend to
the painting work, was seen peeping into the bathroom and, therefore, she cried
out for her brothers.
        PW-13, who lives next door to the house of Mr. Yesubabu, has deposed that 
at about 11-30 a.m., upon hearing some cries (shouts) from the house of
Mr. Yesubabu, she rushed to the house of Mr. Yesubabu and saw the accused   
getting hold of the shirt-collar of one of the boys, who had come for attending
to the painting work and that it is she, who prevailed upon the accused to wait
for the arrival of the father of the deceased and that it is she, who has sent
the second boy, who has come for the painting work, to go and fetch the father
of the deceased, PW-1.  PW-13 has deposed further as under: 
" ......................  I kept the boy (Deceased) in one room and bolted the
doors.  Then I was sitting under the tree of Guava (Jama).  Thereafter the
brother of deceased and another boy came there.  The deceased's brother opened 
the door and found the dead body of the deceased on the floor of the room.
Thereafter PW-1 came." 

        PW-14, the Civil Assistant Surgeon attached to the Government District
Headquarters Hospital at Eluru, who conducted the post-mortem examination, has 
observed the following external injuries on the deceased:
"1. Contusion over the left upper arm.  Blackish brown in colour.  10 X 2 cm.,
on the left upper arm.

2.   Another contusion on the right upper arm 18 to 2 cm., brownish black in
colour."

He also found a ligature mark lower down of the neck extending from the right, 6
cm below the angle of mandible to the left 5 cm below the angle of mandible.
The size of the ligature mark is 16 X 2 cm.  He found fracture of Thyroid
cartilage. He has opined that the deceased might have died due to Asphyxia and
due to pressure over the neck.  He issued the post-mortem examination
certificate, Ex.P-15.  In his opinion, the ligature marks of 2 cm width found on
the neck of the deceased can be caused by MOs-1 and 2, which are the two  
portions of the rope.  In his opinion, the death may have been caused due to
homicide, but not a suicidal one.  When PW-14 has been cross-examined, he  
ascertatively deposed that, on the body he found resistance of the victim and,
importantly, there is resistance on the neck.  He has denied, quite
emphatically, the suggestion made to him that the death of the deceased is not
homicidal and it is only suicidal one.
        PW-15, local Paychayat Secretary and witness to the punchanama, Ex.P16,   
has given the complete details of various objects found in the newly constructed
house of
Mr. Yesubabu in general, and the room in which the body of the deceased was 
found lying on the floor, in particular.  MO-5, the iron paintbrush was found
lying in the room wherefrom the body of the deceased was retrieved.
        On a proper appreciation of the evidence marshaled before the Sessions
Court, the learned Sessions Judge had come to the conclusion that the accused
have caused the death of the deceased and, therefore, he convicted them both for
an offence punishable under Section 302 read with Section 34 of the Indian Penal
Code.  Hence, this Appeal.
        We have heard Sri C. Padmanabha Reddy, learned senior counsel for the 
appellants and the learned Public Prosecutor.
        Sri Padmanabha Reddy, learned senior counsel would contend that there is 
no direct evidence available on record for one to come to a firm conclusion that
it is the accused, and in particular, both of them, to have caused the death of
the deceased.  Further, PW-13 is the one, who pushed the deceased into a room, 
thus, retrieving him from the possession of the accused and bolted the room from
outside.  She was literally standing guard by waiting for the arrival of the
father of the deceased, PW-1.  It is further urged that it is the brother of the
deceased, who came first and opened the door and found the body of the deceased 
lying on the floor.  Therefore, the learned senior counsel would contend that it
is not a case of homicidal death, but it is a clear case of suicide committed by
the deceased as he was apprehensive that the word would have already reached his 
father about his indecent conduct in peeping into the bath room while PW-10 was
taking bath and as he was overcome by the feeling of guilt he committed suicide.
The learned senior counsel would submit that there was no evidence on record to
suggest that the accused had gained entry or access to the deceased after PW-13 
has pushed him into the room in question and bolted its door from outside.  The
learned senior counsel has also drawn our attention to the following statement
found in the Medical Jurisprudence and Toxicology by N.J. Modi and contended
that in the absence of access of the accused to the deceased, who was confined
in a room, where the body was ultimately found, the symptoms between homicidal 
and suicidal hanging, being similar, it is a clear case of suicidal hanging,
rather than homicidal hanging.
        "Hanging is usually suicidal.  Of thirty-two cases of hanging that came
under Modi's observation during a period of over six years, thirty were
suicidal..............

        Homicidal hanging, though rare, has been recorded.  Usually more than one
person are combined in the act, unless the victim is a child, or very weak and
feeble, or is rendered unconscious by some intoxicating or narcotic drug.  In a
case where resistance has been offered, marks of violence on body and marks of a
struggle or footprints of several persons at or near the place of the occurrence
are likely to be found."        

The learned senior counsel would also submit that homicidal hanging is a near
impossibility.  The learned senior counsel would further submit that as per the
deposition of PW-15, who was a party to the inquest punchanama, it appears that
there was an almairah in the room in which the deceased was found dead.  In view
of that fact it was contended that there was a possibility for the deceased to
climb the almairah and tie one end of the rope to the hook of the ceiling and
the other end of the rope around his neck and jumped himself down in order to
commit suicide.
        In a case of this nature, where direct evidence to the actual incident is
not available, it is the circumstances, which precede the incident, have to be
gathered as to link the accused to the act complained of.  In the present case,
such circumstances can be gathered from the depositions of PWs-2 and 13, who  
have categorically stated that upon the cries of PW-10, it is both the accused,
who caught hold of the deceased and then thrashed him for his alleged act of
peeping through the bath room while their sister PW-10 was taking bath.  PW-2
could not retrieve the deceased from the accused.  It is PW-13, who has pushed
the deceased into a room and bolted it from outside and sent away PW-2 to fetch
the father of the deceased.  By the time the brother of the deceased arrived at
the scene of offence and when he opened the door, he found the deceased lying on
the floor.  It is, therefore, clear that the death has occurred in the newly
constructed house of
Mr. Yesubabu, the father of the accused.  Thus, it is clear that no one, other
than the accused, would have had access to the place where the death had 
occasioned. 
        In other words, the presence of the accused at the scene of offence and at
the time of offence had been categorically established by the evidence on
record, including that of PW-10, who is no other than the sister of the accused.
It has to be further noticed that Mr. Yesubabu, father of the accused, was not
available at the time of commission of the offence at his house.  Therefore, it
is obvious, that only the accused were present at their house at the time of
offence.  And they were having the knowledge that it was PW-13, who pushed the
deceased inside a room of the newly constructed house of their father.  When the
brother of the deceased came to the scene of offence and opened the room, he
found the deceased lying on the floor dead with a piece of the rope lying
besides the body.  Therefore, the presence of the accused at the scene of
offence was very much established and the possibility of committing the offence
can only be linked to the accused, inasmuch as, the death of the deceased was
preceded by the outrageous conduct of the accused of beating him.  This is one
circumstance to be reckoned seriously.
        PW-13 has candidly spoken of the fact that it is she, who sent away PW-2
to fetch the father of the deceased and that it is she, who confined the
deceased to the room and bolted it from outside and that it is the deceased's
brother, who opened the door and found him lying on the floor, dead.  Between
the arrival of the brother of the deceased and the act of pushing the deceased
into the room and bolting the door from outside by PW-13, there was sufficient
passage of time.  It is, therefore, clear that excepting the accused, the
presence of all others, during this period in the house in question, is ruled
out.  Further, PW-7, has also deposed that the dead body was found lying on the
floor of the newly constructed house of Mr. Yesubabu.
        Further, the injuries caused by the two accused using MO-5, are the two
external injuries, which are noticed by PW-14, doctor, during his post-mortem
examination.  It is, therefore, clear that after having thrashed the accused,
the access of the accused to the deceased could not have been ruled out
completely.
        No one has spoken of the snapped portion of the rope lying around the neck
of the deceased.  If it is a case of suicidal death and for the sheer weight of
the dead person if the rope got snapped off, then that portion of the rope must
be lying around the neck of the deceased.  It cannot get separated from the neck
of the deceased.  Whereas in the instant case, the snapped portion of the rope
was found lying besides the body of the deceased.  This is also one other
circumstance, which has got to be taken into account.
        PW-15, has specifically described about the presence of the rope lying by
the side of the dead body, but not around the neck of the deceased.  It is no
doubt true that PW-15 has spoken about the presence of an almairah in the room,
where the dead body was found lying.  When a suggestion has been left to him as
to the possibility of the deceased climbing on to the almairah for reaching the
hook, he has discredited the same.  Therefore, the possibility of a suicidal
hanging can be safely ruled out for, even if the deceased, remorsefully, felt
like committing suicide, he must be able to climb upon some support to reach the
hook and ensure that there should be enough gap between his feet and the floor,
for him to die due to hanging.  In such a case, the material used as support for
reaching the ceiling first and then discarding it later on to hang oneself
should be found besides the deceased.  There was no such material found in the
room, which could have possibly helped the deceased to reach the hook first and
then free himself from the platform or support-base, so as to hang himself from
the hook.  We, therefore, have no hesitation to rule out the possibility of
death being caused by suicide.
        In this context, while one must remember that the snapped portion of the
rope was not found lying around the neck of the deceased, but, in fact, it was
found lying beside the body.  It is appropriate to notice that the medical
opinion has categorically found that the death has been caused by homicide and
suicide is ruled out and, in fact, there was resistance of the victim found in
the medical opinion of PW-14, doctor.    For this reason also we can safely
rule out the death being caused by suicide.  Hence, the reliance placed by the
learned senior counsel for the appellants on the opinion contained in Modi's
Medical Jurisprudence and Toxicology, is of no avail.
        The above are the strong circumstances, in our considered view, to
formulate a complete chain, strong enough, to incriminate the accused with the
offence charged with.
        We do not find any merit in the contention canvassed on behalf of the
appellants and we have not found any material on record worth taking into
consideration to interfere with the findings recorded by the Sessions Court.    
        Accordingly, the conviction and sentence recorded by the Sessions Court in
S.C.No.128 of 2006, is confirmed and in the result the appeal is dismissed.

