

THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTIC SAMUDRALA GOVINDARAJULU             
Criminal Petition No.4277 of 2009

01-10-2010 

Shaik Kaleemullah & 9 others.

The State AP, rep. by its P.P.
High Court of A.P., Hyderabad,
Through P.S. Town IV, Nizamabad and another.  

Counsel for the petitioners: Sri Nazir Ahmed Khan

Counsel for respondent No.1: Additional Public Prosecutor
Counsel for respondent No.2: D. Bhaskar Reddy 

:ORDER:  

        The petitioners 1 to 10/A-2, A-3 and A-5 to A-12 are accused of offences
punishable under Section 498 (A) IPC and Sections 3 and 4 of the Dowry
Prohibition Act.

2.      A-2 is brother, A-3, A-5 to A-9 are sisters of A-1 who is husband of the
second respondent/de facto complainant.  A-10 to A-12 are brother-in-law of A-1,
they being husbands of sisters of
A-1.  There is no dispute about marriage between the second respondent and A-1.
A-1 is not figuring as one of the petitioners herein.  A-4 who is another
brother of A-1 is stated to be no more even by the time of giving report by the
second respondent to the police, which report was registered as FIR No.108 of
2009 of Nizamabad IV Town Police Station.  All the sisters of A-1 are married
and are living with their respective husbands, except A-8.

3.      It is alleged that parents of the second respondent gave dowry of
Rs.70,000/- in cash, 11 tolas of gold, 20 tolas of silver, Hero Honda motorcycle
and other household utensils at the time of marriage.  The alleged dowry and
articles might have been given to A-1 and not to any of A-1's brothers, sisters
or brothers-in-law who are the petitioners herein.  It is further alleged that
A-1 was always beating the second respondent and abusing her and subjecting her 
to mental as well as physical harassment demanding her to get further dowry of
Rs.1.00 lakh and that all the other accused were instigating A-1 to demand
further dowry of Rs.1.00 lakh and to harass the second respondent and that
finally all the accused necked the second respondent out of her family house
demanding to bring Rs.1.00 lakh.  Thus, main allegation of demanding additional
dowry of Rs.1.00 lakh and putting the second respondent to physical and mental
harassment is on A-1.  It is only A-2 to A-12 are stated to have instigated A-1
to do the same.  There are no specific allegations of any of the petitioners
herein subjecting the second respondent to harassment by way of beating or
abusing her, much less demanding to bring Rs.1.00 lakh towards additional dowry.
If the alleged additional dowry is brought, then none of brothers, sisters and
brothers-in-law would be beneficiaries and they would not get any share in that
additional dowry.

4.      The Supreme Court in Preeti Gupta v. State of Jharkhand1 took note of the
fact on some unscrupulous wives putting all family members of the husband to
harassment by way of giving report alleging offence under Section 498 (A) IPC.
The Supreme Court pointed out role of the courts as follows:

"At times, even after the conclusion of criminal trial, it is difficult to
ascertain the real truth.  The courts have to be extremely careful and cautious
in dealing with these complaints and must take pragmatic realities into
consideration while dealing with matrimonial cases.  The allegations of
harassment of husband's close relations who had been living in different cities
and never visited or rarely visited the place where the complainant resided
would have an entirely different complexion."

5.      The Supreme Court also pointed out role of advocates and also need for
change of legislation on this aspect.  If allegations in the report given by the
second respondent are scrutinized with pragmatic approach contemplated by the 
Supreme Court, it is evident that general and omnibus allegations are made
against all the petitioners who are residents of different places and different
localities including a brother who is no more even by the date of giving report
by the second respondent to the police.  Such indiscriminate activity on the
part of the second respondent, cannot be supported by this Court.  Registration
of case on report of the second respondent by the police against the petitioners
herein is nothing short of abuse of process of criminal law.

6.      Hence, the criminal petition is allowed quashing FIR in crime No.108 of
2009 of Nizamabad IV Police Station in so far as the petitioners 1 to 10/A-2, A-
3 and A-5 to A-12 are concerned.

?1 2010 (8) Scale 131

