

THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE B. CHANDRA KUMAR          
Criminal Petition No. 5110 of 2007

21-04-2010 

Chunchu Yesodara Rao   
S/o Venkata Subramanyam,   
Aged 34 years, Hawaldar in Indian Army,
Pune. 

Station House Officer,
Bestavaripeta P.S.,
Rep. by Public Prosecutor,
Hyderabad and another 

Counsel for petitioner: Smt. D. Lalitha Prasad

Counsel for first respondent:   Public Prosecutor

:ORDER:  

This Criminal Petition has been filed to quash the proceedings in C.C.No.128 of
2007 on the file of the Judicial Magistrate of First Class, Giddalur.
The brief facts of the case are that the marriage of the second respondent
herein was performed with the petitioner.  The father of the second respondent
presented an amount of Rs.1,25,000/- to A-1 to A-3 i.e., the petitioner and his
parents towards dowry and other expenses. It is alleged that after marriage,
when the second respondent gave birth to a female child, the Accused started
harassing her on the ground that she gave birth to a female child. The
petitioner is alleged to have harassed the second respondent physically and
mentally at the instigation of the other Accused. On the complaint lodged by the
second respondent, the police registered a case in Crime No.16 of 2006 and after
completing the investigation, laid the charge sheet.
The only point that arises for consideration is whether the allegations in the
complaint are absurd and inherently improbable and whether no prima facie case
has been made out. 
It is the settled law that while exercising the jurisdiction under Section 482
of Cr.P.C., the High Court would not embark upon any enquiry whether the
allegations in the complaint are likely to be established by evidence or not.
The High Court would be guided by the allegations where those allegations set
out in the complaint or the charge sheet do not, in law, constitute or spell out
any offence and that resort criminal proceedings of injustice would amount in
the abuse of process of the Court of law.  There is nothing on record to say
that the allegations set out in the charge sheet do not constitute an offence.
Therefore, I hold that there are no grounds to quash the proceedings against the
petitioner.
Accordingly, the Criminal Petition is dismissed.

