

THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE V.ESWARAIAH AND THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE B.N.RAO NALLA                 
Crl..A. No. 708 of  2000

14-12-2010 

Mogilicherla Bhixapathi
2.  Mogilicherla Rajeswaramma 

The State of A.P. rep. By its
Public Prosecutor, High Court of A.P., Hyderabad

Counsel for the Appellants: Smt A.Gayatri Reddy

Counsel for the Respondent:  The Addl. Public Prosecutor

:JUDGMENT: (Per Hon'ble Sri Justice B.N.Rao Nalla) 

This Criminal Appeal is preferred by the accused-A1 and A2 against the Judgment
dated 21.03.2006 delivered in S.C.No.252 of 2005 by III Additional Sessions
Judge, Karimnagar, whereby the accused are found guilty of the offence
punishable under Sections 498-A, 302 read with 34 IPC, 304-B IPC and Sections 3 
and 4 of Dowry Prohibition Act and convicted and sentenced them to under
imprisonment for life and pay a fine of Rs.1,000/- each, in default of payment
of fine, they shall undergo Simple Imprisonment for a period of two months each
for the offence punishable under Section 302 read with 34 IPC.  They are further
sentenced to undergo Rigorous Imprisonment for a period of ten years each for
the offence punishable under Section 304-B IPC, and further sentenced to undergo
Rigorous Imprisonment for a period of two years each and pay a fine of
Rs.1,000/- each, in default, to suffer Simple Imprisonment for a period of four
months each for the offence punishable under Section 498-A IPC, and further
sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for a period of three years each and
pay a fine of Rs.15,000/- each, in default, to suffer simple imprisonment for a
period of one year each for the offence punishable under Section 3 of Dowry
Prohibition Act and also sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for a period
of six months each, and pay a fine of Rs.500/- each, in default, to suffer
simple imprisonment for a period of two months each for the offence punishable
under Section 4 of Dowry Prohibition Act, and all the sentences shall run
concurrently.
           The case of the prosecution in brief is that PW1 - M.Rajalaxmi, who
is the mother of Kalavathi - deceased, performed the marriage of her daughter
with A1 about four years prior to her death and agreed to give Rs.45,000/- as
dowry.  Out of the agreed dowry, she paid Rs.35,000/- at the time of marriage
and promised to pay the balance dowry subsequently.  A2 is the mother of the A1.
The couple lead marital life happily for sometime, and thereafter, the accused
used to ill-treat Kalavathi for getting balance dowry and also additional dowry
of Rs.15,000/-.  The deceased used to disclose her owes to her parents whenever
she visited their house, but they used to console her and send back to her-in-
laws' house.  While so, on 13.04.2004, at about 05.30 p.m., when PW1 was in Jaya 
Bharathi School, where she was working as Attendant, PW3, who is her son, 
informed that Kalavathi sustained burn injuries and he shifted the victim to MGM
Hospital.  Immediately, she rushed to the hospital, found the deceased with burn
injuries.  When she enquired with the deceased as to how the incident happened,
she stated that the accused poured kerosene on her and set fire to her on the
ground that she failed to bring balance dowry.  The deceased succumbed to
injuries while undergoing treatment in the hospital.  While undergoing the
treatment, PW10 - IV Additional Junior Civil Judge, Warangal, recorded her dying
declaration.  PW1 lodged complaint against the accused.  PW15 - Assistant Sub- 
Inspector of Police, Kamalapur Police Station, registered a case against the
accused and PW16 - Sub-Divisional Police Officer, took up investigation,
arrested the accused on 18.06.2004, and after completing the investigation filed
charge sheet.
        The charges under Sections 498-A IPC, 302 read with 34 IPC, 304-B IPC and 
Sections 3 & 4 of Dowry Prohibition Act, which are levelled against the accused,
were read over and explained to them, but they pleaded not guilty.
        To substantiate the case of the prosecution, it examined PWs.1 to 16 and
got marked Exs.P1 to P19 besides case property M.Os.1 to 4.  
        After closure of the prosecution evidence, the accused were examined under
Section 313 Cr.PC.  wherein they denied the incriminating circumstances
appearing in the prosecution evidence.  No oral or documentary evidence was
adduced on behalf of the accused.
        The trial Court, after considering the evidence of the prosecution
witnesses, found the accused guilty and convicted and sentenced them as stated
supra.  Being aggrieved by the same, the accused have filed the present appeal.
        The point for determination is whether the prosecution proved the guilt of
the accused for the offences punishable under Sections 498-A IPC, 302 read with
34 IPC, 304-B IPC and Sections 3 and 4 of Dowry Prohibition Act, beyond all
reasonable doubt and whether the judgment of the trial Court is correct, legal
and proper?
PW1 - mother of the deceased, deposed as to the performance of marriage of her
younger daughter-Kalavathi with A1; her agreement to give dowry of Rs.45,000/-,
out of which Rs.35,000/- was paid, demand of additional dowry of Rs.10,000/- by
the accused and also as to the commission of offence by A1 and A2 subjecting her
daughter to mental and physical cruelty, pouring kerosene and setting fire to
her.  In cross-examination, she denied the suggestion that they did not perform
the marriage of her daughter with A1.
PW2 - father of the deceased and PW3 - brother of the deceased also deposed on 
the same lines as deposed by PW1.  In cross-examination, they denied the 
suggestion that they did not perform the marriage of Kalavathi with A1.
PW4, neighbour of the deceased, who was declared hostile, deposed that at 5.00
p.m. on the date of occurrence of offence, he heard some noise from the house of
the accused and immediately rushed there and observed the deceased in flames and  
he covered her body with blanket and he did not know the reasons for the burn
injuries.
PWs.5 and 6 deposed that they do not know the terms of the marriage nor the
disputes between the deceased and A1, and they came to know about the deceased    
sustaining burn injuries and was being shifted to M.G.M. Hospital, Warangal.
Their evidence is not of much avail.
PWs.7 and 8 were declared hostile.
PW9, resident of Katnepalli, deposed as to the inquest held over the dead-body
of the deceased by the Mandal Revenue Officer.
        PW10, the then IV Additional Junior Civil Judge, Warangal, deposed that on
13.04.2004, at 07.30 P.M. on receipt of a requisition from out-post police,
M.G.M. Hospital, Warangal, for recording dying declaration, he went to the
hospital, but before he recorded dying declaration, the deceased was certified
by the duty Medical Officer that she was in fit state of mind, conscious and
coherent to give her statement, and the Doctor also made an endorsement to that
effect, and then PW10 recorded her dying declaration, which is marked as Ex.P12,
and he read over and explained the contents to her, who accepted the same, and
he obtained her right toe impression at the end of the dying declaration.
        PW11 deposed as to the seizure of M.Os. 1 to 4 by the police under Ex.P15.
        PW12 - Dr.L.Vinod Kumar, who was Assistant Professor, Department of  
Forensic Medicines, Warangal, deposed that on 14.04.2004, on receipt of
requisition from the Mandal Revenue Officer, he conducted autopsy over the dead
body of the deceased and opined that the deceased suffered 90% of burns and died
of burn injuries.
        PW13, the then Mandal Revenue Officer, Warangal deposed as to the conduct  
of inquest over the dead body of the deceased.  He and other panchas opined that
the deceased died of burn injuries.
        PW14, photographer, deposed that he took photographs of the dead body of 
the deceased at mortuary of M.G.M. Hospital, Warangal. 
        PW15, the then Sub-Inspector of Police, Kamalapur, deposed that he gave 
requisition to PW13 for conducting panchanama because she died within seven 
years from the date of marriage.  He visited the scene of offence, prepared
rough sketch and seized M.Os. 1 to 4.
PW16, the then Sub-Divisional Police Officer, Karimnagar, who took up
investigation in the matter, deposed that on 16.04.2004 he visited the scene of
offence i.e. the house of the accused, secured the presence of PWs.1 to 8 and
PW14, examined them and recorded their statements under Section 161 Cr.P.C.   
Heard the learned counsel for the appellants and the learned Additional Public
Prosecutor appearing for the State.
We have carefully perused the records and given our anxious considerations of
the contentions urged by both the parties.  From the evidence of the prosecution
witnesses coupled with Exs.P1 to P19, the facts that the marriage of the
deceased with A1, the demand of dowry of Rs.45,000/- by the accused and payment  
of Rs.35,000/- to the accused by the parents of the deceased, and the demand of
balance dowry and additional dowry of Rs.10,000/- by the accused are not
disputed.  Inasmuch as the evidence of PWs.1 to 3 to the effect that the accused
demanded dowry of Rs.45,000/- and additional dowry of Rs.15,000/- remains
uncontroverted, we hold that the accused undoubtedly demanded the alleged dowry 
from Kalavathi, which constitutes an offence punishable under Sections 3 and 4
of Dowry Prohibition Act.
The second aspect of the matter is that most of the witnesses other than the
members of the family of the deceased, spoke as to the burns suffered by the
deceased miserably after she was set ablaze by the accused.   With regard to the
ingredients, which attract the offences punishable under Sections 302 and 304-B
IPC, i.e. subjecting a woman to cruelty and causing her murder within seven
years from the date of the marriage, this Court has to examine the evidence of
prosecution witnesses and the medical evidence in the light of the dying
declaration of the deceased recorded by PW10 - IV Additional Junior Civil Judge,
Warangal. 
The Apex Court, in Vikas and Others Vs. State of Maharashtra1, while referring
to earlier cases, summed up principles governing dying declaration as under.
i) There is neither rule of law nor prudence that dying declaration cannot be
acted upon without corroboration.
ii) If the court is satisfied that the dying declaration is true and voluntary,
it can base conviction on it, without corroboration.
iii) This Court has to scrutinize the dying declaration carefully and must
ensure that the declaration is not the result of tutoring, prompting or
imagination.  The deceased had opportunity to observe and identify the
assailants and was in a fit state to make the declaration.
iv) Where dying declaration is suspicious it should not be acted upon without
corroborative evidence.
v) Where the deceased was unconscious and could never make any dying declaration  
the evidence with regard to it is to be rejected.
vi) A dying declaration which suffers from infirmity cannot form the basis of
conviction.
vii) Merely because a dying declaration does not contain the details as to the
occurrence, it is not to be rejected.
viii) Equally, merely because it is a brief statement, it is not to be
discarded.  On the contrary, the shortness of the statement itself guarantees
truth.
ix) Normally, the Court, in order to satisfy whether deceased was in a fit
mental condition to make the dying declaration look up to the medical opinion.
But where the eye-witness has said that the deceased was in a fit and conscious
state to make this dying declaration, the medical opinion cannot prevail.
x) Whether the prosecution version differs from the version as given in the
dying declaration, the said declaration cannot be acted upon.

The Apex Court further held that one of the principles formulated by this Court
in Khushal Rao vs. State of Bombay2, was that where a dying declaration is
recorded by a competent Magistrate, it would stand on a much higher footing.  In
another case in Nallapati Sivaiah v. Sub-Divisional Officer, Guntur. A.P.
(S.C.)3 the Apex Court observed thus:
"It is equally well-settled and needs no restatement at our hands that dying
declaration can form the sole basis for conviction. But at the same time due
care and caution must be exercised in considering weight to be given to dying
declaration inasmuch as there could be any number of circumstances which may  
affect the truth.  This Court in more than one decision cautioned that the
Courts have always to be on guard to see that the dying declaration was not the
result of either tutoring or prompting or a product of imagination.  It is the
duty of the Courts to find that the deceased was in a fit state of mind to make
the dying declaration.  In order to satisfy itself that the deceased was in a
fit mental condition to make the dying declaration, the Courts have to look for
the medical opinion."

PW10, the then IV Additional Junior Civil Judge, Warangal, specifically deposed
in his evidence at the time of recording the dying declaration of Kalavathi,
that she was in a fit state of mind, conscious and coherent and after recording
her statement, he obtained her right toe impression on the dying declaration,
and the same was read over to her.  He further deposed that the mental condition
of the deceased was also endorsed by the duty Medical Officer, who was present
during the recording of the dying declaration.  Ex.P12-dying declaration reveals
that both the Medical Officer and IV Addl. Junior Civil Judge certified to the
effect that the deceased, at the time of making her statement, was conscious and
coherent and her mental faculties are normal throughout the proceedings of dying
declaration.  It further reveals that at the time of the marriage, Rs.35,000/-
was given to the accused and when she failed to pay the balance of Rs.10,000/-
the accused harassed her, subjected to physical and mental cruelty, poured
kerosene and set her ablaze.  The deceased answered to question No.7 in the
dying declaration that "her husband and mother-in-law poured kerosene on her and
set her ablaze by liting a match-stick for the reason that she did not comply
with the demand of balance dowry of Rs.10,000/-".  Further, to question No.8,
she stated in clear terms that "her husband and mother-in-law set her ablaze and
action may be taken against them."  From this, it is crystal clear that the
deceased gave her statement when she was in a fit state of mind.  Further, the
evidence of PWs.1 to 3, parents and brother of the deceased to the effect that
the accused subjected her to cruelty and harassment demanding additional dowry 
of Rs.10,000/- and pouring kerosene and setting her ablaze, receives full
corroboration from the dying declaration as well.  Obviously, there is no
contrary evidence indicating that the deceased at the time of her statement
being recorded, was tutored or prompted by PW1 or any external agency or was 
there any product of imagination, and moreover, her statement is fully supported
by Duty Doctor, who also opined in Ex.P12 - dying declaration that she was in a
fit state of mind.   Therefore, the dying declaration, which is the substantial
piece of evidence, has inspired confidence so as to make it safe to act upon.
Apart from the above, the evidence of PWs.1 to 3, who are interested witnesses,
as to the cause of the death of Kalavathi, is fortified by the evidence of
PWs.12 - Assistant Professor of Department of Forensic Medicines and PW13 -  
Mandal Revenue Officer, who conducted autopsy over the dead body of the deceased  
opining that the deceased died of 90% of burns.  Hence, this Court is thoroughly
satisfied with the entire narration of events stated by the deceased in her
dying declaration recorded by PW10 and the cumulative effect of the other
evidence including the medical evidence and the circumstances that are taken
into consideration, as such, the same cannot be discounted.  In that view of the
matter, we hold that the accused, for the reason that the deceased failed to pay
the balance dowry amount, harassed her by subjecting her to physical and mental
cruelty, and ultimately poured kerosene on her and set her ablaze and committed
an offence punishable under Sections
498-A IPC and 302 read with 34 IPC.

Further, admittedly, the occurrence of offence took place on 13.04.2004 and the
marriage of A1 with the deceased, according to the evidence of PWs.1 and 2, took
place about five years prior to the date of offence which was corroborated by
the evidence of PW15 - Sub-Inspector of Police, Kamalapur who stated that he
gave requisition to PW13 for conducting panchanama because Kalavathi died within
seven years from the date of her marriage.  This piece of ocular evidence has
remained uncontroverted and unrebutted.  Hence, this Court has no hesitation in
inferring that the marriage of the deceased with A1 took place within seven
years from the date of their marriage, which attracts the ingredients of the
offence punishable under Section 304-B IPC.   Thus, the contentions put forth by
the learned counsel for the appellants are wholly unsustainable, and the
judgment of the trial Court, in our considered opinion, is correct, legal and
proper.



        For the foregoing reasons, the appeal is dismissed.  The judgment of
conviction and sentenced recorded against the appellants are upheld.

?1 2008(1) ALD (Crl.) 880 (SC)
2 1958 SCR 552  
3 2008(1) ALD (Crl.) 316 (SC)

