

THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE B. CHANDRA KUMAR          
CRL. R.C. NO. 1209 OF 2009   

09-02-2010 
Mohd. Younus and others.  

The State of A.P., and another.

Counsel for the Petitioners: Sri M. Govind Reddy

Counsel for Respondent No.1: The Public Prosecutor 
Counsel for Respondent No.2:   Sri Mohd. Faqruddin Ghori

:ORDER:  

        This Revision Case has been filed challenging the order, dated 14-07-2009
in Crl.M.P.No.355 of 2009 in S.C.No.206 of 2009 on the file of the III
Additional Metropolitan Sessions Judge at Hyderabad.
2.      The brief facts of the case are as follows:
The second respondent herein, who is the de facto complainant, filed a complaint
under Section 200 of Cr.P.C. alleging that she was married to A-1 on 14-04-2006
as per muslim law. A-2 and A-3 are the parents, A-4 and A-5 are the brothers, A-
6 and A-7 are the sisters and A-8 is the maternal aunt of A-1.  A-9 is the son
of A-8.  The accused, after receiving huge cash, gold ornaments, electronic
items and jahez articles towards dowry from the complainant, harassed her to get
additional dowry of Rs.1,00,000/-.  It is also her case that her brother
Minhajuddin paid the said amount of Rs.1,00,000/- to the accused by obtaining
loan from the bank.  It is also her case that on 10-08-2007, A-1 to A-9 with a
common intention attempted to kill her due to which she received bleeding
injuries on both the hands and that when her brother, who visited the house of
the accused, tried to rescue her, he was also attacked due to which he also
received bleeding injuries.  The complainant and her brother were treated in
Yashoda Hospital, and thereafter, filed a dowry harassment case against the
Accused. 
3.      On 29-09-2007, A-8 to A-10 were arrested in the above dowry harassment 
case.  A-1 to A-7 have forcibly and illegally entered into the house of the
defacto complainant situated at Prakash Nagar and started abusing her and her
family members and threatened her to withdraw the dowry case and when she  
refused for the same, A-1 and A-2, at the instigation of A-3 to A-7, attacked
her by giving fist blows and pressed her neck with his waist belt with an
intention to kill her and also snatched away her 2 1/2 tulas gold chain from her
neck.  Due to attack by the accused, she fell down and the accused fled away by
threatening to spoil her life and to sell away her gold ornaments and Jehaz
articles.
4.      Thereafter, she filed a complaint on 13-10-2007 against the accused, which
was registered as Crime No.385 of 2007 by Begumpet Police Station, for the
offences under Sections 307, 382, 506 read with 34 of IPC.  The police, after
completing the investigation, laid the charge sheet.
5.      A-1 to A-9 in the FIR are shown as A-8, A-9, A-3,
A-4, A-10, A-5, A-6, A-7 and A-1 respectively in the charge sheet.  The police,
after completing the investigation, laid the charge sheet holding that A-1 to A-
10 committed the offences punishable under Sections 147, 450, 382, 307, 354 and
506 read with 149 and 109 of IPC.
6.      The petitioners filed an application in Crl.M.P. No.355 of 2009 praying to
discharge them.  The learned Sessions Judge, holding that at the time of framing
of charge it is not necessary and proper for the Court to consider the
inconsistencies and contradictions in the statements of witnesses and that the
Court has to see whether there exists any prima facie or not and if it appears
that there exists the prima facie case, charges have to be framed against the
accused, dismissed the said application.
7.      The learned counsel for the petitioners submitted that though the alleged
incident had occurred on 20-09-2007, the FIR was issued on 13-10-2007 and there
is inordinate delay in registering the case.  It is further argued that in the
FIR, there is no whisper about A-2 and the de facto complainant for the first
time referred the name of A-2 when her statement was recorded under Section
161(3) of Cr.P.C.  It is further argued that the allegation against A-2 is that
he had caught hold of the hands of the de facto complainant when A-1, as shown
in the charge sheet, beat her.  It is further argued that the in the FIR, it is
mentioned that when the complainant became restless and fell down, the Accused 
ran away.  Whereas in the charge sheet it is mentioned that the complainant
raised cries and when neighbours came, on seeing them, the accused ran away.  It
is further mentioned that the mother of the de facto complainant in her 161(3)
Cr.P.C. statement says that she saw the incident her son was locked in a room
and that her son in his 161(3) Cr.P.C statement says that both of them were
locked in the room.  It is also argued that no test identification parade has
been conducted though the neighbours are cited as witnesses.  It is also argued
that the doctor found only abrasions on the neck of the de facto complainant,
but he did not explain what kind of abrasions were found on the neck of the de
facto complainant.  It is also argued that the entire case is made up to take
revenge against the Accused and when it is a clear case of false implication,
the petitioners are entitled to discharge.
8.      The learned counsel for relied on the Judgment of the Supreme Court in
YOGESH @ SACHIN JAGDISH JOSHI v. STATE OF MAHARASHTRA 1 in support of his             
contention that where the material relied upon by the prosecution, even if
accepted in entirety, only creates suspicion of motive, which is not sufficient
to make out a case for conviction of the accused, the accused are entitled for
discharge particularly when the other co-accused have been discharged.
9.      The points arises for consideration is:
1. Whether the material on record shows that there is any prima facie case
against the petitioners-accused to frame charge against them?
2. Whether the petitioners are entitled for discharge?
9.      Section 227 of Cr.P.C. reads as follows:
"S. 227. Discharge.-If, upon consideration of the record of the case and the
documents submitted therewith, and after hearing the submissions of the accused
and the prosecution in this behalf, the Judge considers that there is not
sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused, he shall discharge the
accused and record his reasons for so doing."

10.     The Court has to see whether there is sufficient ground to proceed against
the accused.  Reasons have to be recorded if the Court comes to a conclusion
that the Accused have to be discharged.  The approach of the Court should be
pragmatic.  The charge should not be framed in cases where the available
material does not disclose the ingredients of the offence.  Framing of charge in
such cases is an exercise in futility and results in wasting the valuable time
of the Court. The Court has to consider the material placed before it and come
to the conclusion whether a prima facie case is made out.  Though the Court is
not required to appreciate the entire evidence, but it has to see whether a
prima facie case is made out or not.
11.     In YOGESH @ SACHIN JAGDISH JOSHI's case, the Hon'ble Supreme Court,        
referred to the decision in STATE OF BIHAR v. RAMESH SINGH 2 observed that:   
"It is true that the words "not sufficient ground for proceeding against the
accused" appearing in the Section postulate exercise of judicial mind on the
part of the Judge to the facts of the case in order to determine whether a case
for trial has been made out by the prosecution.  However, in assessing this
fact, the Judge has the power to sift and weigh the material for the limited
purpose of finding out whether or not a prima facie case against the accused has
been made out.  The test to determine a prima facie case depends upon the facts
of each case and in this regard it is neither feasible nor desirable to lay down
a rule of universal application.  By and large, however, if two views are
equally possible and the Judge is satisfied that the evidence produced before
him gives rise to suspicion only as distinguished from grave suspicion, he will
be fully within his right to discharge the accused.  At this stage, he is not to
see as to whether the trial will end in conviction or not."

        12.     In the case UNION OF INDIA v. PRAFULLA KUMAR AND SAMAL AND ANR 3, it          
was held that even a very strong suspicion founded upon materials leading the
Magistrate to form a presumptive opinion as to the existence of the factual
ingredients constituting the offence alleged may justify the framing of charges.
The Court cannot act merely as a post office or a mouthpiece of the prosecution,
but has to consider the broad probabilities of the case, the total effect of the
evidence and the documents produced, any basic infirmities and find out whether
a prima facie case against the accused has been made out.  The Judge should not 
make a roving enquiry into the pros and cons of the matter and weigh the
evidence as done at the time of final judgment.  The standard of test, proof and
judgment which is to be finally applied before finding the accused guilty or
otherwise is not to be applied at the stage of deciding the matter under
Sections 227 or 239 Cr.P.C as the case may be. 
        13.     As seen from the contents of the complaint, the alleged incident
took place on 29-09-2007 at about 9 PM at the parents' house of the de facto
complainant. Even according to the complainant, A-1, A-2, A-5 shown in the FIR,
who are cited as A-8 to A-10 respectively in the charge sheet, were arrested by
the police, North zone and therefore, they were admittedly not present on 29-09-
2007 at the time of alleged incident. Admittedly, there is no whisper in the
complaint as shown in the charge sheet.  The specific allegation made by the de
facto complainant in her complaint is that since A-1, A-2, A-5 in the FIR, who
are shown as A-8 to A-10 respectively in the charge sheet, were arrested, the
other accused became angry and they trespassed into their house.  According to
her, the accused, who trespassed into their house, are A-1 and A-3 to A-7 as
shown in the charge sheet and on the instigation of the other accused, A-1 (A-9
in the FIR) gave fist blows to the de facto complainant and pressed her neck
with his waist belt on the instigation of the other accused with an intention to
kill her and snatched away her 2 1/2 gold chain. It is also her case that when
she became restless, the accused ran away. Whether the de facto complainant was  
referred to the doctor or not and whether there are material contradictions in
the statements of the witnesses or not and whether the test identification
parade was necessary or not, are the aspects to be considered at the time of
trial and judgment.  The complaint allegations made by the de facto complainant
prima facie go to show that A-1 and A-3 to A-7 shown in the charge sheet went to
the house of the defacto complainant and A-1 is alleged to have gave fist blows
and pressed her neck with waist belt at the instigation of the other accused.
Therefore, it appears that a prima facie case has been made out against A-1 and
A-3 to A-7 as shown in the charge sheet, who are shown as A-9, A-3, A-4 and A-6
to A-8 respectively in the FIR.
        14.     As far as A-8 to A-10 shown in the charge sheet are concerned,
admittedly they were arrested on the date of accident and were not present at
the time of incident.  Similarly, the name of A-2 is also not referred by the
complainant in her complaint filed under Section 200 of Cr.P.C.  It has to be
seen that the alleged incident took place on 29-09-2007 and the complaint is
filed on 01-10-2007.  Thus even after two days of the incident, the de facto
complainant did not make any allegations against A-2 or even did not say that A-
2 shown in the charge sheet was present at the time of alleged incident.  It is
not her case that she had no contact with the other witnesses before lodging the
complaint.  It is not her case that, the other witnesses had subsequently
informed her about the role played by A2.  In fact the allegation against A2 is
that he had caught hold the hands of the de facto complainant.  In the above
circumstances, it is against normal human conduct and most improbable on the 
part of the de facto complainant not to mention the name of A2 in her complaint.
Thus it appears that A-2 shown in the charge sheet has been falsely implicated
in this case. Merely because the statements of the other witnesses recorded
under Section 161 (3) Cr.P.C. referred the name of A-2  (as shown in the charge
sheet), the Court is not bound to blindly accept the same and proceed against
him when it appears that he has been falsely implicated in this case.
15.     In view of the above discussion, I am of the view that no prima facie case
has been made out against A-2 and A-8 to A-10 shown in the charge sheet, who are 
A-1, A-2 and A-5 in the FIR.  Therefore, A-2 and A-8 to A-10 shown in the charge
sheet are entitled for discharge.
        16.     Accordingly, the Criminal Revision Case is allowed and the order of
the lower Court is set aside in respect of    A-2 and A-8 to A-10 shown in the
charge sheet and they are discharged for the offences with which they were
charged.  Consequently, the Criminal Revision Case stands dismissed in respect
of the other accused as shown in the charge sheet.
        17.     The Criminal Revision Case is allowed in part and dismissed in part
as indicated above.

?1 AIR 2008 SC 2991  
2 AIR 1977 SC 2018  
3 AIR 1979 SC 366  

