

THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE GOPALA KRISHNA TAMADA            
Tr.Crl.P. No.267 of 2009 and TR.CRLPMP No.209 of 2010 in Tr.Crl.P.No.267 of 
2009 

22-07-2010 

Nadiminti Triveni

State of A.P., rep. by its Public Prosecutor, High Court of A.P., Hyderabad and
others

Counsel for Petitioner  : Sri K.Venkat Rao

Counsel for Respondents: Sri G.Nageswara Rao  

:ORDER:  

Transfer Criminal Petition No.267 of 2009 is a petition seeking transfer of
C.C.No.309 of 2009 on the file of the Judicial First Class Magistrate, Bapatla,
to any Court preferably in Srikakulam District or in the alternative to the
Courts at Districts of Visakhapatnam or East Godavari.  When this matter was
taken up on 14.12.2009, a learned Judge of this Court admitted the petition and
granted interim stay of all further proceedings.

The facts, in brief, that lead to the filing of the petition, are as follows:
The petitioner, by name, Nadiminti Triveni, who was cited as L.W.1 in C.C.No.309
of 2009 has joined the 1st year B.Tech (Agriculture) in Acharya N.G.Ranga
Agricultural University, College of Agricultural Engineering, Bapatla, during
October 2008 and she was staying in one of the hostels attached to the
university.  As she was a new comer and was staying in the hostel, she was
subjected to severe prolonged ragging by her seniors i.e. the accused Nos.1 to
5.  Unable to bear the said torture which is in the nature of ragging the
petitioner tried to commit suicide by consuming hair dye and tablets on
27.02.2009 and when she became unconscious she was taken to a private hospital  
where she was treated for about 25 days and after her recovery she was
discharged from the hospital on 21.03.2009.  As the petitioner by name Triveni
tried to commit suicide, initially a case in Crime No.48 of 2009 of Bapatla
Police Station was registered under Section 309 of IPC, but after recording her
statement, the same was altered and the said crime was registered against the
accused Nos.1 to 5 for the offences punishable under Sections 4(i)(ii)(iii) and
7(1) of the Andhra Pradesh Prohibition of Ragging Act, 1997 (for short - 'the
Act'), Act.  After investigation, charge sheet was filed before the Judicial
First Class Magistrate, Bapatla, against the accused Nos.1 to 5 for the offence
punishable under Section 4(i)(ii)(iii) of the Act only.  As there was pressure
on the de facto complainant i.e. Triveni/LW1 to withdraw the case, she took
transfer certificate from the College of Agricultural Engineering, Bapatla, and
joined in B.Sc., at Srikakulam.  As she is residing at Srikakulam and it is
causing any amount of inconvenience to her, she approached this Court and filed
the present transfer application.  As stated supra, this matter was admitted and
stay was granted.

When this matter was listed before this Court, taking into consideration the
fact that the petitioner and the accused are students and their future is at
stake, this Court advised some sort of settlement and directed the parties to
appear before this Court on 08.07.2010 and accordingly the accused with their
parents and the petitioner with her parents appeared before this Court.  The
petitioner narrated as to how the things have taken place and the accused also
have given their version.  However, as stated supra, as the petitioner as well
as the accused/respondent Nos.2 to 6 are all students of agricultural
engineering and if the case against the accused ends in conviction, their future
would be at stake, this Court advised them to come forward with a memorandum of 
compromise and adjourned the matter.  Today, when the matter is taken up for
hearing a memorandum of compromise in Tr.Crl.P.M.P.No.209 of 2010, signed by all 
the parties, is filed in the following manner.
"1)     The petitioner in the above Tr. Crl. Petition No.267 of 2009 is victim/LW1
in CC No.309/2009 on the file of JFCM, Bapatla, wherein respondents 2 to 6
herein are accused of offences punishable under Section 4 (i) (ii) (iii) of AP
Prohibition of Ragging Act, 1997.

2)      The above Tr. Crl. Petition No.267/2009 when listed for hearing before
this Hon'ble Court, this Hon'ble Court was of the view that the matter requires
to be settled between parties, as the petitioner herein and Respondents
2 to 6 are students, and directed the appearance of the petitioner herein and
respondents 2 to 6 before this Hon'ble Court on 08.07.2010 at 10.30 a.m.,
consequent thereon, the petitioner and respondents 2 to 6 accompanied by their
parents appeared before this Hon'ble Court on 08.07.2010, and at the
intervention of elders and well wishers it was decided that Respondents 2 to 6
herein collectively shall pay a sum of Rs.1,50,000/- (Rupees One Lakh Fifty
Thousand Only) to the petitioner/LW-1, as LW-1 had discontinued her Ag. B. Tech
subsequent to the incident of ragging.

3)      In pursuance of the above, Respondents 2 to 6 herein agreed to pay the
above sum of Rs.1,50,000/- to the petitioner/LW1/Victim and is paying
Rs.1,50,000/- by way of Demand Draft (s) bearing No.052026, 052027, 052028 and 
052030 dated 21-07-2010 drawn on SBH Bank, Tarnaka Br., in favour of the
petitioner / LW-1, towards full and final settlement of the above CC No.309/2009
pending on the file of JFCM, Bapatla.

4)      In view of the same, the petitioner herein prays that this Hon'ble Court
may be pleased to compound the offence of Section 4 (i) (ii) (iii) of A.P.
Prohibition of Ragging Act, 1997 pending trial in CC No.309/2009 on the file of
JFCM, Bapatla and acquit the respondents 2 to 6 (accused 1 to 5) of the
offences, and pass such other order or orders as this Hon'ble Court may deem fit
and proper in the circumstances of the case."

        In the light of the compromise entered into between the parties, and the
present application is filed under Section 482 of Cr.P.C. to get the proceedings
quashed by way of compounding the offences, this Court looked into the various
provisions of the Andhra Pradesh Prohibition of Ragging Act, 1997.      

The word 'ragging' means doing the act of teasing, taunting, playing a practical
joke upon some one or holding comic parties and other activities during certain
period of a collegian.  Thus, it has both positive and negative manifestation.
But, of-late, it has become a menace and under the guise of ragging so many
untoward incidents such as disorderly conduct, excitement by rough and rude
treatment by rough handling which causes or is likely to cause annoyance, undue
hardship, physical or psychological harm, or apprehension or fear in a fresher
etc., are taking place.  Though ragging has a chequered history it has not
assumed monstrous preparations.  The incidents of ragging in educational
institutions, more particularly in higher educational institutions, were
hitherto dealt with at the institution level i.e. by the respective colleges.
However, when so many serious incidents of ragging are noticed along the
country, several States have taken it up as an issue and thus introduced
Prohibition of Ragging Acts of the respective States and in so far as the State
of Andhra Pradesh is concerned, an Act called the Andhra Pradesh Prohibition of
Ragging Act, 1997, was introduced and it came into force with effect from
04.07.1997.  It may not be necessary to refer to various provisions of law
referred to in the said Act and it is suffice to refer to Section 4 of the said
Act, which deals with penalty for ragging and it reads as under.
"4.Penalty for Ragging:-- Whoever, with the intention of causing ragging or with
the knowledge that he is likely by such act to cause ragging, commits or abets
ragging and thereby,--
(i) teases or embarrasses or humiliates a student shall be punished with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or with fine which may
extend to one thousand rupees or with both; or
(ii) assaults or uses criminal force to or criminally intimidates a student
shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or
with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees or with both; or
(iii) wrongfully restrains or wrongfully confines or causes hurt to a student
shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years or
with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees or with both; or
(iv) causes grievous hurt to or kidnaps or abducts or rapes or commits unnatural
offence with a student shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to five years and with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees; or
(v) causes death or abets suicide shall be punished with imprisonment for life
or with imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years and with a fine
which may extend to fifty thousand rupees.

From the above provision of law it is clear that if a student is convicted, he
shall be dismissed from the educational institution as provided for under
Section 5 of the Act and a student may be suspended when once a complaint of 
ragging is made against him/her as provided for under Section 6 of the Act.
Taking these things into consideration only, this Court advised the parties
herein to get the matter compromised.  This is an enactment which has come into
force in the year 1997 and this Act is silent as to whether the offences falling
under Section 4 of the Act are compoundable or not.

Section 320 of Cr.P.C., which deals with compounding of offences, prescribes
only those offences falling under the Indian Penal Code and it is silent with
regard to the penal provisions of the special enactments.  No doubt, this Court
is conferred with extraordinary inherent jurisdiction as provided for under
Section 482 of Cr.P.C., but the point that falls for consideration is whether
this Court can exercise its powers conferred under Section 482 of Cr.P.C. when
the Act is silent with regard to the compounding of offences.

Apparently, the accused are all students aged less than 20 years and are
studying 3rd year B.Tech (Agriculture) in Acharya N.G.Ranga Agricultural
University, College of Agricultural Engineering, Bapatla, and in another one
year they will be completing their education.  Having seen the accused Nos.1 to
5 and their parents, this Court is of the view that they all belong to middle
class agricultural families and with the hard earnings of the parents, these
girl students/ accused are prosecuting their studies at Bapatla.  It shall be
noticed that there is no provision in the said Act to the effect that the said
offences are not compoundable.  If there is a specific provision stating that
the offences falling under the Act are not compoundable, it may not be proper
for this Court to exercise the inherent powers conferred under Section 482 of
Cr.P.C.  In the absence of any specific provision to that effect, this Court is
of the view that this Court can exercise its extraordinary inherent jurisdiction
and get the offence compounded taking the totality of the circumstances into
consideration.  As stated supra, the accused are all young girls aged less than
20 years coming from middle class background and if for any reason the case ends
in conviction, their entire career gets spoiled.

In B. S. Joshi v. State of Haryana1, the Supreme Court having considered the
various judgments of the Apex Court held that if for the purpose of securing the
ends of justice, quashing of FIR becomes necessary, Section 320 of Cr.P.C. would
not be a bar to exercise of power for quashing.
Of-course, the Supreme Court has also stated that every case depends on its own
facts and circumstances.  There their Lordships were dealing with an offence
falling under Section 498-A of IPC.  Section 498-A of IPC was introduced to curb
the dowry harassment and also to prevent torture to women by her husband or his
relatives and the proceedings therein have been initiated against the husband
and in-laws at the instance of the wife under Section 498-A and thereafter the
wife settled the disputes with her husband and his relatives and obtained
divorce by mutual consent and an application was filed by the wife for quashing
of the said proceedings initiated by her against the husband and his relatives.
When the petition filed under Section 482 of Cr.P.C. was dismissed by the High
Court of Haryana, the Supreme Court observed that it is not proper for the High
Court to prevent women from settling earlier and that is not the object of the
Chapter XX-A of the IPC.

Similarly, in the instant case, the Act has come into force in the year 1997
only to curb the said menace of ragging and, on the ground that the said offence
is not included in Section 320 of Cr.P.C., it is not proper for this Court to
refuse to interfere and invoke its extraordinary jurisdiction conferred under
Section 482 of Cr.P.C.  After all, the Courts have to look after the welfare of
society and so, keeping in view the peculiar circumstances of the case i.e. the
involvement of the students, their future, their career etc., this Court is of
the considered view that this Court can definitely exercise its inherent powers
conferred under Section 482 of Cr.P.C. and quash the said proceedings.

Accordingly, Tr.CrlPMP No.209 of 1010 is allowed by recording the compromise and 
the proceedings in C.C.No.309 of 2009 on the file of the Judicial First Class
Magistrate, Bapatla, are hereby quashed.  Consequently, since there is no need
to pass any orders in the Transfer Criminal Petition No.267 of 2009, the same is
dismissed.  The bail bonds of the accused/respondent Nos.2 to 6, if any, shall
stand cancelled.

?1 AIR 2003 SUPREME COURT 1386       

