

THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE V. ESWARAIAH AND THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE B.N.RAO NALLA                 
Civil Miscellaneous Appeal No.3463 of 2000

18-06-2010 

Adigarla Venkata Lakshmi 

Adigarla Venkata Satya Sreenivasulu 

Counsel for the Petitioner: Sri V.L.N.G.K. Murthy

Counsel  for the Respondent:  Sri M. Subba Reddy 

:JUDGMENT:- (Per Hon'ble Sri Justice B.N.Rao Nalla) 

This Civil Miscellaneous Appeal is directed against the order dated 30.10.2000
passed in O.P. No. 212 of 1992 by the learned I Additional Senior Civil Judge,
Kakinada, East Godavari District, whereby the petition filed by the petitioner-
husband under Section 13(1)(ia)(ib) and Section 10 of the Hindu Marriage Act,
1955 (for short "the Act") seeking divorce on the ground of cruelty and
desertion was allowed.  The wife preferred the present C.M.A.
For the sake of convenience, the parties are referred to as they are arrayed in
O.P. No.212 of 1992.
The marriage of the petitioner-husband and the respondent-wife was solemnised on
28.05.1986 and consummated on 07.11.1987.  On 10.01.1988, the father of the 
respondent-wife took her to his house for celebrating Pongal, and after the
festival, she returned to the petitioner on 20.01.1988.  Again, she left for her
parents' house on 29.01.1988 without the petitioner's knowledge, but did not
come back for about three years.  In May 1990, the petitioner and his father
sent one
N.R.K.G. Haragopal and Ankamreddy Konda to persuade the respondent's parents to   
send her to live with the petitioner, but the respondent refused to come and
live with the petitioner.  On 25.06.1990, the petitioner and his grandfather
requested the respondent to live with the petitioner, but she bluntly refused to
join him.
On 15.06.1992, the respondent and her father, apprehending proceedings for
divorce by the petitioner, influenced the Sub-Inspector of Police, Tuni Rural
Police Station, and got sent two police constables to bring the petitioner and
his father.  The Sub-Inspector of Police threatened the petitioner and his
father that if the petitioner would not set up separate residence and live with
the respondent, they would be prosecuted and convicted and the petitioner would
be deprived of his job.  The police also threatened that the parents of the
petitioner shall not visit the respondent.  The police also directed that the
respondent should be allowed to live in the petitioner's house at Hamsavaram
where he is working as Teacher.  Apprehending a false case and harassment by the 
respondent with the connivance of the police, the petitioner agreed to live as
directed by the respondent-wife and the police, and on 22.08.1992, the
respondent entered the petitioner's house at Hamsavaram.  Later, the petitioner
was transferred to S.Annavaram where his parents were living.  Because of the
threat posed by the police and the respondent, the petitioner took a separate
house on rent at Kankipati Vari Garuvu, Tuni and stayed there.  Though they were
residing under the same roof, there were no marital relations between them.  The
respondent, with the assistance of the police, always threatened that she could
get the petitioner and his people convicted.  Sometimes, she threatened that she
would commit suicide so that the petitioner and his people would be convicted.
Thus, the respondent has not only deserted the petitioner for a continuous
period of three years but also subjected him to cruelty and torture.    As the
situation was unbearable, the petitioner came to Kakinada on 20.09.1992 for
initiating proceedings for a decree for dissolution of marriage.  Sensing the
purpose for which the petitioner left for Kakinda, the respondent immediately
reported to the police and got a notice dated 22.09.1992 served on the
petitioner with a direction to appear before the police immediately in spite of
the fact that examinations were going on in the school.  When the petitioner
along with Lagudu Chinnayya Naidu went to the police station, he was abused in
vulgar language and was threatened of launching of prosecution and allowed to
leave the police station in the mid-night.  Thus, during the period from
22.08.1992 to 23.09.1992, she had no intention to return to the matrimonial
home, but managed to stay in the house of the petitioner with the assistance and
pressure from the police.  Hence, the respondent is guilty of cruelty towards
the petitioner, as such, he filed the petition for grant of decree for
dissolution of marriage or alternatively for judicial separation.
The respondent-wife filed counter affidavit inter alia denying all the
allegations made in the petition and stated that at the time of the marriage,
the petitioner was given 20 tulas of gold ornaments, 100 tulas of silver wear
and half tula of gold ring.  A sum of Rs.3,000/- was paid towards Adpaduchu
Katnam.  The petitioner demanded more gold, jewellery and dowry.  The parents of
the respondent, out of affection, presented one Govardhanam Golusu weighing 14
tulas, one necklace weighing 4 tulas and a pearl chain weighing 2 tulas, thus
making in all 20 tulas of gold ornaments.  Immediately after consummation of the
marriage, the respondent joined the petitioner along with sari samans worth
Rs.15,000/-.  After Pongal vacation, troubles started between them as the
petitioner and his parents began harassing the respondent to bring more money
from her parents.  Immediately after she returned to her in-law's house, her
mother-in-law took away the respondent's gold ornaments and necked her out of
the house.  Having no other way, the respondent returned to her parents' house.
In fact, the petitioner and his parents took away Mangala Sutram from her neck.
The allegations in the petition that the respondent left the house of the
petitioner on 29.01.1988 without the petitioner's knowledge, is absolutely
false.  Never did N.R.K.G. Hara Gopal and Ankamreddi Konda come to the house of  
the respondent in May, 1990 and the respondent never refused to join the
petitioner.  After several mediations at the instance of Ankamreddi Konda, one
R.Chinnayya Naidu, K.Nageswara Rao, Ch. Bhaskara Rao and R.Thatharao mediated     
the matter between the petitioner and the respondent, and on 25.06.1990, the
respondent was taken to the house of the parents of the petitioner in Suravaram.
The allegation that on 25.06.1990, the petitioner and his grandfather requested
the respondent to come and live with the petitioner and she bluntly refused to
do so, are absolutely false.  The respondent joined the petitioner on 25.06.1990
at Suravaram and both of them led conjugal life and the petitioner treated her
well for a few days, and thereafter, stated that he would see that her parents
purchased a Scooter for him.

The respondent prevailed upon her parents and got an amount of Rs.20,000/- paid
through G.Satyanarayan alias Bullabbai.  During the period of her stay in the
house of the petitioner's parents, the respondent was not happy.  With the
amount given by the respondent's parents a Spark moped was purchased and the  
remaining amount was utilised by the petitioner himself.  Subsequently, the
petitioner and his parents started demanding Rs.50,000/- stating that they will
purchase a house.  When, the respondent refused to comply with the demand, the 
petitioner harassed her both physically and mentally.  The mother-in-law of the
respondent used to threaten her that she would set her ablaze by pouring
kerosene on her, if she failed to bring money.  The petitioner also did not stop
his mother from making such threats.  The petitioner and his father obtained
signatures of the respondent on some white papers threatening that they would
put an end to her life.
In fact, during the period of her stay in the house of the petitioner's parents,
they refused to provide food to the respondent and her mother-in-law used to
place her feet in the plate whenever food is served to her and thereby deprived
her of having food.  On one occasion, the petitioner-husband and his mother
tried to kill the respondent-wife by placing a pillow on her face while she was
asleep, but with great difficulty she could survive.  Finally, the petitioner
and his parents caught hold of her tuft and warned her that unless and until she
brings Rs.50,000/-, she should not return to their house.  Again, the elders,
G.Satyanarayana, G.Nookaraju, R.Chinnayyanaidu intervened and made the   
petitioner agree to set up a separate residence at Hamsavaram.  Even though the
petitioner was not willing to put up separate residence, but at the instance of
the elders and with a view to harassing the respondent, set up separate
residence at Hamsavaram and lived with her.  Because the respondent joined the
petitioner against his wishes, the petitioner failed to bring provisions for
cooking.  The allegation that on 15.06.1992, the respondent influenced the Sub-
Inspector and sent for the petitioner and his father to the Police Station, is
false.  Never did the police intervened in the matter on 15.06.1992 as alleged
in the petition.  At the instance of mediators only the petitioner and the
respondent lived together, and in fact, the petitioner had cohabitation with the
respondent during their stay at Hamsavaram.
The petitioner's parents, having influenced higher authorities, got the
petitioner transferred from Hamsavaram to Suravaram to make the respondent live
with the parents of the petitioner.  The elders, having got knowledge of the
illegal activities of the petitioner, advised him to have a separate residence
at Tuni. Then, the petitioner took on lease a house belonging to Madireddy
Atchayamma in Kankipativari Garuvu where the petitioner and the respondent lived
together and had marital relations.  On 02.12.1992, the petitioner and his
parents forcibly obtained signatures of the respondent and threatened that if
only she brought Rs.50,000/-, she would be allowed to stay with the petitioner,
but the respondent knowing fully well that it is not possible for her to live
with her parents, bore the
ill-treatment meted out to her, and finally, the petitioner, by filing the O.P.,
made the respondent leave for her parents' house.  Even on the date of filing
the petition, the respondent was with the petitioner as could be seen from the
address given in the petition.

In view of the attitude of the petitioner towards the respondent and the
harassment meted out to her by the petitioner and his parents, she lodged a
complaint in Tuni Rural Police Station in December, 1992.  The petitioner never
came to Kakinda on 20.09.1992, nor did the respondent ever give a complaint to
the police either on 20.09.1992 or 22.09.1992.  To the knowledge of the
respondent, the police never called the petitioner to the police station and the
petitioner never approached the police along with L.Chinnayyanaidu.
Anticipating that the respondent will take action against the petitioner under
Section 498-A IPC, he approached the Court with false allegations.  On the
report of the respondent, the police registered a case against the petitioner.
The respondent filed M.C. No.4 of 1993 on the file of the Judicial First Class
Magistrate, Narsipatnam.  Thus, the petitioner and the respondent lived together
till December, 1992 and had marital relationship.  The petitioner, having
suppressed the facts, came to the Court with unclean hands.  The respondent is
always ready and willing to lead conjugal life with the petitioner, provided the
petitioner and his parents give an unconditional undertaking before the Court
that they would not harass her.  The petitioner and his parents should be
directed to return all the gold jewellery and silver wear to the respondent.
On the premise of the aforesaid pleadings of the parties, the trial Court framed
the following points for determination:

(i) "whether the respondent-wife voluntarily deserted the petitioner-husband for
a continuous period of not less than two years immediately preceding the
presentation of the petition and has been staying away from him without any just
and reasonable cause?" 
(ii) Whether the respondent treated the petitioner with cruelty?
(iii) Whether the petitioner is entitled to divorce on the grounds of desertion
and cruelty or in the alternative for judicial separation?
(iv) To what relief?

        Before the Family Court, the petitioner-husband got examined himself as
PW1 and three others as PWs.2 to 4 and got marked Exs.A1 to A11, on his behalf.  
The respondent-wife got examined herself as RW1 and another as RW2 and got   
marked no documents on her behalf.  Ex.X1 was marked by consent.   
PW1, the petitioner-husband, deposed that his marriage with the respondent-wife
was performed on 28.05.1986 and consummated on 07.11.1987.  After consummation     
ceremony, the respondent-wife was not willing to lead marital life with him.  On
10.01.1988, the respondent's father came and took the respondent for "Sankranti
Festival".  He did not go to their house as he was not invited.  Five days after
the festival, the respondent joined him.  On 29.01.1988, when he was not in the
house, the respondent left for her parent's house without his knowledge.  He
further deposed that in December 1988, he secured a job as Teacher and was 
posted in Gadarada village and worked there about six months.  Later, his father
went to the house of the respondent's parents to bring the respondent, but she
refused to come.    Then, they sent one N.Harigopal and Ankamreddy Konda in May,  
1990 to the respondent to request her to come and join the petitioner and also
in June 1990, they sent one Amkamreddy Ramanna Patrudu to the respondent with   
similar purpose, but she refused to join with the petitioner.  Later, the
petitioner was transferred to Hamsavaram near Tuni and worked there till 1992.
The respondent did not send any notice to the petitioner till 1992 for
restitution of conjugal rights, as such, he thought of giving divorce in April,
1992.  In June, 1992, his father-in-law sent for him, his mother and father to
Tuni Police Station and the Police threatened them with dire consequences of
getting his job removed and the pension of his father stopped unless he agrees
to live with the respondent.  Thereupon, he put up separate family at Hamsavaram
and stayed with his wife in August 1992.  At that time also, the respondent did
not agree to lead marital life with him and threatened him that she would commit
suicide if he touched her.  The respondent stayed with him for about two months
in Hamsavaram.  He was transferred to Sooravaram and shifted his residence to
Ammajipeta, Tuni in September 1992 and was residing with his wife.  Even at that
place, the respondent continued to behave in the same manner and did not allow
him even to touch her.  Then, the petitioner contacted
Sri S.Satyanarayana, Advocate and wanted to file divorce petition, but at that
time, he was again called to the Police station.  In September, 1992, he came to
Kakinada for filing divorce petition.  The respondent went to her parents' house
and gave a report to the police.  The petition filed for divorce in Kakinada
which was registered in November, 1992.  The respondent joined him at the
instance of police so as to nullify his efforts to maintain divorce petition.
The respondent received the notice of the petition on 02.12.1992 and went away
from his house after keeping it under lock.  Later, on 18.12.1992, the
respondent gave a report to the police alleging the offence under Section 498-A
IPC.  Ex.A2 is the certified copy of the report.  In February 1992, the
respondent had filed M.C. No.4 of 1993 on the file of the Judicial First Class
Magistrate, Narsipatnam, and during its pendency, the matter was referred to Lok
Adalat and they were advised to live together once again.  Even then, the
respondent repeated her previous behaviour and did not co-operate with him in
leading family life.   Again in January, 1997, the respondent went away.

In cross-examination, he denied a suggestion that his version in this regard is
not true and that they sent away the respondent by harassing her.  He denied a
suggestion that on 29.01.1988, they drove out the respondent from their house
after taking her gold jewellery.  He also denied a suggestion that on
25.06.1990, respondent's cousin and some others along with Ankamreddy Konda came    
to his father for mediation.  He also denied a suggestion that T.Satyanarayana,
who is the relative of the respondent, came to his house and paid him cash of
Rs.20,000/-.  He stated that by the time of filing divorce petition, and by
02.12.1992, on which date, the notice in this case was received by the
respondent, she was living with him.  He brought his wife to his house in the
last week of July or 1st week of August, 1992.  He himself went to the house of
the parents of the respondent and brought her at that time.  In September, 1992,
they resided in Kankipativari Garuvu.  By 22.08.1992, he was transferred to
Sooravaram where his parents were residing.  The respondent stayed with him in
Hamsavaram and Sooravaram.  He further deposed in cross-examination that in 
Maintenance Case he gave evidence to the effect that himself and his wife lived
together till 02.12.1992 and he looked after her well, and he has no objection
to leading marital life with his wife.  He never gave any notice from 1988 to
1992 alleging that the respondent harassed him.  He further deposed that from
1988 till June 1992, his wife did not harass him.
PW2, who is the father of PW1, deposed that after consummation of the marriage
of PW1 and the respondent, the petitioner and the respondent lived in their
house for about two months.  Later, the respondent went to her parents' house
for "Sankranti" festival. Ten days thereafter, she returned to the petitioner.
At that time, she lived in their house with the petitioner for one week and
thereafter left for their house without informing them.  He came to know through
the petitioner that even during the two months' period of her stay, she did not
live with the petitioner amicably.  In 1992, the petitioner told him that he
wanted to file divorce O.P. since the respondent did not return from 1988 to
1992.   He worked at Suravaram from 1989 to 1992.  In August, 1992, the
petitioner and the respondent put up separate family in Tuni.  In November,
1996, the petitioner and the respondent lived together due to intervention of
Lok Adalat.  At that time also, the respondent lived with the petitioner for few
months and went away in January, 1997.  Now, there is no possibility for them to
live together.  In cross-examination, he deposed that he did not know whether
the petitioner and the respondent lived together in Tuni till 02.12.1992.  He
further deposed that when the matter was placed before Lok Adalat, PW1 stated
that he had no objection to living with the respondent, who also stated that she
did not have any objection to living with her husband.    With the suggestion
made in Lok Adalat, the petitioner and the respondent put up separate family at
Rekhavanipalem.  They lived there for about two months.  He did not know whether
they led marital life or not, but they stayed together there.  From 25.09.1992
onwards, the respondent lived with the petitioner in Kankipativari Garuvu.
PW3, who is the relative of PW2, deposed that he attended the marriage of PW1 
and the respondent.  He cannot say whether there is any possibility for the
petitioner and the respondent to live together.            In cross-examination,
he deposed that from June, 1992 to till December, 1992, the petitioner and the
respondent lived together in Hamsavaram and Tuni.
PW4, the house-owner of the petitioner, deposed that the petitioner took a
portion of his house on rent and the respondent lived with the petitioner in his
house for about three months.  After three months, the respondent went to her
parents' house.
RW1, the respondent-wife, deposed that when she returned to her in-laws' house
from her parents after celebrating Sankranti festival, the petitioner-husband
and his parents demanded her to bring Rs.50,000/- as they intended to purchase a
house.  When she did not agree to that, they took her gold and silver jewellery
and sent her to her parents' house.  Then, her parents got mediated the matter
and arrived at a settlement through Ankamreddy Konda, Rayapureddy  
Chinnayyanaidu, G. Nageswara Rao and R.Tatarao, and she was sent to her husband   
on 25.06.1990.  But, the petitioner and his parents again sent her out demanding
her to bring Rs.50,000/- stating that if she failed to bring the dowry, she
should not come to their house.   Later, her husband put up residence in the
house of M. Atchayyamma where they lived as wife and husband.  During that time,
her husband got issued a notice to her in the divorce petition, and her parents
reported the matter to the police and the respondent filed Maintenance Case, and
she was granted maintenance.  The petitioner preferred an appeal against the
orders passed in M.C. and during its pendency, he took her to Rekhavanipalem
where they led marital life, and the Court directed both of them to attend the
Court for every adjournment.  She never left her husband and went away on her
own accord.  She is always willing to live with her husband.  In her cross-
examination, she deposed that she lived in the house of the petitioner till she
left for her parents' house for Sankranti Festival of 1988.  After the festival,
she returned to her husband along with her younger brother, Kanna Babu.  She
lived with the petitioner for 15 days and later she was sent out by her husband
after her gold jewellery were taken away by her mother-in-law.  Subsequently, on
25.06.1990, she joined her husband after mediation through elders viz.
Ankamreddy Konda.  She denied a suggestion that she did not join the petitioner
till June,1992.   This mediation was not fruitful till the mediators tried for
settlement for four or five times.   She got mediated the matter as she was
harassed by 
her in-laws by demanding her to bring Rs.50,000/- for purchasing a house.  Even
without paying the amount, she joined her husband after mediation.  She asked
her father to get the matter mediated as she was interested to lead conjugal
life with her husband.  Then, her father approached Ankamreddy Konda who 
conducted mediation.  After the mediation, the mediators brought her husband to
her parents' house and she was sent along with him on 25.06.1990 and one Bhyragi 
accompanied them.   From 25.06.1990 till August, 1990, she lived with the
petitioner in Suravaram.  During the period, the petitioner led marital life
with her, but did not look after her well, and her in-laws again started
pressurising her to bring Rs.50,000/- and though she informed the same to her
husband, he did not pay any heed to her words and that was the only reason for
her leaving her husband's house.  One year thereafter, the petitioner got
mediated the matter through the elders and she joined her husband.  She informed
the elders that in August, 1990, she was sent out by the petitioner on the
ground that she did not bring Rs.50,000/-.  For the
second time mediation, she sent G.Satyanarayana, who is senior paternal uncle of
her mother and G.Nookaraju, who is the son of her junior paternal grandfather.
This mediation took place on 24.06.1992.  She further deposed that in
Hamsavaram, she lived with the petitioner only in one room as tenants for about
three months, and during this period, she brought all the provisions from her
parents' house and maintained her family, so there was no necessity for her
husband to purchase the provisions during the period.  She denied a suggestion
that after she went to her parents' house for Sankranti festival of 1988 and
till the divorce O.P. was filed by her husband, she never intended to live with
her husband and lead marital life with him.  She also denied a suggestion that
she has no intention to join her husband.
RW2, who is the relative of RW1, deposed that initially, the petitioner looked
after the respondent well, but subsequently, the respondent demanded her to
bring Rs.50,000/-, and when she refused to do so disputes between her and her
in-laws arose, as such, the petitioner and his parents sent the respondent out
of the matrimonial home after taking away her gold jewellery.  He further
deposed that in 1990, the respondent joined the petitioner in Suravaram.  Once
she went to the house of the petitioner and found the respondent living with her
husband and in-laws.  RW2 talked with the respondent in the presence of her
in-laws and felt that she was living happily.  One year six months thereafter
i.e. in 1992, he saw the respondent in her parents' house at Jogompeta and
thereafter, the respondent was sent to Suravaram for mediation, which took place
for the reason that again her husband and
in-laws were demanding her to bring dowry of Rs.50,000/-.  He denied a
suggestion that the petitioner and his parents never demanded the respondent to
bring Rs.50,000/- and that the respondent was not willing to live with the
petitioner.

On the basis of the aforesaid evidence of the parties, both oral and
documentary, the learned I Additional Senior Civil Judge, Kakinada allowed O.P.
No.212 of 1992 by order and decree dated 30.10.2000.  Challenging the order of
dismissal, the respondent-wife has preferred the present C.M.A.
Having heard the learned counsel for both the parties, the only question that
arises for determination in this appeal is whether the allowing of O.P. No. 212
of 1992 filed by the petitioner-husband is justified in the facts and
circumstances of the case? 

Insofar as the ground of desertion is concerned, this Court, in Kosuri
(Chandana) Dhanum Kumari Vs. Kosuri Venkata Vara Prasad1 held that mere living  
apart by the parties is not desertion.  The desertion indicates a state of mind
in which a party is guilty of the act must indicate either in express words or
by conduct to put an end to the relationship.  The Court further held that that
burden of proof of the fact of desertion lies on the person who alleged it.
The essential ingredients of the offence in order that it may furnish a ground
or relief are;
i) the factum of separation;
ii) the intention to bring cohabitation permanently to an end - animus
deserendi;
iii) the element of permanence which is a prime condition requires that both
these essential ingredients should continue during the entire statutory period
of two years immediately preceding presentation of the petition for divorce.
Thus, though the expression "desertion" is to be widely interpreted and
understood, these essential conditions have to be established.
In the light of the above legal position, we have to examine the pleadings and
the evidence of the parties to determine the point.
From a careful analysis of the pleadings and the evidence on record, it is
obvious that the petitioner made several allegations against the respondent-wife
such as she used to leave him on several occasions for her parents' house
without informing him, and in spite of his best efforts to take her back to make
her lead matrimonial life, she did not agree to join him.  It is further stated
that even though he shifted his residence from one place to another for reason
of his employment, she lived with him occasionally, but did not continue to stay
with him nor did she cohabit with him or lead marital life.  Even according to
the petitioner, the respondent lived with him after December, 1992, the alleged
period of desertion, and the petitioner himself is willing to live with her
amicably.  The evidence of PW2, the father of the petitioner, is on the same
lines as that of the petitioner.
Even the pleadings averred both in the counter affidavit and in the evidence of
the respondent-wife are to the effect that she lived with the petitioner for a
certain period of time though not incessantly, and the main ground for her
deserting her husband and living with her parents on several occasions is that
her in-laws and her husband demanded her to bring Rs.50,000/- in spite of the
fact that at the time of marriage, the petitioner was given dowry and gold
articles.   The learned Judge held that even the living together of the
petitioner and the respondent is established as is evident from the admission
made by PW3 in his cross-examination, she did not cohabit with him.  This
finding is not a justifiable conclusion for the factum of separation.  As
prescribed in law, desertion means living separately for a period not less than
two years preceding the date of filing the O.P.  Even according to the legal
position laid down in the case (cited as supra), mere living apart by the
parties is not desertion.  The desertion indicates a state of mind in which a
party who is guilty of the act must indicate either in express words or by
conduct to put an end to the relationship. But in the instant case, the
petitioner and the husband lived together for a considerable period of time and
even now they are willing to live together as is evident in the testimony of PW1
and RW1.  
In the light of the above discussion, we are of the opinion that though the
factum of separation of the petitioner and the respondent was occasionally
proved, there are instances when the petitioner and the respondent lived
together as is clear from the evidence both oral and documentary, and at that
juncture, there is not even an inclination of animus deserendi on the part of
the wife to permanently cease the cohabitation and marital relation, and these
facts and circumstances would also probablize that there is no love lost between
the spouses.  Moreover, the petitioner-husband appears to have stuck to his
nature not to cause hurt to the feelings of the wife, but so as to cause
reasonable apprehension in the mind of the wife to live with him peacefully.
        
As regards the term "Cruelty", it is observed in
V.Bhagat Vs. Mrs. D.Bhagat2, to the following effect:
"Mental cruelty in Section 13(1) (ia) of the Act can broadly be defined as that
conduct which inflicts upon the other party such mental pain and suffering as
would make it not possible for that party to live with the other.  In other
words, mental cruelty must be of such a nature that the parties cannot
reasonably be expected to live together.  The situation must be such that the
wronged party cannot reasonably be asked to put up with such conduct and 
continue to live with the other party.  It is not necessary to prove that the
mental cruelty is such as to cause injury to the health of the petitioner.
While arriving at such conclusion regard must be had to the social status,
educational level of the parties, the society they move in, the possibility or
otherwise of the parties ever living together in case they are already living
apart and all other relevant facts and circumstances which it is neither
possible nor desirable to set out exhaustively.  What is cruelty in one case may
not amount to cruelty in another case.  It is a matter to be determined in each
case having regard to the facts and circumstances of that case.  If it is a case
of accusations and allegations, regard must also be had to the context in which
they were made". 

         In the light of the above legal position, we have to examine the
pleadings and the evidence of the parties to determine the point.
The case of the petitioner-husband is that even though the respondent lived with
the petitioner occasionally she did not live in cohabitation with him.  He
further stated that at the time of filing the divorce petition the respondent
was with him but did not allow him even to touch her, as such it amounts to
cruelty.  When the petitioner and the respondent lived together, it cannot be
proved whether they lived in cohabitation with the each other and the respondent
allowed the petitioner to touch her or whether they led marital life or not.  No
doubt, there may be minor quarrels between the couple from time to time during
the martial relationship, and the respondent may be reluctant to cohabit with
the petitioner in a fit of anger, but such instances cannot be taken as basis
for cruelty.   Their living together itself indicates that they are willing to
live together.  Even in cross-examination, PW1 deposed that he never gave any
notice from 1988 to 1992 alleging that the respondent harassed him during that
period.  The ingredients of mental cruelty as stated supra are not all attracted
to grant divorce on the ground of cruelty on the part of the respondent.
On an appreciation of the entire evidence on record as well as the findings of
the trial Court, we are satisfied that there is no evidence on the part of the
petitioner-husband to establish the ground of desertion within the aforesaid
three essential ingredients, and in fact, the very establishment of animus
deserendi on the part of the wife is absent in the present case.  Further, the
petitioner-husband miserably failed to establish the other ground "cruelty"
alleged to have been meted out by his wife, by adducing substantial legal
evidence.  Therefore, the contentions urged by the learned counsel for the
respondent-wife, who is the appellant herein, merit consideration and are
sustainable.
        The findings recorded by I Additional Senior Civil Judge, Kakinda, in our
considered opinion, are not justified and there appear to be legal infirmities
therein and they are vitiated calling for interference by this Court, and the
impugned order is liable to be set aside.
Hence, the Civil Miscellaneous Appeal is allowed setting aside the order dated
30.10.2000 made in O.P.No. 212 of 1992 on the file of I Additional Senior Civil
Judge, Kakinada.  However, if the parties are aggrieved by any events subsequent
to filing the O.P. by the petitioner, they are at liberty to work out their
remedies before the trial Court as may be available to them under law.  No order
as to costs.

?1 1997 (5) ALT 805 (D.B.)
2 AIR 1994 SC 710  

