

THE HONOURABLE SRI JUSTICE V.ESWARAIAH AND THE HONOURABLE SRI JUSTICE B.N.RAO                     
Civil Miscellaneous Appeal No.385 of 2002

30-03-2010 

Smt.K.Padmaja  

K.Venugopal Reddy  

Counsel for Appellant: Mr. M.V.Durga Prasad 

Counsel for Respondent  :       None appeared  

:JUDGMENT: (per the Hon'ble Sri Justice V.Eswaraiah) 

        The appellant is the wife of the respondent.  The respondent filed
O.P.No.746 of 1998 on the file of the Family Court, Hyderabad, under Section 13
(1) (ia) and (ib) of Hindu Marriage Act, seeking a decree of divorce on the
grounds of cruelty and desertion.
1.      The said OP was allowed by order dated 28/11/2001, and aggrieved by the
same the wife/the respondent in the said OP filed this appeal.  This Court,
while admitting the appeal, granted interim stay of operation of the said order,
and thereafter, the notice by substituted service was ordered and after service
of the notice, certain interim directions were also issued, as the respondent
did not choose to appear and contest the said application.  Though this case has
been taken up for hearing on several occasions, none appeared for the
respondent.
        Heard the learned counsel appearing for the appellant.
The parties herein are referred to as they are arrayed in the OP.  The husband
who is the petitioner in the OP is hereinafter called as the petitioner and the
appellant herein who is the respondent in the said OP is hereinafter called as
respondent.
2.      It is the case of the petitioner that his marriage took place with the
respondent on 08/08/1993 at TTD Kalyana Mandapam, Gudiwada of Krishna District   
as per Hindu rights and customs and their marriage was consummated.  Immediately  
after the marriage, the respondent joined his company at Lingamguntla Agraharam,
Narsaraopet Mandal, Guntur District, and both of them lived together till they
shifted to Hyderabad on 18/06/1994 and started their marital life at Hyderabad.
Out of their wedlock, one son was born on 02/01/1995 at the parents' house of
the respondent at Bethavolu, Gudiwada Mandal, Krishna District.  Both of them
lived at Hyderabad from 18/06/1994 to 12/08/1994 and thereafter, the respondent
left the company of the petitioner, without informing him, and after making
searches for some days, he came to know that she was with her parents.  His
mother went to bring her on 10/12/1994 and again his parents went to the
respondent on 02/01/1995 when the child was born, but she refused to return to
the society of the petitioner and she also refused to live with his parents.
The petitioner himself went to the parents of the respondent on 17/01/1995 but
she bluntly refused to accompany him.  Again he sent his mother and others on
10/02/1995, 26/05/1995, 02/06/1995, but there was no response from her.  He
himself again went to get her to his society on 05/06/1995 but she again
refused.  She not only refused but assaulted and abused him in filthy language
and threatened him with dire consequences if he comes again to take her to his
society.  As such, he has sent his cousin Nagireddy/P.W.3 and his friend Ramana 
Reddy on 15/02/1996, but the respondent failed to respond to the requests of the
aforesaid persons and he again went along with Nagireddy to the respondent on
23/03/1996 to persuade her, but she bluntly refused to come and join his
society.  Lastly, he along with his parents and his cousin Nagireddy/P.W.3 and
Ramana Reddy went to the parents' house of the respondent and requested her to 
join the society of the petitioner, but she refused and abused the persons who
persuaded her and threatened with dire consequences.  It is stated that in spite
of repeated requests and attempts made by the petitioner, the respondent never
responded to his requests and the mediators'.  As such, he is living separately
from 27/06/1997.  It is stated that the respondent's parents are rich compared
to the family of the petitioner and she is having the habit of luxurious life
and could not accustom with the limited income and expenditure.  It is stated
that she was having friendships with highly placed people and also living in the
midst of rich circle at Bethavolu, Gudiwada Mandal, Krishna District.  It is
stated that as the respondent lived with him only for 56 days i.e., from
18/06/1994 to 12/08/1994, the day on which she left the company of the
petitioner, while they were living in Hyderabad, the birth of his child on
02/01/1995 clearly shows and creates a shadow on the birth of the child.
Therefore, the petitioner believed that the respondent is not interested to live
in his society and also dislikes to lead a respectable family life with the
petitioner and the attitude of the respondent disclosed that she is not
interested to live in his society for no fault of him, making him to suffer his
family life.
3.      A counter has been filed denying all the allegations made in the OP while
admitting their marriage on 08/08/1993 at Gudiwada of Krishna District and also
about the consummation of the marriage and the birth of the son on 02/01/1995
and joining the petitioner at his residence Lingamguntla Agraharam immediately
after marriage on 08/08/1993 till they left for Hyderabad on 18/06/1994.  Thus,
it is not in dispute that both of them lived in the house of the petitioner's
parents immediately from the marriage i.e., from 08/08/1993 till they left to
Hyderabad on 18/06/1994 i.e., for about ten months and thereafter lived together
for a period about two months in Hyderabad.  But she denies the allegation that
she herself left the company of the petitioner on 12/08/1994 and it is stated
that he himself driven her out from his home on 12/08/1994 demanding more money 
and other articles from her parents and therefore, she had no other alternative
but to go her parents house as she did not know anybody in Hyderabad.  All other
allegations that his mother, himself and others came to her parents house to
take her for the conjugal society of the petitioner were denied.  It is stated
that the petitioner never visited her even when the child was born.  It is
stated that neither the respondent nor her parents never refused for the request
of the petitioner, his parents and the relatives to join her the company of her
husband.  On the other hand, it is stated that she herself tried through elders
to join his company but all the efforts have become in vain.  The other
allegations that she made an attempt to assault the petitioner and abused him in
filthy language and threatened with dire consequences are all denied stating
that the said allegations are absolutely false, baseless and are fabricated for
the purpose of petition.  It is stated that the OP filed by the petitioner is
cooked up and created one filed with an oblique motive to obtain divorce so that
he can go for second marriage where he can get substantial amount of dowry.  The
petitioner himself threatened her many times since she was unable to fulfill the
demand of the petitioner for more money.  The other allegation that she used to
have luxurious life in her parents house and therefore she is not prepared to
live in the company of the husband is denied and it is stated that the
petitioner himself used to live extravagant life.  It is stated that she is
always interested to join the company of the petitioner for living the rest of
the life with the petitioner.  It is stated that the petitioner, his parents and
relatives are responsible for driving out her from out of her matrimonial life
and they are only at fault but not she as she was unable to get more dowry from
her parents.  It is stated that the petitioner and his parents are only
interested in the property given to her by her parents.  It is stated that she
is interested to live with the petitioner alone and she never deserted the
petitioner as alleged but the petitioner himself drove her out of the house.  It
is stated that having lived with her for 56 days at Hyderabad, he himself drove
her out of the house and chosen to make damaging remarks against her about the 
birth of the child which clearly shows the mean mentality of the petitioner who
can stoop down to any level to get the divorce from her.
4.      The petitioner was examined as P.W.1 and stated that after the marriage on
08/08/1993 both started living at his house at Lingamguntla Agraharam,
Narsaraopet Mandal, Guntur District, for one year in the said village and
thereafter on 18/06/1994 both shifted to Hyderabad and lived together there up
to 12/08/1994.  She left his parents house without intimating him and he sent
his parents on 10/12/1994 to the respondent but she refused to come to him and
also abused his parents.  On 02/01/1995, the respondent delivered a male child
and his parents went there but she refused to show their child and abused his
parents.  He himself went on 17/01/1995 to see the child but she did not allow
him to see the child and she abused him in filthy language.  He has narrated the
averments made in the OP about the unsuccessful attempts made by himself, his  
parents and the relatives.  But there was no response from the respondent and
she herself refused to join even after several attempts.  On the other hand, she
used to insult him and she was always proud because of her higher status.  Both
of them are living separately from 12/08/1994.  It is stated that the acts on
her part clearly shows that she is not interested to join the marital life.  In
the cross-examination, it is stated that from August, 1993 to June, 1994 he kept
his wife with his parents at Lingamguntla Agraharam of Guntur District and used
to go on weekends twice in a month.  The dowry, gold and other marriage presents
and further demand of one lakh dowry is denied.  The suggestion that he himself
forced her to terminate the pregnancy and he himself used to harass his wife and
also used to threaten her with abusive and filthy language was denied.  The
suggestion that he himself driven her out of his house on 12/08/1994 was also
denied.  It is stated that he did not give any complaint for missing of wife and
he came to know about the whereabouts of respondent after 4 or 5 weeks.  Then
when he telephoned to the respondent, he was informed that she went there for
delivery in the 5th month of the pregnancy.  He went to the respondent on
17/01/1995 after the delivery and saw his son born on 02/01/1995.  He admitted
that he has not issued any notice to her to join him.  The suggestion that he
himself wants to get rid of her and treated her with cruelty and ultimately
driven her out with a view to obtain divorce on the ground of desertion and he
himself is not willing to join her even after the filing of the case is denied.
5.      P.W.2, the mother of the petitioner, stated that she was informed by her
son about the respondent leaving the company of her son while she was carrying
fifth month pregnancy.  All efforts made by them to get her back the company of
the petitioner were proved futile.  It is stated by her that when herself and
her husband went to the parents' place of the respondent to get her back, her
parents have stated that the petitioner has no income and he cannot maintain the
respondent.  However, they promised to send the respondent after the delivery.
It is stated that their attempt to get her along with the child was of no avail.
It is stated that the respondent cannot live with his son as the respondent has
no intention to join.  The suggestion that she demanded the respondent to bring
additional dowry for the business of the petitioner and when the respondent
failed to bring the amount demanded by her, she started harassing, as such she
left to her parents house was denied.  The suggestions that the respondent was
not at fault and she never deserted the petitioner and that the petitioner
himself harassed her and the petitioner himself driven out of his house are all
denied.
        P.W.3 is the cousin of the petitioner, who acted as a mediator, stated
that when he went to the respondent along with the parents and friends of the
petitioner to the house of the parents of the respondent on 27/06/1997 in
Gudiwada, she refused to join the society of the petitioner but she did not give
any reasons and they also did not enquire any details as to the fiction between
them.  He has stated that both the petitioner and the respondent have no
intention to live back and therefore, he along with the parents of the
petitioner had to come back.  The suggestions that the respondent's parents
requested him to pacify the situation and that the respondent expressed her
readiness to join the society of the petitioner and that the petitioner himself
refused to take her and that she was not at all fault are all denied.  The
suggestion that the child was present when they visited is also denied.
6.      The respondent herself examined as R.W.1 and stated that at the time of
the marriage her parents handed over a sum of Rs.1 lakh to her husband towards
pasupu-kumkuma besides presentations worth Rs.1 lakh furniture and other 
utensils etc., apart from presenting her 35 sovereigns of gold jewellery.  It is
stated that she was staying at in-laws house from the date of marriage i.e., on
08/08/1993 till January, 1994 i.e., for a period of four months and her husband
used to come from Hyderabad frequently by keeping her at her in-laws house.  She
was taken for Sankranti festival by her parents to Gudiwada and her husband also
came for the festival as her parents invited her husband for the festival and
there he demanded Rs.1 lakh from her parents to start a business but her parents
could not meet his demand because they have already indebted by performing the 
marriage.  Then he stated that unless they fulfill the demand, he would not take
her back from her parents.  Therefore, she was in her parents' house till April,
1994 and then her father-in-law came and took her back for Ugadi.  She stayed
there for one day and as she was suffering with ill-health, she came back to her
parent's house for treatment.  Thereafter, her husband took a house at Hyderabad
and she was taken to Hyderabad.  It is stated that while she was in Hyderabad
she was carrying third month pregnancy and her husband behaved well for ten days
during the presence of his mother and thereafter, he was quarrelling with her
for no reason demanding to undergo abortion to terminate pregnancy for which she
was not willing and on 10/07/1994 he threatened her to do away with her life or
leave his house by the time he returns back from the office in the evening and
therefore, there was no other go for herself except to leave his house.  After
coming to the house, there was again very much quarrel with him and he tried to
take away the articles presented by her parents against her will.  He used to
torture her day by day and make her life miserable which made her to go to her
parents' house as she left no option on 12/08/1994 and gave birth to male child
on 02/01/1995 at Gudiwada at her parents' house.  Immediately after the
delivery, her in-laws were informed over phone but none of them were came to see
her or the child.  It is stated that none of them attended the barasala function
on 17/01/1995 despite they were intimated in advance.  When the child attained
second year in 1997, the cousin of the petitioner Mr.Nagi Reddy/P.W.3 came to
her and suggested mediation for which she has agreed but the petitioner and the
mediator have not responded later. Her husband himself totally neglected her
without looking after her welfare and the welfare of the child and filed the
said OP.  It is stated that she has been trying to join his husband since 1995
but his parents were not giving the contact address of her husband.  Her parents
also tried for reconciliation but they could not even trace her husband as he
has vacated the house in August 1994 itself and staying somewhere.  During the
course of cross-examination, she stated that she is always ready and willing to
join her husband.  It is stated that even if he sends a word of willingness, she
is ready to go and join her husband.  It is stated that the OP was filed in
Hyderabad with a view to cause inconvenience to her and she has to travel all
the time by incurring huge expenditure every month.  It is stated that she never
deserted the husband and he is not entitled to seek a divorce.  In the cross-
examination, she has admitted that though her in-laws treated her well from
August 1993 to April 1994, but they were making demands to alienate the property
that was promised by her father to her.  The suggestion that she left her
husband in 1994 without intimation was denied.  She is carrying 5th month by
12/08/1994.  On 10/12/1994, the parents of the petitioner never came to her
requesting her to join the petitioner and she never refused their request.  The
allegation that she never allowed the family members of the petitioner to see
the child after delivery was denied.  It is stated that she never refused the
request of the mediators to join her husband.  It is stated that Nagaraja Reddy
never came to her requesting to join her husband.  Neither Nagaraja Reddy nor
her parents-in-law ever visited her requesting her to join her husband.  It is
stated that her husband himself demanding the additional dowry apart from the
dowry given by the time of marriage and she could not know the reason for such
demand.  It is stated that she did not know why she was asked to go for an
abortion.  It is stated that her parents also tried to settle the dispute and
efforts were made for conciliation.  It is stated that she is not in the habit
of leading a luxurious life and she is always ready and willing to join her
husband and she never deserted her husband and there was no cruelty on her part
at any point of time.
7.      R.W.2 is the mother of the respondent.  She stated that at the time of
marriage they presented 35 sovereigns of gold jewellery, Rs.1 lakh cash and
furniture and household articles worth Rs.1 lakh and they have also promised to
give land of Ac.4 1/2  and 200 sq.yards site at Gudiwada.  The jewellery, cash
and furniture are under custody of the petitioner and his parents which were
entrusted by them for the benefit of the respondent.  In 1994, her daughter was
sent to her by the petitioner to bring
Rs.1 lakh for the petitioner to start a business for which she expressed her
inability.  In January, 1994, the petitioner and his parents came to her house
for the first festival after marriage for Sankranti on her invitation.  But they
went away by saying that the respondent can live with her parents till they
arrange Rs.1 lakh.  Later, in April, 1994, the father of the petitioner came to
her house and took the respondent to his house.  Again they sent her back to
their house after ten days on the pretext that the respondent was not doing well
and she was suffering from ill-health.  Later, in June, 1994, the father of the
respondent took the respondent again to Hyderabad for setting up their separate
family.  By that time, she was carrying third month pregnancy.  The respondent
joined her husband and they lived together but during which period he used to
harass the respondent to undergo abortion by terminating the pregnancy and also
ill-treated her for her refusal for the abortion.  As the respondent was unable
to bear with the torture, issued telegrams to her and therefore she along with
her son went and enquired why the petitioner is unwilling for the pregnancy,
then she was informed that as they are not meeting the said demand of additional
dowry of Rs.1 lakh. Later, on 12/08/1994, the petitioner himself sent away the
respondent along with her son.  Later, on 02/05/1995, the respondent gave birth
to a male child by name Jaideep Reddy.  The birth about the male child was
informed but they did not come and see the child or the respondent.  Later, she
made several efforts through the elders to take the respondent for the
matrimonial house as the respondent was always ready and willing to join the
petitioner for the matrimonial life.  Without taking the respondent, the
petitioner himself filed an OP for divorce hastily instead of allowing or taking
the respondent for the matrimonial life.  It is stated that the respondent was
not at all at fault but the petitioner himself was at fault and therefore, he is
not entitled to seek divorce and the petitioner is bound to take the respondent
for marital life.  In the cross-examination, R.W.2 stated that when P.W.3 came
to her house for sending the respondent to her in-laws place they have agreed
for the same and they never refused to send her back to the petitioner for the
marital life.  It is stated that the mediators simply used to come to take her
back but they never took her.  It is stated that she also complained about the
harassment of the petitioner towards her daughter.  It is stated that they never
lodged any complaint nor received any legal notice for restitution of conjugal
rights.  She informed to the elders about the demand made by the petitioner to
her daughter for termination of pregnancy.  The suggestion that the petitioner
never demanded the respondent to terminate the pregnancy was denied.  The 
maternal uncle of the petitioner requested the petitioner to take the respondent
into his hold.
8.      On the aforesaid pleadings, oral and documentary evidence, the Court below
came to a conclusion that the evidence of the petitioner is consistent to his
pleadings and established that there is desertion of the petitioner by the
respondent which entitles him to seek divorce.  While granting divorce, the
Family Court granted permanent alimony of Rs.1,50,000/- to the respondent.
During the pendency of the appeal, the petitioner failed to appear, and
therefore, pursuant to the orders for deposit of the said amount, the amount was
deposited and the same was also withdrawn by the respondent.  It is stated that
the interim applications, for deposit of the said amount towards the maintenance
amount and to withdraw the same without prejudice to her rights, are not opposed
in spite of the service of the notice by substitute service.  We are unable to
know the reasons for the non-appearance of the petitioner before this Court.
9.      The question that arises for consideration as to whether the petitioner
was treated with cruelty by his wife/the respondent and whether the respondent
deserted the petitioner entitling the petitioner to seek divorce.
        In so far as the cruelty is concerned, the petitioner was unable to
establish the said ground and the divorce was granted only on the ground of
desertion.  No doubt, the desertion was not defined in the definitions, but the
explanation to Section 13 (1) of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 reads as follows:
        "In this sub-section, the expression "desertion" means the desertion of
the petitioner by the other party to the marriage without reasonable cause and
without the consent or against the wish of such party, and includes the willful
neglect of the petitioner by the other party to the marriage, and its
grammatical variations and cognate expressions shall be construed accordingly."
        The petitioner alleged that the respondent deserted the petitioner
contending that the respondent left the company of the petitioner on 12/08/1994
without intimating him.  It is stated that after the respondent left the company
of the petitioner on 12/08/1994, he made efforts to search her but after 4 or 5
weeks alone, he came to know that she found at her parents.  Admittedly, the
petitioner has not filed any complaint about the missing of his wife and he
never gave any notice or addressed any letter asking her to join him at any
point of time.  Had he been interested in her, he would have addressed some
letters asking her to join his conjugal life.  If really he was serious to lead
a marital life, he would have filed an application for restitution of conjugal
rights.  On the other hand, we are of the opinion that an interested and prudent
husband will not keep quiet for four or five weeks after his wife disappeared
from the house without intimation.  Even during the course of recording the
evidence, she expressed her willingness to join the petitioner but the
petitioner never took any interest to take her back.  But on the other hand, it
is the case of the respondent that admittedly, she lived in her matrimonial
house at Lingamguntla from the date of marriage i.e., on 08/08/1993 till they
left for Hyderabad on 18/06/1994 i.e., for a period of ten months and ten days.
Of course, during the first festival, she was taken to her parents' house and
her husband was also invited for the first festival where it is stated that he
demanded for additional dowry of Rs.1 lakh.  It is not in dispute that she lived
for a period of ten months ten days at her in-laws house, during which period,
the husband used to come from Hyderabad twice a month and he used to live with 
her.  Immediately after the marriage, the marriage was consummated and 
therefore, it cannot be said that she was not conceived through the petitioner.
On the other hand, the petitioner made a reckless allegation stating that the
incident, which has taken place for her conception, the birth of the child on
02/01/1995 shows and creates a shadow on the birth of the child.  We do not see
any justification on the part of the husband to make such a reckless allegation
doubting the character and conduct of the wife without any basis.  However, the
said doubt was denied by the respondent stating that she lived with the
petitioner for ten months at his parents' house, and thereafter, for two months
with him at Hyderabad.  It is not in dispute that when she was alleged to have
been left, she was carrying 5th month pregnancy.  According to the petitioner,
the respondent herself left without intimating him.  But according to the
evidence of R.W.1 coupled with the evidence of R.W.2, she was sent to her
parents' house to get additional dowry of Rs.1 lakh from her parents.  It is
stated that the petitioner himself used to harass the respondent for additional
dowry and also for abortion as they were not fulfilling his demand of additional
dowry.   Merely because the petitioner has repeated verbatim what has been in
the OP, it cannot be said that the said version is trustworthy.  It is for the
Court to see whether the averments made in the petition and averments made by 
the petitioner during the oral depositions are motivated, created for the
purpose of obtaining divorce on the ground of desertion.  We are of the opinion
that the averments made in the petition as affirmed in the oral evidence of the
petitioner making a serious allegation on the conduct of the respondent with
regard to the conception of the pregnancy, which gave raise to a birth of a male
child, caused mental cruelty to the respondent/wife herself.  He never made any
attempt to bring her into his hold.  The version of the respondent, that as the
parents of the respondent were unable to meet the demand for additional dowry,
appears that the petitioner started harassing the respondent to meet his demand
of additional dowry.  The version of the petitioner that the will of the wife is
to lead a luxurious life and that she is an educated lady and that she disliked
his company appears to be incorrect as admittedly she stayed with her in-laws in
village for ten months, and thereafter, she joined the company of the husband
for about 56 days.  Therefore, it cannot be said that she herself voluntarily
left deserting the petitioner without any reason.  Even if she has left while
carrying the pregnancy of 5th month on account of the demand made by the 
petitioner to bring additional dowry and due to the harassment meted out by the
husband, it cannot be said that she has deserted the petitioner.  Even according
to the mother of the petitioner, it is stated that the respondent's parents
informed them that they will send her immediately after the delivery.
Therefore, we are of the opinion that the Court below, except believing the
version of averments made by the petitioner and the parrot like speaking of the
deposition by the petitioner, never examined the reasonableness or otherwise of
the said averments in the deposition.  We are of the opinion that the said
evidence available on record is not sufficient to hold that the petitioner was
deserted by the respondent, and we accordingly, set aside the finding recorded
by the Court below that the respondent deserted the petitioner entitling him to
seek divorce.  In so far as the grant of permanent alimony is concerned, it is
the duty of the husband to maintain his wife and child, as the petitioner is not
entitled to seek any divorce.  It is for the petitioner to maintain his wife and
the minor child.   With regard to the adjustment of the amount of permanent
alimony, we are of the opinion that the withdrawal of the said money by the
respondent is liable to be adjusted towards the maintenance amount payable by
the petitioner to the respondent and the child.  For the aforesaid reasons, we
are of the opinion that the order of the Court below is unsustainable and
accordingly liable to be set aside.
        Accordingly, the Civil Miscellaneous Appeal is allowed and the order dated
28/11/2001 in O.P.No.746 of 1998 on the file of the Family Court, Hyderabad, is
set aside.  No order as to costs.
