

THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE GOPALA KRISHNA TAMADA            
Criminal Appeal No.1439 of 2007 

13-04-2010 

Dr. Madas Venkat Goud  

State of A.P., represented by
Public Prosecutor, High Court,
Hyderabad 

Counsel for the appellant: Sri C. Padmanabha Reddy 
                                Sri C. Praveen Kumar 

Counsel for respondent  : Public Prosecutor-State

:JUDGMENT:   

The sole accused in S.C.No.167 of 2005 on the file of the I Addl. Metropolitan
Sessions Judge, Hyderabad, is the appellant herein.  The learned Judge tried the
appellant for the offences punishable under Sections 304-B IPC and 12(1)(b) of
the Passports Act, 1967 (for short "the Act").  During the course of trial, on
behalf of the prosecution, P.Ws.1 to 12 were examined and Exs.P.1 to P.9 were
marked. On behalf of the defence, D.W.1 was examined and Ex.D.1 was marked.   
After analyzing both oral and documentary evidence and after hearing both sides,
the trial court found the accused guilty of the offences, and accordingly,
convicted and sentenced him to undergo rigorous imprisonment for ten years for
the offence under Section 304-B IPC, and also sentenced him to undergo rigorous
imprisonment for one year and to pay a fine of Rs.1,000/- in default, to undergo
simple imprisonment for three months, for the offence under Section 12(1)(b) of
the Act.

2.      The graveman of the charge against the accused is that at Saleem Nagar
Colony, Prasanth Nagar, Malakpeta, Hyderabad, the accused subjected his wife 
Smt. Aravindasree, hereafter called the deceased, to cruelty and harassed her
for additional dowry, on account of which, her health got deteriorated and
ultimately she died on 27.9.2001.  Further, the charge against the accused is
that while obtaining a passport, he suppressed his marital status and did not
mention the name of his wife, the deceased, in the application.

3.      For the sake of convenience, the parties will be referred to as they are
arrayed in the Sessions Case.
4.      The case of the prosecution as culled out during the course of trial is as
follows:
i)      P.W.1, a doctor by profession, is the father of the deceased. The marriage
between the deceased and the accused was performed on 30.1.1998 and at the time  
of marriage, an amount of Rs.3 lakh in cash, 60 tulas of gold, 20 tulas of
silver, one residential building situated at Saleem Nagar Colony, a Maruthi car,
and other household articles, were given by way of dowry. After the marriage,
both of them lived together happily for a period of six months, and
subsequently, the accused got a seat in M.S. course at Gandhi Medical College,
Hyderabad. After joining in the said course, he used to bring girl friends to
the house and behave indecently with the deceased. Though the deceased objected  
the said conduct, the accused did not heed to her words and used to beat her
mercilessly.

ii)     In the month of December, 1999 on a telephone call from the accused,
P.W.1, father of the deceased, rushed to their house and found the deceased
dowsed in kerosene and he was informed by the deceased that the accused was   
demanding an amount of Rs.10 lakh to go abroad.  Then, P.W.1 expressed his  
inability to meet the said demand, and when he warned the accused that he would
report the matter to the police, the parents of the accused requested him not to
lodge a report with the police, and further, the accused promised P.W.1 stating
that he would look after the deceased well. Thereafter, P.W.1 used to send money
to the accused for family expenses, since the financial condition of the accused
was very week. 

iii)    In the month of February, 1999, the appellant obtained a passport and
while making an application for passport, he suppressed his marital status
stating that he is not married.  As the accused was threatening the deceased
that he would go abroad by leaving her, the said fact was brought to the notice
of the passport authorities.

iv)     In the month of March, 2000 the accused came to his house in drunken 
condition and forced the deceased to consume alcohol and when she refused he 
beat her mercilessly and further tried to kill her by pressing her face with a
pillow.  When the same was informed by the deceased to P.W.1, he took her to his
house. But, again on the request of the parents of the accused and on their
assurance that the accused will look after the deceased well, the deceased was
sent back to the accused. Inspite of the same, the alleged harassment continued
and a panchayat also was held wherein the accused and his parents promised that 
they would look after the deceased well.

v)      On 25.5.2001 at about 2.00 p.m. the deceased went to Satya Hospital 
belonging to P.W.1 and complained health problems.  Thereafter, on instructions,
she was immediately shifted to Medwin Hospital and she was under the care of a
Cardiologist.  When the said information was brought to the notice of the
accused, he visited the hospital and spent just a couple of minutes with the
deceased. After about 10 days, the deceased was discharged from Medwin Hospital  
on 04.06.2001 and brought back to Satya Hospital for further treatment. Though
the said fact was brought to the notice of the accused, he did not visit her.

vi)     On 27.09.2001 at 3.30 a.m. the deceased died in the hospital, while
undergoing treatment. As the said death was in the hospital and it is a medico
legal case, the said fact was informed to the Sub Inspector of Police,
Dabeerpura police station i.e. P.W.7, on that day itself and the same was
numbered as a case in Crime No.92/2001 under Section 174 Cr.P.C. The report 
dated 27.09.2001 given by the father of the deceased was marked as Ex.P.1 and 
the FIR was marked as Ex.P.4.  Immediately thereafter, the dead body was sent to
Osmania General Hospital Mortuary, Hyderabad,  for the purpose of post mortem 
examination and the Mandal Revenue Officer of the concerned area, who was 
examined as P.W.5, at the request of P.W.7, held inquest over the dead body of
the deceased in the presence of P.W.4. The said inquest report was marked as
Ex.P.2. Subsequently, the Deputy Civil Surgeon of Osmania General hospital, who
was examined as P.W.6, held autopsy over the dead body of the deceased and  
opined that the cause of death was due to chronic heart disease. The said post
mortem report was marked as Ex.P.3. P.W.7 recorded the statements of P.W.2 and   
other relevant witnesses, and on the basis of their statements, altered the
section of law to Section 304-B. The FIR was altered by the Inspector of Police,
who was examined as P.W.8.  P.W.9 the Assistant Commissioner of Police, who is   
competent to investigate into the case, took over investigation from P.Ws.7 and
8 and directed them to collect relevant materials, such as wedding card,
marriage photographs, passport of the accused, etc. The accused surrendered
before P.W.9 on 14.11.2001 and immediately he was shown arrested and produced   
before the competent criminal court and later he was remanded to judicial
custody. After completion of investigation, P.W.9 filed charge sheet.

vii)    The Assistant Commissioner of Police, Mir Chowk Division, Hyderabad, who 
obtained sanctioned order to prosecute the accused under the Act, after
completion of investigation, filed a supplementary charge sheet for the offence
punishable under Section 12(1)(b) of the Act.

4.      It is mainly contended by the learned Senior Counsel Mr. Padmanabha Reddy  
that the offence alleged to have been committed by the accused does not fall
under Section 304-B IPC for the reason that the main ingredients of Section 304-
B IPC have not been satisfied. According to him, initially the crime was
registered under Section 174 Cr.P.C. i.e., suspicious death, and subsequently,
the case has been developed by the prosecution witnesses. The learned Senior
Counsel further contended that there was no need for the accused to suppress any
fact for obtaining passport and even if it is accepted that he suppressed the
facts, it would not go to the root of the case for the reason that suppression
of the facts in no way debars him from getting passport.

5.      The Additional Public Prosecutor opposed the said submissions and 
contended that the court below has properly weighed the entire evidence in
coming to the conclusion that the accused is guilty of both the charges under
Section 304-B IPC and Section 12(1)(b) of the Act and the said finding cannot be
interfered with.

6.      It may be apt to refer to Section 304-B IPC which reads as under:
"304-B Dowry Death:- (1) Where the death of a woman is caused by any burns or 
bodily injury or occurs otherwise than under normal circumstances within seven
years of her marriage and it is shown that soon before her death she was
subjected to cruelty or harassment by her husband or any relative of her husband
for, or in connection with, any demand for dowry, such death shall be called
"dowry death" and such husband or relative shall be deemed to have caused her
death.

Explanation:- For the purposes of this sub-section, "dowry" shall have the same
meaning as in Section 2 of the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961 (28 of 1961).

(2) Whoever commits dowry death shall be punished with imprisonment for a term
which shall not be less than seven years but which may extend to imprisonment
for life."


7.      From a reading of the said provision of law, it is required that the
prosecution shall come forward and satisfy the following three requirements by
cogent evidence:
1) The death had taken place within a span     of seven years;
2) It is unnatural death; and
3) There was harassment by the husband and in-laws soon before the death. 


8.      As per the evidence of prosecution witnesses, the marriage between the
deceased and the accused was performed on 30.11.1998 and the deceased left the  
company of the accused in the month of March 2000 and her death took place on 
27.9.2001. From the above, it is evident that the death of the deceased had
taken place within a span of 7 years. But as stated supra, the prosecution shall
satisfy all the three requirements by way of cogent evidence to bring home the
guilt of the accused for the offence punishable under Section 304-B IPC. The
doctor, who conducted autopsy over the dead body of the deceased and issued post 
mortem certificate marked as Ex.P.3, clearly stated that the death of the
deceased was natural. The requirement as provided for under Section 304-B IPC is
that it should be an unnatural death. Of course, if the said death is solely on
account of the alleged harassment, presumption can be drawn in view of Section
113-B of the Indian Evidence Act, But here, we have to look into the fact that
the accused and the deceased lived together only up to March 2000 and the
alleged death took place on 27.9.2001 i.e., after  1 1/2 year. From that it
cannot be inferred that there was harassment soon before her death. When once
the doctor states that the death was unnatural and there is no cogent evidence
to establish that soon before the death of the deceased, there was harassment,
in my considered view, it is not safe to hold that the accused is guilty of the
offence punishable under Section 304-B IPC.

9.      Another aspect which is prompting this Court to come to the conclusion is
the evidence.  The alleged death took place on 27.09.2001 and as it was occurred
in the hospital of P.W.1 i.e. father of the deceased, and it is a medico legal
case, P.W.1 immediately reported the matter to the police i.e. P.W.7, the Sub
Inspector of Police, Dabeerpura, and the said police officer registered crime
No.92/2001 only under Section 174 Cr.P.C. If really the said harassment is in
existence as on the date of the report, the same would have been mentioned in
the report. It is not known as to why P.W.1 has not stated all these facts in
his report marked as Ex.P.1.

10.     In Ex.P.1, what was stated is about the marriage and the disputes between
the wife and husband i.e. the deceased and the accused and about the death of
the deceased on account of the disputes. In my considered view, at the first
instance, they should state all the required details in the first information
report. Of course, the first information report is not an encyclopedia to
contain all the contentions. But, the basic requirements shall be there in the
said report. No doubt, it is true that a young woman died within a span of four
years from the date of marriage. But however, as there is no evidence that it is
an unnatural death and there is harassment for dowry soon before her death, this
Court is of the view that the accused cannot be said to have committed the
offence falling under Section 304-B IPC for the reason that he is the husband of
the deceased. 

11.     Coming to the evidence falling under Section 12(1)(b) of the Act, every
applicant, who makes an application for passport, is expected to give the
correct details. If an applicant gives false information only with a view to get
passport, then only it becomes an offence falling under Section 12(1)(b) of the
Act. It may be apt to refer to the said provision of law.

" 12. Offences and Penalties:-
1 (b)   -       Whoever, knowingly furnishes any false information or
suppresses any material information with a view to obtaining a passport or
travel document under this Act or without lawful authority alters or attempts or
alter or causes to alter the entries made in a passport or travel document,
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years
or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees or with both."

12.     The words used in the said provision of law clearly indicate about false
information or suppression of any information with a view to obtain a passport.
Here is a case where it can definitely be said that the accused had furnished
false information, since as on the date when he submitted an application for
passport, he was married and completed his medicine and was prosecuting further
studies in post graduation. In the application he furnished his educational
qualification as "S.S.C. and Intermediate". In my considered view, the said
false information or suppression of material information is not with a view to
obtaining passport. Whether the educational qualification of the accused is
intermediate or whether he is married or not, makes no difference for the
passport authorities to issue passport.

13.     Here, this Court gives an example. If a person is convicted, in the normal
circumstances, the passport authorities will refuse to issue a passport to him,
and in that connection there is a column in the application and
in that column, if he furnishes false information knowingly stating that he was
never arrested or convicted, the passport authorities, taking the same  into
consideration, refuse to issue passport to him and the said act falls under
Section 12(1)(b) of the Act i.e. knowingly furnishing false information or
suppression of any material information.

14.     As stated supra, whether the information about the marital status or
educational qualification of the accused in no way differ the situation.
Further, during the course of his 313 Cr.P.C. examination, the accused has
stated that he approached a broker and simply signed the documents and the 
details in the said application form have been filled in by the broker.  No
doubt, the said act of approaching the broker and filling the application is not
expected to and it may attract a different provision of law, but not the
provision i.e. Section 12(1)(b) of the Act.

15.     In the light of the above discussion, this Court is of the view that the
court below erred in coming to the conclusion that the accused is guilty of the
offence falling under Section 304-B IPC and Section 12(1)(b) of the Act.

16.     In the result, the criminal appeal is allowed and the conviction and
sentence imposed against the appellant/accused by the learned I Additional
Metropolitan Sessions Judge, Hyderabad, in S.C.No.167 of 2005, by judgment dated 
25.10.2007, are set aside, and consequently, the appellant/accused is acquitted
of the charges leveled against him. The fine amount, if any, paid by the
appellant/accused shall be refunded to him.

