

THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE P. DURGA PRASAD         
CRIMINAL APPEAL No.327 of 2002     

15-07-2011 

Alakunta Yadaiah 

1.State of A.P.,through Public Prosecutor

COUNSEL FOR PETITIONER: Smt.Vasundhara Reddy.C         

COUNSEL FOR RESPONDENT :Public Prosecutor         

:JUDGMENT:   

This appeal is directed against the conviction and sentence passed by III-
Additional District & Sessions Judge (FTC), at N.T.R. Nagar, L.B. Nagar,
R.R.Dist, in S.C.No.351 of 1998, on 28.01.2002.
The appellant and his parents who are A2 and A3 were prosecuted for offence
under Section 304-B IPC, alleging that the appellant has married the daughter of
PW.1, by name Saidamma eight months prior to her death and at the time of 
marriage, PW.1  gave five tolas of gold, almirah, wrist watch, cycle, portable
television and net cash of Rs.1,500/- for purchase of cot.  After marriage,
Saidamma joined the appellant at Srinivas Nagar, Jagadgiri Gutta and they led
happy marital life for about two months and thereafter, the appellant along with
his parents A2 and A3 started harassing the deceased for bringing net cash of
Rs.15,000/- and a fan from her parents and harassing her, abusing her in filthy
language. PW.1 and her husband held a panchayat in the presence of PWs.2 and 3   
and PW.1 promised and assured A1 that they will arrange the net cash of
Rs.10,000/- on 06.08.1997 and sent the deceased with the accused No.1 and his 
sister Anjamma, and even then the accused did not satisfy and continued to
harass the deceased and as there is no change in the attitude of the accused,
the deceased poured kerosene and set fire to herself in her in-laws house at
Srinivas Nagar, Jagadgiri Gutta on 03.08.1997 at 6.00 P.M and died on the spot.
On receipt of the information, PW.1 and her husband had gone to Jagadgiri Gutta
and lodged complaint with the police. The police, after investigation, filed
charge sheet against the accused and A2 and A3 for offence under Section 304-B 
IPC.
The learned Sessions Judge framed charge under Section 304-B IPC against all the
accused and all the accused pleaded not guilty for the said charge.
The prosecution, in order to establish the said charge, examined 11 witnesses
i.e. PWs.1 to 11 and got marked Exs.P1 to P13 and MOs.1 and 2. On behalf of the 
accused, DW.1 was examined and Exs.D1 and D2 were marked.      
The learned Sessions Judge, by taking into consideration the said oral and
documentary evidence, found A1 guilty for the offence under Section 304-B IPC
and convicted and sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for 7 years, and A2
and A3 were found not guilty and acquitted.  Aggrieved by the said conviction
and sentence, the accused No.1 has filed the present appeal.
Now the point that arises for consideration is whether the prosecution could
able to establish the charge under Section 304-B IPC against the appellant/A1.
The counsel who has filed the appeal on behalf of the appellant did not
represent the matter in spite of giving several opportunities and thereby, a
non-bailable warrant has been issued for the production of the accused and on
production, the accused has stated that he has no capacity to engage an advocate
and a counsel may be appointed for arguing his case. Hence, Smt.Vasundhara  
Reddy.C was appointed as legal aid counsel to argue the appeal.
Smt. Vasundhara Reddy, legal aid counsel, has pleaded that except the evidence
of PW.1, there is no other evidence on record to establish the demand made by
the accused for additional dowry and also harassment caused to the deceased by 
the accused.  She further pleaded that even though PWs.2 and 3 were cited as
mediators, they were also not aware of the harassment caused by the accused to 
the deceased but they came to know about the same only through PW.1 and the   
evidence of PWs.2 and 3 is not consistent with regard to their holding the
mediation.  The legal aid counsel has further pleaded that even though PW.1 has
stated that the accused demanded Rs.15,000/- and a fan and started harassing
her, but the manner in which the deceased was harassed was not spoken by her  
except generally alleging harassment of the deceased.  The learned counsel
further pleaded that since the prosecution could not establish the cruelty on
the part of the accused prior to the death of the deceased, the appellant cannot
be convicted for the offence under Section 304-B of IPC.
The Additional Public Prosecutor has pleaded that since the harassment has
caused within the house of the in-laws of the deceased, there will not be any
eye witness to the alleged incident, and PW.1 has come to know about the
harassment through the deceased and as such the evidence of PW.1 has to be  
relied upon and the circumstantial evidence of PWs.2 and 3 supported the version
of PW.1 with regard to the harassment and demand of Rs.15,000/- and a fan by the
accused. She further pleaded that since the deceased committed suicide within 7
years of her marriage, and prior to her death there is harassment in connection
with the demand for additional dowry, the prosecution could able to establish
the offence under Section 304-B IPC, and the learned Sessions Judge has rightly
convicted the appellant and the said conviction does not warrant any
interference by this appellate Court.
According to the prosecution, the marriage of the deceased took place with A1
eight months prior to her death, and at the time of marriage, PW.1 and her
husband has presented five tolas of gold, one almirah, one cycle, one portable
television, wrist watch and other house-hold articles and also gave net cash of
Rs.1,500/- for purchasing a cot, and after the deceased joined the company of A1
at her in-laws house at Srinivas Nagar, Jagadgiri Gutta, they lived happily for
two months and thereafter the accused No.1 and his parents started harassing the
deceased for bringing additional dowry of Rs.15,000/- and a fan and abused her
in filthy language and as she could not tolerate the harassment, she came to her
parents house and informed the same to PW.1 and PW.1 held mediation in the  
presence of PWs.2 and 3 and they pacified the matter as PW.1 agreed to pay an 
amount of Rs.10,000/- by 06.08.1997 and give the fan as demanded by them, and 
sent the deceased along with A1 to his house.  But before 06.08.1997, the
accused again started harassing the deceased as such the deceased committed   
suicide on 03.08.1997 at 6.00 P.M. by pouring kerosene and setting fire to
herself at in-laws house at Jagadgiri Gutta.
In order to establish the charge under Section 304-B IPC, the prosecution has to
establish that:
i. The death of a woman must have been caused by burns or bodily injury or
otherwise than under normal circumstances; 
ii. Such death must have occurred within seven years of her marriage;
iii. Soon before her death, the woman must have been subjected to cruelty or
harassment by her husband or by relatives of her husband;
iv. Such cruelty or harassment must be for or in connection with demand of
dowry.
In the present case, the deceased died due to burn injuries and eye witnesses
PWs.4 and 5 have categorically stated that while they were playing gilli-danda
in the ground near to the house of the accused at about 4 or 5 PM, sister of A1
came out of her house crying "burning, burning", and then they rushed to the
house of the accused and found the deceased Saidamma was burning in the house in  
the flames, and that they put out the flames by covering a bed sheet on Saidamma
and made her to lie on the floor. Soon after, Saidamma died. But the defence
counsel tried to establish that the burn injuries sustained by the deceased was
accidental, by putting a suggestion to them that at the time they went into the
house of the accused, they found kerosene stove burning with a milk vessel on
it.  In support of the said suggestion, there is no other evidence to establish
that the burn injuries sustained by the deceased is accidental.  PW.6-the
mediator for the scene of offence has stated that the inspector of police had
seized a kerosene stove MO.1 from the scene of offence.  The mediator for the
inquest-PW.7 also opined that the deceased died due to burn injuries.  PW.8-
Mandal Revenue Officer who conducted the inquest has also recorded the opinion
of the mediators as the deceased died due to burn injuries.  PW.10-the Doctor
who conducted autopsy on the deceased Saidamma had opined that the deceased died    
due to shock consequent to the burn injuries.  Thus, the prosecution has
established that the death of the deceased, Saidamma was due to burn injuries,
and she committed suicide. 
The appellant's counsel has not disputed about the death of the deceased within
seven years of her marriage and the evidence of PWs.1, 2 and 3 also establish
that the death of the deceased occurred within seven years of her marriage.
The next point to be established by the prosecution is that soon before the
death of Saidamma, she was subjected to cruelty or harassment by the accused in 
connection with demand for additional dowry.
According to the prosecution, the accused demanded Rs.15,000/- towards  
additional dowry and a fan and started harassing the deceased in that
connection, and as she could not tolerate the harassment, she committed suicide
by pouring kerosene and setting fire to herself.  PW.1-the mother of he deceased
has stated about the giving of gold ornaments, cash of Rs.15,000/-, one cycle,
one television, one wrist watch and other house-hold articles at the time of
marriage.  According to her, they lived happily for two months and thereafter A1
demanded her daughter to bring Rs.10,000/- more and started harassing and ill-
treated her, and her daughter informed her about the demand made by A1 and she 
informed her daughter that she will give Rs.10,000/- and a ceiling fan after
getting the chit amount and according to her, A1 came to her house to take her
daughter back to his house and that her daughter did not agree to go with him
stating that A1 was harassing her and that she asked A1 to bring his father or
mother and then only she will send her daughter, but A1 brought his sister
Anjamma along with her husband and she told A1 and his sister and brother-in-law
not to harass and ill treat her daughter and she will give the money and fan
after getting the chit amount and the said talks took place in the presence of
Pochamma, Yadamma and Satyanarayana who are her neighbours, and that A1 and his      
sister and brother-in-law took the deceased with them after agreeing to her
request and it happened about ten days prior to the death of her daughter.
After ten days, she received information about the death of her daughter.  In
the cross-examination, she has stated that she got mentioned in Ex.P1 that she
gave Rs.15,000/- to A1 prior to the date of marriage and also stated the same
before the police and she admitted that her daughter visited her house several
times after she went to the house of A1 and whenever her daughter came to her
house, A1 used to come and take her to his house, and she used to stay in her
house for two or three days, and that she stayed for ten days when she last
visited her house.  She admitted that she did not state before the police that
her daughter came to her house and that her husband, father-in-law and mother-
in-law together demanded Rs.15,000/-, as mentioned in Ex.D2.  She did not raise
any dispute before the elders about the demand of Rs.10,000/- and fan by the
accused.  PW.1 has lodged the complaint with the police which was marked as  
Ex.P1 and in the said complaint she has not mentioned about payment of 
Rs.15,000/- at the time of marriage as dowry but she has only stated about
giving five tolas of gold, one wrist watch, one cycle and one portable
television and house-hold articles but paid Rs.1,500/- for purchasing of cot.
It is also further stated that the accused and his parents demanded the deceased
to get Rs.15,000/- and fan from her parents.  When her daughter came to her
house, D.Satyanarayana and Yadamma have pacified A1 and his sister and brother-  
in-law stating that Rs.10,000/- and fan will be sent by 06.08.1997, and
thereafter the deceased committed suicide on 03.08.1997.  Therefore, according
to PW.1 and the Ex.P1, D.Satyanarayana and Yadamma has held mediation with     
regard to demanding of Rs.15,000/- and a fan by the accused and pacified A1 and
his sister and brother-in-law stating that PW.1 will pay Rs.10,000/- and send
fan by 06.08.1997 and made the deceased go along with the accused.  
The said Satyanarayana was examined as PW.2 and he has stated that ten days   
prior to the death of Saidamma, PW1 and her husband told him that in-laws of
their daughter Saidamma demanded her Rs.10,000/-.  At that time, Yadamma and   
Pochamma, the members of Mahila Mandali were present, and one lady on behalf of  
in-laws also came and we told the parents of the deceased and the lady that came
on behalf of the deceased Saidamma that they have to adjust among themselves and  
live.  At that time none of the accused were present.  PW.1 and her husband told
that they will send the amount after receiving the chit amount and then they
went away and later he came to know that Saidamma went to her in-laws house and  
after ten days thereafter Saidamma died by pouring kerosene and setting fire to
herself. In the cross-examination, he has stated that he is an elder in that
Basti and PW1 and her husband and a woman on behalf of the accused came to his   
house.  He came to know that the dispute arose with regard to money between the 
parties.  The deceased Saidamma did not come to the house along with parents on 
that day.  He do not remember the month, day or week on which PW1, her husband   
and another woman came to his house.  
The other witness Pochamma-PW3 has stated that she is the General Secretary of  
Rani Rudramma Devi Mahila Mandali at Patigadda.  She knows the deceased    
Saidamma, PWs.1 and 2 and the accused. Saidamma died about four years back due     
to burn injuries.  About a week prior to the death of Saidamma, PW.1 came to him
and PW.2 and Yadamma and informed that the accused are demanding money and asked       
to tell them to adjust. A1 and his sister Anjamma demanded Rs.10,000/- cash and
fan. PW.1 has stated that she will get the chit amount within ten days and send
the amount and the fan thereafter.  So they asked A1 and his sister that PW.1
will send the amount and fan within ten days and asked them to go and Saidamma  
was taken to the house of the accused. After ten days they received phone call
that Saidamma died.  In the cross-examination she has stated that she did not
remember the date and the day or month in which the dispute was raised before
them.  Herself, Yadamma and PW.2 went to the house of PW.1 for settlement of the 
dispute. She did not state before the police that A1 demanded Rs.10,000/- cash
and fan in their presence at the time of dispute. Therefore, PW.2 has stated
that PW.1 and her husband and a woman came to his house for settlement of the 
dispute, but whereas PW3 has stated that they themselves have gone to the house 
of PW1 for settling the dispute. Even though PW.3 has stated that A1 though
demanded Rs.10,000/- cash and fan in her presence, she admitted that she did not
state the same before the police.  Moreover, PW.2 has specifically stated in the
chief examination itself that none of the accused were present when the
discussion took place in his presence.  Therefore, PW.2 only stated about PW.1
informing about the demand made by the in-laws of the deceased Saidamma and he   
did not state that sister of A1 was present along with PW.1 at that time,
whereas PW.3 has stated that A1 and his sister was present at the time of
settlement of the dispute.  Therefore, the evidence of PWs.2 and 3 is not
consistent with regard to their mediating the dispute between the accused and
the deceased. Moreover the deceased was not present at the time of the said
mediation to speak about the demand made by the accused and also about the  
harassment caused to her by the accused.  Moreover, PWs.2 and 3 could not able  
to state the date, day or month in which the said mediation has taken place.  As
admitted by PWs.2 and 3, they are the neighbours of PW.1 and they have gone to 
the police station along with PW.1 at the time of lodging the complaint.
Therefore, they are interested witnesses to the case of the prosecution and they
are not independent witnesses.  Moreover, as observed above, their evidence will
not establish the demand made by the accused for additional dowry and fan and
about settling the dispute by mediation.
Except the evidence of PW.1, there is no other evidence to support the
harassment caused by the accused to the deceased. PW.1, who is the mother of the  
deceased has only stated that her daughter informed her that the accused are
demanding Rs.10,000/- and a ceiling fan.  But she did not state that her
daughter informed her about the harassment and ill treatment caused by the
accused to her.  Moreover, except the general allegation of harassment and ill
treatment, no specific instance of the accused harassing the deceased was spoken
by PW.1. Moreover, PW.1 has admitted in the cross-examination that whenever her 
daughter used to come to her house, A1 used to come and take her back to his 
house; and it is not the case of PW.1 that her daughter used to come to her
house as she could not tolerate the harassment caused by the accused in 
connection with the demand for additional dowry of Rs.10,000/- and fan. Even if
the sole evidence of PW.1 is accepted, it only establishes the demand made by
the accused for payment of Rs.10,000/- and fan and it has not established the
harassment caused by the deceased in connection with the demand for the said 
additional amount of dowry and a fan.
In Yallamanda Chand Basha and others v. State of A.P.1, the Division Bench of
this Court has held that, mere making of demand of amounts, unless followed by
an element of cruelty or harassment, does not attract the provisions of Section
304-B IPC. The Division Bench also observed in the above said decision that
neither in Ex.P1-complaint nor in his deposition as PW.1 in the Court, had
mentioned any acts of cruelty or harassment and it is only evident that the
appellant has been demanding the amount from time to time. 
In the present case, as already observed above, there is only demand for payment
of Rs.10,000/- and fan by A1, but there is no evidence to establish the
harassment caused by A1 to the deceased in connection with the demand for  
payment of the said Rs.10,000/- and fan. Therefore, the prosecution could not
establish that soon before the death of the deceased, she was subjected to
cruelty or harassment by the appellant in connection with the demand for dowry.
The lower Court, by relying upon the evidence of PWs.1 to 3, has come to the
conclusion that the prosecution could able to establish the offence against the
accused No.1.  The said finding of the learned Sessions Judge does not hold good
as he himself has observed that the other accused A2 and A3 who are the parents
of A1 have not subjected the deceased to cruelty or harassment soon before her
death.  It is the case of the prosecution that A1 to A3 have demanded for
Rs.15,000/- and a fan from the deceased, to be brought by her from her parents
and harassed her and ill treated her and as she could not tolerate the said
harassment, she committed suicide by pouring kerosene and setting fire to
herself. Therefore, according to the prosecution, all the accused are involved
in the commission of the harassment of the deceased in connection with the
demand for additional dowry.  When the learned Sessions Judge observed that the
other accused A2 and A3 have not subjected the deceased to cruelty or harassment 
soon before her death, it cannot be said that A1 alone has caused cruelty or
harassment to the deceased soon before her death.  Therefore, in the above
circumstances, I hold that the prosecution has failed to establish the charges
framed under Section 304-B IPC against the accused beyond reasonable doubt.  
In the result, the appeal is allowed and the conviction and sentence passed by
the learned III-Additional District and Sessions Judge (FTC), at N.T.R. Nagar,
L.B.Nagar, Ranga Reddy District in S.C.No.351 of 1998, on 28.01.2002, is hereby
set aside and the appellant/A1 is acquitted of the charge under Section 304-B
IPC.

?1 2008(2) ALT (Crl.) 113
