

THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE NOUSHAD ALI        
W.P.No.23135 of 2010  

25-03-2011 

P.Durga Rao 

1.State of Andhra Pradesh, rep. by its Principal Secretary, General
Administrative Department (Law and Order.II), Secretariat, Hyderabad, and
another.

Counsel For the Petitioner: Sri K.Sarvabhouma Rao 

Counsel For Respondent: Assistant Government Pleader   

:ORDER : (per Hon'ble Sri Justice Noushad Ali)

1.              The petitioner is the son of the detenue Smt. Polisetti Lakshmi,
wife of late Kondaiah, resident of Ayyappanagar, Rajahmundry, East Godavari
District. He has filed this Writ Petition seeking issuance of a Writ of Habeaus
Corpus directing to set the detenue at liberty by setting aside the order of
detention made by the 2nd Respondent-District Collector-cum-District Magistrate,
East Godavari District in File Rc.No.C1(M)/496/2010, dated 22.06.2010, as
confirmed by the State Government by orders in G.O.Rt.No.4063, General 
Administration (Law and Order.II) Department, dated 13.08.2010.
2.              Activities alleged against the detenu as set out in the order of
detention, dated 22.06.2010 are:
The detenu was involved in committing the offences of possession, transport,
sale of illicitly distilled liquor in contravention of Section 8 (3) read with
Section 7-A of the A.P. Prohibition (Amendment) Act, 1997 and also abating the
commission of the said activities; that the said activities are directly causing
and calculated to cause widespread danger to public health and feeling of
insecurity in the locality, Ayyappanagar; that therefore the detenue is a
bootlegger within the meaning of Section 2 (b) of the Andhra Pradesh Prevention
of Dangerous Activities of Boot Leggers, Dacoits, Drug Offenders, Goondas,
Immoral Traffic Offenders and Land Grabbers Act, 1986 (for short 'Act 1 of
1986).
3.              Grounds of detention as set out, are briefly stated as follows:
(i)     On 01.09.2009 at about 4 PM the Prohibition and Excise Sub-Inspector,
Rajahmundry North, along with the staff, arrested the detenue while in
possession of 105 litres of illicitly distilled liquor (I.D. liquor) in front of
her house in Ayyappanagar.  The contraband was seized under a mediators report 
and samples of liquor were sent for chemical analysis.  A case was registered in
crime No.461/09-10, dated 01.09.2009 of Prohibition and Excise Station,
Rajahmundry North, under Section 8 (e) read with Section 7-A of the A.P.
Prohibition (Amendment) Act, 1997. The report C.E.No.1288/2009, dated 26.10.2009 
revealed that the liquor was unfit for human consumption and injurious to health
as it contained fusel oil and acids etc.
(ii)    On 27.04.2010 at about 6.30 AM the detenue was arrested while in
possession of 10 liters of I.D. liquor near Sairam Milk Product Company,
Ayyappanagar.  A case was registered in Crime No.77/10-11, dated 27.04.2010 of 
Prohibition and Excise Station, Rajahmundry North under
Section 8(e) read with Section 7-A of the  A.P. Prohibition (Amendment) Act,
1997. The chemical analysis report C.E.No.449/2010, dated 20.05.2010 revealed
that the liquor was unfit for human consumption and injurious to health.
(iii)   On 06.05.2010 at about 9 AM the detenue was again found to be in 
possession of 20 liters of I.D. liquor at the same place and the detenue was
arrested and a crime No.119/10-11, dated 06.05.2010 was registered in the same
station for the offences under Section 8(e) read with Section 7-A of the A.P.
Prohibition (Amendment) Act, 1997. The chemical analysis report C.E.No.503/2010, 
dated 01.06.2010 revealed that it was unfit for human consumption and injurious
to health.
        Charge sheets were filed against the detenue in all the aforesaid cases.
4.              Apart from the above activities, the detenue was earlier detained
under Preventive Detention Act, 2007 and as many as six crimes were registered
during 13.04.2009 to 05.02.2010.
5.              On the basis of the aforementioned grounds and the earlier detention
and the material connected therewith as well as the medical opinion of Dr.
B.Balaraju, Chief Physician, Professor and Head of the Department of Medicine,
Osmania Medical College and General Hospital, Hyderabad, the 2nd Respondent came    
to the conclusion that the activities of the detenue were affecting the
community, creating a sense of insecurity and danger to life and health of
public in the locality.  The 2nd Respondent thus considering the grounds and the
frequent involvement of the detenue in dealing with illicit liquor, passed
orders of detention, dated 22.06.2010.  The said order was approved by the State
Government vide orders in G.O.Rt.No.3184, General Administration (Law and 
Order.II) Department, dated 28.06.2010.  The Advisory Board constituted under
Section 9 of the Act reviewed the case after affording opportunity to the
detenue and submitted a report, dated 12.07.2010 justifying the detention.  On a
consideration of the same, the State Government in exercise of its powers under
Sub-Section (1) of Section 12 read with Section 13 (Act 1 of 1986) issued orders
in G.O. Rt. No.3561, General Administration (Law & Order-II) Department, dated
19.07.2010 confirming the detention directing that the detenue be continued
under detention for a period of 12 months from the date of detention i.e.,
22.06.2010. An application seeking review of the said order was also dismissed
vide G.O.Rt.No.4063, dated 13.08.2010. The petitioner has thus filed this writ
petition.
6.              Heard Sri K. Sarvabhouma Rao, learned counsel appearing on behalf of
the petitioner and learned Assistant Government Pleader for the respondents.
7.              The learned counsel for the petitioner raised the following
contentions.
1. The activities alleged against the detenue do not fall within the ambit of
Section 2(b) or Section 3(1) of the Act 1 of 1986.
2. Power of the State Government to fix the period of detention although
discretionary, should be exercised in a judicious manner, but it failed in
discharging it by ordering detention for the maximum period of twelve months
without assigning reasons.

Point No.1:-

8.              In order to appreciate the contention whether the activities alleged
against the detenue fall within the ambit of Section 2(b) and 3(1) of the Act 1
of 1986, it is necessary to ascertain the meaning of "boot-legger" as defined in
Section 2(b) of Act 1 of 1986, which reads as under.
"Boot-legger" means a person, who distills, manufactures, stores, transports,
imports, exports, sells or distributes any liquor, intoxicating drug or other
intoxicant in contravention of any of the provisions of the Andhra Pradesh
Excise Act, 1968 and the rules, notifications and orders made there under, or in
contravention of any other law for the time being in force, or who knowingly
expends or applies any money or supplies any animal, vehicle, vessel or other
conveyance or any receptacle or any other material whatsoever in furtherance or
support of the doing of any of the above mentioned things by himself or through
any other person, or who abets in any other manner the doing of any such thing."

9.              A plain reading of the above definition shows that a person who
indulges in the activities, inter alia, of transporting, selling or
distributing an intoxicant including liquor in violation of the provisions of
A.P. Excise Act, 1968 and the rules, notifications made there under or in
contravention of any other law for the time being in force is a "boot-legger".
10.             A.P. Prohibition Act, 1995 (Act No.17 of 1995) has been enacted in
public interest to bring about the prohibition of manufacture, sale and
consumption of arrack and regulation of manufacture, sale and consumption of
other intoxicating liquors in the State of Andhra Pradesh. Section 7 of the said
Act prohibits selling, buying, being in possession and consumption of liquor
otherwise than in accordance with the provisions of the Act, or as the case may
be. Section 7-A prohibits the production, manufacture, storage, possession,
collection, purchase, sale and transport of arrack. Section 8 provides for
punishment for violation of the provisions of Section 7 and 7-A.  Clause (e) of
Section 8 provides punishment by imprisonment for contravention of the
provisions of Section 7-A.
11.             In view of the absolute prohibition envisaged in Section 7-A, it is
not permissible to possess, transport or sell illicitly distilled liquor. In the
instant case, the detenue was found in possession of I.D. liquor and was
arrested for offences of transportation, possession and sale on three occasions
i.e., on 01.09.2009, 27.04.2010 and 06.05.2010.  Crime was, therefore,
registered against the detenue under Section 8 (e) read with Section 7-A of the
Act No.17 of 1995.  It is therefore evident that the detenue is a boot-legger
within the meaning of Section 2 (b) (Act 1 of 1986).
12.             It is true that a person cannot be detained merely because he is a
boot-legger, unless he is acting in any manner prejudicial to the maintenance of
the public order as provided in Section 3 of Act No.1 of 1986.
13.             "Acting in any manner prejudicial to the maintenance of public
order" is defined in Section 2 (a) of Act 1 of 1986, which is as follows:
        "2. Definitions:-- In this Act, unless the context otherwise require :--
        (a) "acting in any manner prejudicial to the maintenance of public order"
means when a boot-legger, a dacoit, a goonda, an immoral traffic offender or a
land-grabber is engaged or is making preparations for engaging, in any of his
activities as such, which affected adversely, or are likely to affect adversely,
the maintenance of public order :
Explanation:-- For the purpose of this clause public order shall be deemed to
have been affected adversely, or shall be deemed likely to be affected adversely
inter alia, if any of the activities of any of the persons referred to in this
clause directly, or indirectly, is causing or calculated to cause any harm,
danger or alarm or a feeling of insecurity among the general public or any
section thereof or a grave of widespread danger to life or public health;"

14.             Thus, if any activity is causing or calculated to cause any harm,
danger to the general public or cause a grave widespread danger to life or
public health shall be deemed to affect public order.  The grounds of detention
in the instant case would disclose that the contraband seized from the detenue
was found to contain organic acids, higher alcohols, aldehydes, furfural and
other impunities, which are injurious to public health and unfit for human
consumption. The contraband was manufactured by adopting crude and unscientific 
methods of using raw-material, such as black jaggery, aluminum, potassium
sulphate which cause chronic diseases affecting public health and posing danger
to life.  More and more such activities would lead to wide spread danger to life
and public health.  Thus, the activities indulged by the detenue in dealing with
the contraband unhesitatingly fall within the meaning of Section 2 (b) and scope
of Section 3 (1) of Act 1 of 1986.

Point No.2

15.             It is the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner that
Section 13 vests discretionary power in the Government to fix the period of
detention and hence such power should be exercised in a judicious manner, but
the State Government failed in its duty in exercising its discretion and fixed
the maximum period. The contention on behalf of the State, however, is that
there is no discretion vested in the authority in the matter of fixing the
period of detention and wherever detention is ordered, it should be for the
maximum period of 12 months.  
16.             Several statutes provide for penalties prescribing minimum/maximum
sentences/fines. Wherever such minimum and maximum sentences are prescribed, it   
is permissible to order sentence for the minimum or the maximum period as well.
In all such cases it is not an invariable rule to order only the minimum
sentence or the maximum sentence as the case may be. It can also be more than  
the minimum and less than the maximum period. Awarding of sentence depends on   
the facts and circumstances and gravity of a case.

17.             It is therefore necessary to examine Section 13 to ascertain whether
it vests any discretion.
Section 13:-
Maximum period of detention - The maximum period for which any person may be  
detained, in pursuance of any detention order made under this Act which has been
confirmed under Section 12 shall be twelve months from the date of detention.

18.             The aforesaid provision has prescribed the maximum period but has
not prescribed any minimum period of detention. By omitting to prescribe the
minimum period, the intention of legislative is clear that it desired to provide
maximum discretion to the authority in fixing the period of detention.
19.             Therefore even though it is competent to order detention for a
maximum period of 12 months, maximum detention in each and every case need not   
be ordered unmindful of the facts of the case. It is true that there is no hard
and fast rule in this regard. In the absence of any specific guidelines for
exercising discretionary power, it should be exercised in a fair, judicious,
just and reasonable manner. Failure to do so would give room for arbitrary
exercise of power. There may be variety of cases and circumstances which may not 
be identical to each other. All such cases cannot be treated alike. In a given
case, the activities alleged may be very grave warranting the maximum detention,
whereas in another case the alleged activities though justify detention, may not
warrant detention for the maximum period.
20.             In this regard it is useful to refer to the views expressed by the
Apex Court. In Deo Narain Mandal v. State of U.P.1 the Apex Court while
considering conviction and sentence of the appellant therein, who was found
guilty of the offence punishable under Sections 365/511 r/w Section 149 IPC
considering the question in regard to reduction of sentence, observed as
follows.
        "In criminal cases awarding of sentence is not a mere formality. Where the
statute has given the court a choice of sentence with maximum and minimum limit
presented then an element of discretion is vested with the court. This
discretion can not be exercised arbitrarily or whimsically. It will have to be
exercised taking into consideration the gravity of offence, the manner in which
it is committed, the age, the sex of the accused, in other words the sentence to
be awarded will have to be considered in the background of the fact of each case
and the court while doing so should bear in mind the principle of
proportionality. The sentence awarded should be neither excessively harsh nor
ridiculously low."

21.             In Bhupinder Singh and others v. Jarnail Singh and another2 the Apex
Court while considering the powers of the Magistrate for detention of the
accused under Section 167 Cr.PC., referring to
Section 304-B IPC relating to dowry deaths, which provides for punishment with
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than seven years but which may
extend to imprisonment for life, observed as follows.
"Where minimum and maximum sentences are prescribed both are imposable depending      
on the facts of the cases. It is for the Court, after recording conviction, to
impose appropriate sentence. It cannot, therefore, be accepted that only the
minimum sentence is imposable and not the maximum sentence. Merely because     
minimum sentence is provided that does not mean that the sentence imposable is 
only the minimum sentence......."

22.             In Ruli Ram v. State of Haryana3, the Apex Court while considering
the question of sentence for the offences punishable under Section 304 Part-II
IPC, observed as follows.
        "..... the punishment has to be always proportionate to the crime.
Punishment serves a purpose inasmuch as it acts as a deterrent for those who
have the propensity to take the law into their own hands. The principle of
proportion between crime and punishment is a principle of just deserts that
serves as the foundation of every criminal sentence that is justifiable. As a
principle of criminal justice it is hardly less familiar or less important than
the principle than the principle that only the guilty ought to be punished.
Indeed, the requirement that punishment not to be disproportionately great,
which is a corollary of just deserts, is dictated by the same principle that
does not allow punishment of the innocent, for any punishment in excess of what
is deserved for the criminal conduct is punishment without guilt."
        
It is further observed that -
"The Criminal law adheres in general to the principle of proportionality in
prescribing liability according to the culpability of each kind of criminal
conduct. It ordinarily allows some significant discretion to the Judge in
arriving at a sentence in each case, presumably to permit sentences that reflect
more subtle considerations of culpability that are raised by the special facts
of each case. Judges in essence affirm that punishment ought always to fit the
crime; yet in practice, sentences are determined largely by other
considerations. Sometimes it is the correctional needs of the perpetrator that
are offered to justify a sentence. Sometimes the desirability of keeping him out
of circulation, and sometimes even the traffic results of his crime. Inevitably
these considerations cause a departure from just deserts as the basis of
punishment and create cases of apparent injustice that are serious and
widespread."

23.             The aforesaid judgments have clearly laid down that wherever minimum
and maximum sentences are prescribed, there is an element of discretion and that
it should be exercised taking into consideration the proportionality of the
crime committed and various other factors including the age, sex, etc.
24.             The learned Government Pleader would however seek to contend that as 
Section 13 has not prescribed the minimum period, it leaves no discretion to the
authority except ordering detention for the maximum period. Reliance is placed
on Suresh Bhojraj Chelani v. State of Maharashtra4.  In our opinion, this
judgment is not relevant to the issue under consideration.  In that case the
Apex Court was dealing with an order passed by the Government which did not 
mention the period of detention. Considering the contention that if an order
does not mention the period it would vitiate the order itself, it was held that
when no period is mentioned in an order, the implication is that the detention
is for the maximum period of one year. The Apex Court in the said case was not
dealing with the question whether there is any discretion provided by the Act.
25.             On the other hand, in A.K. Roy v. Union of India5 a Constitution
Bench of the Apex Court while considering the validity of the National Security
Act rejected the argument that the absence of provision requiring the detaining
authority to provide for maximum period of detention was illegal, observed as
follows.
        "Dr. Ghatate's objection against Section 13 is that it provides for a
uniform period of detention of 12 months in all cases, regardless of the nature
and seriousness of the grounds on the basis of which the order of detention is
passed. There is no substance in this grievance because, any law of preventive
detention has to provide for the maximum period of detention, just as any
punitive law like the Penal Code has to provide for the maximum sentence which
can be imposed for any offence. We should have thought that it would have been
wrong to fix a minimum period of detention, regardless of the nature and
seriousness of the grounds of detention. The fact that a person can be detained
for the maximum period of 12 months does not place upon the detaining authority
the obligation to direct that he shall be detained for the maximum period. The
detaining authority can always exercise its discretion regarding the length of
the period of detention. It must also be mentioned that, under the proviso to
Section 13, the appropriate Government has the power to revoke or modify the
order of detention at any earlier point of time."

26.             A Division Bench of this Court of which one of us (V. Eswaraiah, J)
is a member, in Sunkara Lakshumma v. Government of Andhra Pradesh, in   
W.P.No.21099 of 2010 dated 8.12.2010 while dealing with the case of detention
observed thus -
"The maximum period specified under Section 13 of the Act for which any person
may be detained in pursuance of the detention order would be 12 months from the
date of detention. Therefore, we are of the view that the Government is
empowered to detain the detenu for a maximum period of 12 months. It does not
mean that the State has no power to detain for less than the maximum period of
12 months." 

27.             From the aforesaid decisions, it is manifest that Section 13
provides discretion to the Government in the matter of fixing the detention
period. The contention on behalf of the State that it is mandatory to detain for
the maximum period of 12 months is therefore liable to be rejected.
28.             We would now examine whether in the instant case, the State 
Government has exercised its discretion when it has ordered detention for the
maximum period of 12 months.  The order is as follows :
        "WHEREAS the Collector and District Magistrate, East Godavari District,
made an order of detention vide reference first read above under Section-3(2)
read with Section 2 (a) & (b) of the Andhra Pradesh Prevention of Dangerous
Activities of Bootleggers, Dacoits, Drug Offenders, Goondas, Immoral Traffic
Offenders and Land Grabbers Act, 1986 (Act No.1 of 1986) in respect of
Smt.Polisetti Laxmi, W/o Kondaiah (Late), aged 38 years, R/o Ayyappa Nagar, 
Thadi Thota, Rajahmundry Town, Godavari District, with a view to prevent her
from further indulging in a manner prejudicial to the maintenance of public
order;
2.      WHEREAS the Government accorded approval to the said detention order under   
sub-section (3) of section-3 of the Act, vide Government Orders second read
above;
3.      WHEREAS the Advisory Board constituted under Section-9 of the said Act,  
consisting of Sri Justice T.L.N.Redy (Retired), Chairman and two other Members,
reviewed the case on 12-07-2010 and after having heard the detenu, her son  and
her relation and the investigating officers and also after perusing the
connected records, and the written representation submitted by her son to the
Board, and reported vide reference third read above that in its opinion "there
is sufficient cause for the detention of the detenu, Smt.Polisetti Laxmi, W/o
Kondaiah (late).
4.      NOW, THEREFORE, after due consideration of the report of the Advisory 
Board and the material available on record, Government, in exercise of the
powers conferred under sub-section (1) of Section-12 read with Section-13 of the
said Act, hereby confirm the order of detention and direct that the detention of
Smt.Polisetti Laxmi, W/o Kondaiah (late), R/o Ayyappa Nagar, Thadi Thota,
Rajahmundry Town, East Godavari District, be continued for a period of 12 months
from the date of her detention, i.e., 22-06-2010."
        
29.             A perusal of the aforesaid order shows that the Government has not
addressed the question as to what weighed with it to order the maximum
detention.  No reasons have been assigned why the petitioner deserved detention
for 12 months.  From the law laid down, as noticed above, an authority is vested
with discretionary powers to fix the length of detention and such power should
be exercised in a fair and judicious manner.  Assigning reasons for a decision
is a facet of exercise of discretionary power and an authority should speak and
disclose its mind only through the order. Further, reasons for an order is an
indispensable right of an affected person.
30.             In State of Rajasthan v. Sohan Lal 6 the Supreme Court while dealing
with the question whether the High Court was required to assign reasons while
disposing of petitions filed under Section 378 (3) Cr.P.C. observed :
        "The hallmark of a judgment/order and exercise of judicial power by a
judicial forum is to disclose the reasons for its decision and giving of reasons
has been always insisted upon as one of the fundamentals of sound administration
justice-delivery system, to make known that there had been proper and due
application of mind to the issue before the Court and also as an essential
requisite of principles of natural justice...The giving of reasons for a
decision is an essential attribute of judicial and judicious disposal of a
matter before courts, and which is the only indication to know of the manner and
quality of exercise undertaken, as also the fact that the court concerned had
really applied its mind.  All the more so, when refusal of leave to appeal has
the effect of foreclosing once and for all a scope for scrutiny of the judgment
of the trial court even at the instance and hands of the first appellate
court..."
31.             A conviction by a Court of law and an order of detention, both
deprive an individual of his personal liberty. A conviction and sentence by a
Court of law is preceded by a trial which affords ample opportunity to the
accused to defend himself whereas in the case of detention no such trial
precedes. Therefore, recording reasons for an order is all the more necessary in
the matters of detention.
32.             Applying the above principles - the degree and potentiality of the
objectionable activity of the detenue and the effect of it on the society, the
proportionality and the frequency of the commission of objectionable activities
and various other factors including the age, sex of a person - to the facts on
hand, it must be held that the impugned order in so far as it relates to fixing
the period of detention must be held to be unsustainable.
33.             In the analysis as above, while upholding the detention, we deem it
appropriate that in so far as the period of detention, the order requires
reconsideration. We therefore, remand the matter to the 1st respondent with a
direction to consider and pass a reasoned order fixing an appropriate period of
detention keeping in view the above principles.
34.             The writ petition is accordingly disposed of. There shall be no
order as to costs.

?1 (2004) 7 SCC 257 
2 (2006) 6 SCC 277 
3 (2002) 7 SCC 691 
4 AIR 1983 SC 181  
5 AIR 1982 SC710  
6 2004 (5) SCC 573 
