
THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE R.KANTHA RAO        
CRIMINAL APPEAL No. 974 of 2007.    

04.08.2011.

Shaik Moulana Saheb  

The State of A.P. represented
by Public Prosecutor, High Court of A.P. Hyderabad.

Counsel for the appellant:   Dr.K.Satyanarayana Rao,

Counsel for the respondent:  Public Prosecutor.

JUDGEMENT:    

        This appeal is filed against the Judgement passed by the V Additional
Sessions Judge, West Godavari at Eluru in S.C.No. 89 of 2006 convicting and
sentencing the appellant to undergo RI for a period of 10 years and to pay a
fine of Rs. 500/- for the offence under Section 304-B IPC and further convicting
and sentencing him to undergo RI for two years and to pay a fine of Rs. 300/-
for the offence under Section 498-A IPC.
I have heard Dr.Satyanarayana Rao, the learned Counsel for the appellant and the
learned Additional Public Prosecutor representing the State.
        In all three accused were tried by the learned Sessions Judge on the
allegation of committing the offences under Sections 304-B and 498-A IPC.  A.1
is the husband of the deceased, A.2 is the mother of A.1 and A.3 is a relative
of A.1 and A.2.  During the pendency of the case, A.2 died and as such the case
against A.2 was abated.  The trial court acquitted A.3 while convicting and
sentencing the appellant/A.1 as mentioned above.
        The case of the prosecution in brief is that the appellant and the
deceased Imam Bee belong to Ramachandrapuram in East Godavari District.  The   
marriage of the deceased with A.1 was performed on 25.4.1997.  According to the
prosecution, at the time of marriage, Pw.2 the adopted father of the deceased
gave an amount of Rs. 11,000/- to the appellant as dowry and the marriage was
consummated and both the appellant and the deceased lead marital life for a
month and thereafter, the appellant left the deceased and absconded from the
house.  After some time, again he joined the deceased at Ramachandrapuram and  
started demanding additional dowry of Rs. 5,000/-.  The matter was placed before
the villager elders and it was settled.
        About 20 days prior to 19.7.1998, the appellant and the deceased came down 
to Jangareddygudem and started living there along with A.2 the mother of A.1 and
it is stated that A.1 and A.2 continued their harassment for additional dowry.
On 18.7.1998, when the deceased was alone in the house, the appellant/A.1 
threatened her demanding for additional dowry and left the house.  On 19.7.1998,
in the absence of A.1 and A.2, the deceased died by committing suicide by
hanging to the roof of the house.  The version of the prosecution is that the
deceased committed suicide being unable to bear the harassment of the appellant
and other accused for additional dowry.  Thereafter, on a report lodged by Lw.1,
a neighbour, a case in Cr.No. 94 of 1998 of Jangareddigudem Police Station was
registered for the offence under Section 306 IPC and was investigated into by
Pw.11, the SI of police.  After conducting a part of investigation, the section
of law was altered to one under Section 304-B IPC by on memo filed issued by the
Investigating Officer.  Subsequently, after filing of the charge sheet, the case
was committed to the V Additional Sessions Judge, West Godavari at Eluru by the 
concerned Magistrate. 
        The learned Sessions Judge framed charges against the appellant and the
other accused for the offences under Sections 304-B and 498-A IPC and after
conclusion of trial, the appellant was convicted and sentenced as mentioned
above.
        Dr. Satyanarayana Rao, the learned Counsel for the appellant contended
that absolutely there is no satisfactory evidence adduced by the prosecution
warranting conviction for the offence under Section 304-B IPC or under Section
498-A IPC and the appellant/A.1 is entitled for acquittal.  On the other hand,
the learned Additional Public Prosecutor would submit that the evidence on
record is sufficient and the prosecution could be able to establish both the
charges and the trial court is justified in convicting and sentencing the
appellant for the offences under Sections 304-B and 498-A IPC and as such the
order of conviction and sentence warrants no interference in the present appeal.
        Lw.1, a neighbour who lodged the report died before the commencement of 
trial and therefore the prosecution could not examine her.  Pw.2 who is the
adopted father of the deceased stated about the performance of marriage of the
deceased with the appellant on 24.5.1997 and giving him an amount of Rs.
11,000/- towards dowry.  He also spoke about the appellant beating and harassing
the deceased demanding additional dowry of Rs. 5,000/-.  He also stated that the
deceased was informing him about the appellant telling her to die by leaving a
suicide note so that he could marry another woman.  Pw.3 did not support the
case of the prosecution and he was treated hostile by the prosecution.  Pw.4 who
is the wife of Pw.2 (adopted mother of the deceased) also stated in her evidence
about their giving dowry of Rs. 11,000/- at the time of marriage and the
appellant leaving the deceased and absconding from the house.  She also stated
about the appellant subjecting the deceased to cruelty with a demand for
additional dowry of an amount of Rs. 5,000/-.  She further stated that the
deceased was informing her that the appellant was forcing her to commit suicide
by leaving a suicide note.  However, the material fact that the appellant was
forcing the deceased to commit suicide by leaving suicide note was not spoken to
by both Pws 2 and 4 to the police in their statements recorded under Section 161
Cr.P.C. and thus this is a material omission in the version of Pws 2 and 4.
Pw.5 who is the natural father of the deceased also stated in his evidence about
the appellant harassing the deceased for additional dowry.  He also spoke about
the appellant deserting the deceased and harassing her with a demand for
additional dowry.
        Though the evidence of autopsy surgeon and the report of the forensic
science laboratory are to the effect that no conclusive opinion can be obtained
about the cause of the death of the deceased, the inquest panchayatdars as well
as the doctor Pw.7 who conducted post mortem examination noticed a ligature mark 
on the neck of the deceased and the body of the deceased was found hanging to 
the roof of the house.  Therefore, it can be undoubtedly said that the death of
the deceased is unnatural and it took place in the house of the appellant in the
absence of the appellant and A.2.
        Curiously, the Investigating Officer admitted in his cross examination
that he did not ascertain from the witnesses as to whether the death of the
deceased Imam Bee took place within seven years of her marriage or not.
Therefore, except the oral evidence of Pws 2,4 and 5, there is no reliable
evidence to show that the death of the deceased occurred within seven years of
her marriage.  When the Investigating Officer himself admitted that he did not
ascertain the said fact during the course of investigation, it is not possible
to give a finding that the death of the deceased occurred within seven years of
her marriage.  The Investigating Officer Pw.11 stated in his cross-examination
that he did not visit the village of the parents of the deceased and did not
examine any witness in the village.
        Though the medical opinion about the cause of the death is not conclusive
because of the decomposition of the body of the deceased, from the evidence of
Pw.7 the doctor who conducted post mortem examination and the evidence of Mandal  
Revenue Officer and Panchayatdars, it is clear that there was a ligature mark on
the neck of the deceased and the prosecution therefore could be able to
established that the death of the deceased occurred otherwise than in normal
circumstances.  However, the prosecution is not able to establish that the
deceased died within seven years from the date of her marriage. The prosecution
further failed to establish that soon before the death, the deceased was
subjected to cruelty in connection with the demand for additional dowry.
Therefore, the learned trial court erred in convicting the appellant for the
offence under Section 304-B IPC and the conviction and sentence for the said
offence is liable to be set aside. In the decision in the case of State of Uttar
Pradesh vs. Santosh Kumar1, the Supreme Court held that the offences under 
Sections 304-B and 498-A IPC are distinct and separate offences and therefore
even there is acquittal of the offence under Section 304-B IPC, conviction for
the offence under Section 498-A IPC can be recorded, if there is sufficient
evidence to hold the accused guilty of the said offence.  Section 498-A IPC
reads as under:
498-A. Husband or relative of husband of a woman subjecting her to cruelty:--
Whoever, being the husband or the relative of the husband of a woman, subjects
such woman to cruelty shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may
extent to three years and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation:--For the purpose of this section, 'cruelty' means-
a) any wilful conduct which is of such a nature as is likely to drive the woman
to commit suicide or to cause grave injury or danger to life, limb or health
(whether mental or physical) of the woman; or
b) harassment of the woman where such harassment is with a view to coercing her
or any person related to her to meet any unlawful demand for any property or
valuable security or is on account of failure by her or any person related to
her to meet such demand. 

To attract the offence under Section 498-A IPC, cruelty must be in such a nature
which is likely to drive the woman to commit suicide and the harassment should
be in connection with any unlawful demand for any property or valuable security
or is on account of failure by her or any person related to her to meet such
demand. 
        In the instant case, there is the evidence of Pws 2, 4 and 5 that the
appellant was harassing the deceased to bring additional dowry. The appellant
cannot be convicted for the offence under Section 304-B IPC because the
prosecution could not successfully establish the main ingredient of the offence
under Section 304-B IPC that the death of the deceased was within seven years of
her marriage and soon before her death, she was subjected to cruelty.  However,
there is no impediment to convict the appellant for the offence under Section
498-A IPC on the same evidence.  The learned trial court therefore is justified
in convicting and sentencing the appellant for the offence under Section 498-A
IPC though it erred in convicting and sentencing him for the offence under
Section 304-B IPC. 
For the foregoing reasons, the conviction and sentence passed against the
appellant for the offence under Section 304-B IPC is set aside and he is
acquitted of the said offence. However, the conviction and sentence passed by
the trial court against the appellant for the offence under Section 498-A IPC is
confirmed.  Since the appellant (A.1) has been in jail from 20.3.2006 and since
the appellant has already served the sentence of imprisonment imposed against
him for the offence under Section 498-A IPC, he shall be released forthwith, if
he is not required to be detained in any other case.
        In the result, the appeal is partly allowed.

                                                        ___________________________     
                                                             R.KANTHA RAO, J  
04.08.2011.
Note:
LR copy to be marked. 
B/o.
KRB
