
HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE A. GOPAL REDDY AND HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE R. KANTHA RAO                

CRIMINAL APPEAL No.1809 OF 2007      

02.11.2011 

Sambangi Tirupathi @ Tirupathirao

The State of A.P., rep. by its Public Prosecutor

Counsel for the Petitioner: Ms.Hema Jaiswal

Counsel for the Respondent: Public Prosecutor

JUDGMENT:       (per the Hon'ble Sri Justice R.Kantha Rao)
Appellant/A1 and her mother A2 were tried for the offences under Sections 498A,
304B and 302 IPC by the II Additional Sessions Judge, (Fast track Court),
Visakhapatnam.  At the conclusion of the trial, the learned Sessions Judge
acquitted A1 and A2 of the charges under Sections 498A and 304B IPC and found  
the appellant/A1 guilty for the offence under Section 302 IPC and convicted him
for the said charge and sentenced him to undergo imprisonment for life and also
to pay a fine of Rs.5,000/- and in default to undergo rigorous imprisonment for
six months.  Challenging the said order of conviction, the appellant/A1
preferred the present appeal.
2.      The case of the prosecution, in brief, is stated as follows:-
One Lakshmi (hereinafter referred to as, "the deceased"), was the wife of
appellant/A1.  A2 is the mother of A1.  The marriage of A1 with the deceased
took place on 18.06.1999 and both of them lead conjugal life happily for some
time and blessed with a son and a daughter.  As per the version of the
prosecution the parents of the deceased gave an amount of Rs.55,000/- to the
appellant as dowry, 4 tulas of gold ornaments and other bridal articles.  The
appellant was an auto driver. His auto met with an accident and thereafter the
appellant and A2 started harassing the deceased to get an amount of Rs.15,000/-
from her parents for conducting the repairs of the auto.  The demand of
additional amount in this case is not of much consequence because the learned
trial court acquitted the appellant as well as A2 for the offences under
Sections 498A and 304B IPC.  
Further, it is the case of the prosecution that the deceased developed illicit
intimacy with L.W.3 and the appellant who came to know about this was suspecting 
her fidelity.  On 01.11.2003, the deceased gave a report against the appellant
and her mother about the harassment caused to her by them.  On that it is said
that there was a compromise between the parties in the presence of elders in the
police station and the police advised the appellant and the deceased to live
amicably.  While so, on the morning of 18.11.2003 the deceased went to
agricultural field.  The appellant, who was suspecting her fidelity, followed
her and saw her with L.W.12 Vemakoti Rama Sastry.  On seeing both of them  
together, the appellant grew wild and demanded both of them to attend before the
Panchayat.  Vemakoti Ramasastry stated that there was no truth in the
allegations made by the appellant, refused to attend the panchayat and went away
from that place.  Thereafter the appellant forcibly took away the deceased
towards the village through Konda Gorja way, and in the midway he brutally
killed her by hacking her on the neck with knife.  Subsequently, P.W.1, who is
the sarpanch of the village, on coming to know about the existence of the dead
body near Kond Gorja sent a written report through the village Talyari to Rajam
police station, which is at a distance of 71/2 kilometres from the village.
Basing on the said report P.W.11 registered a case in crime No.153 of 2003 of
Rajam Police Station under Section 302 IPC and issued express F.I.R.  The C.I.
of police P.W.12 took up investigation.  After completing the investigation he
filed charge sheet.
3. In order to establish the guilt of the accused, the prosecution examined
P.Ws.1 to 13, marked Es.P1 to P22 and M.Os.1 to 3.  The accused did not propose  
to examine any defence witness, but they marked Exs.D1 and D6 on their behalf.
4.      Upon considering the entire evidence on record, the learned trial court
acquitted the appellant and A2 for the offences under Section 498A and 304B IPC,
but convicted the appellant/A! for the offence under Section 302 IPC and
sentenced him to punishment as aforementioned.  
5. We have heard the learned counsel for the appellant and the learned
Additional Public Prosecutor representing the State
6.      There being no direct witnesses to the actual occurrence, the entire case
of the prosecution rested on the circumstantial evidence. One of the
circumstances the prosecution sought to establish was that the appellant was
harassing the deceased to get some amount from her parents and that he was also 
harassing her by suspecting her fidelity on the ground that she developed
illicit intimacy with L.W.12 Vemakoti Rama Sastry.  Another circumstance the
prosecution wanted to prove was that on the date of incident i.e., on
18.11.2003, the appellant, deceased and L.W.12 were last seen by P.W.3 on the 
morning and the deceased was found dead in close proximity thereof.  The other
circumstance the prosecution sought to establish was that M.O.1 knife was
recovered by P.W.13 the Investigating Officer in the presence of P.W.10 and
L.W.18, the mediators, in pursuance of the disclosure statement made by the
appellant.  The learned trial court arrived at the conclusion that the
prosecution could be able to establish all the circumstances and they are enough
to draw a presumption of guilt against the appellant and, accordingly, convicted
the appellant for the offence under Section 302 IPC and sentenced him to
punishment. 
7.      Now in this appeal it has to be seen whether the prosecution could be able
to establish the circumstances, which are mentioned herein above, and whether
they are enough to establish the guilt of the accused.
8.      In a case which rests on circumstantial evidence all the circumstances
which the prosecution seeks to establish should be conclusive and should point
only towards the guilt of the accused without there being any scope for the
presumption of innocence of the accused.
9.      P.W.2, who is the junior paternal uncle of the deceased, and P.W.6, the
father of the deceased, however, stated in their depositions before the trial
court about the appellant harassing the deceased to bring some amount from her
parents' house and also his suspecting her fidelity and that a panchayat being
convened in the police station in the presence of elders.  However, the
independent witness who is said to be one of the elders according to the
prosecution namely P.W.4, did not support the prosecution version.  He stated in
his deposition before the trial court that his house is situated opposite to the
house of A1, but he did not know whether there were any disputes between the
appellant and the deceased about six months prior to the incident.  He also
stated that P.Ws.2 and 3 did not raise any dispute in his presence about the
alleged harassment caused by the appellant to the deceased.  This witness is
treated hostile by the prosecution.  However, P.W.7, who was a lecturer in GNR
College, Rajam, supported the prosecution version and he stated in his evidence
before the trial court that there was a compromise in the presence of elders in
Rajam Police station where at a document was reduced to writing evidencing the
compromise between the appellant and the deceased and he signed in the said 
document. 
10. From the evidence forthcoming on this aspect, it seems that there were
disputes between the appellant and the deceased.  But we are of the view that
merely because there were some disputes between the appellant and the deceased,  
who are wife and husband, it is highly difficult to presume that the appellant
had a strong motive to do away the deceased, unless there is some convincing
material on record evincing such motive.  Therefore, unless the said
circumstance was proved by the prosecution beyond reasonable doubt, it will not
be appropriate to presume that on account of the differences between the
appellant and the deceased the appellant might have killed the deceased.
11.      As regards, the other circumstance, that the deceased was last seen in
the company of the appellant, P.W.3, who was examined to prove the said 
circumstance, stated in his evidence that about three years back on one day he
noticed A1 and L.W.12 pushing each other near gedda at a distance of 25 yards
from his land.  He further deposed that he did not notice any other person
except A1 and L.W.12.  This witness is treated as hostile by the prosecution.
However, in the cross-examination this witness stated that during the
altercation between the appellant and L.W.12 the deceased was not present and
subsequently she came to the said place from their field.  Even if P.W.3
witnessed the appellant, deceased and L.W.12 together, it cannot be said that
just prior to the death of the deceased, she was last seen in the company of the
appellant by P.W.3.  P.W.3 did not mention about the date or time when he saw
the said three persons together.  Further, according to the evidence of P.W.3,
the deceased came after the altercation between A1 and L.W.12 and from the 
evidence of P.W.3 it is highly difficult to presume that the appellant had taken
away the deceased towards gedda on the date of incident.  Therefore, in our view
the prosecution failed to establish that the deceased was last seen in the
company of the appellant in close proximity of time prior to her death on the
date of incident.
12. The next aspect to be dealt with is the recovery of M.O.1 knife, which
according to the prosecution was used by the appellant in the commission of the
offence.  On this aspect, the evidence of P.W.10 the mediator discloses that on
19.11.2003 he was called to the police station, he went to the police station
and there he found A1 in the custody of police.  Thereafter he states that the
police personnel and the appellant proceeded to nearby culvert from where the
appellant picked up a knife and produced the same before the Inspector of
Police, which was seized under the cover of a mediators report.  But the
evidence of P.W.10 is inconsistent with that of the prosecution story.  P.W.13,
the investigating officer, stated that he secured P.W.10 and another mediator-
L.W.18 and on receiving prior information about the movements of the appellant
he along with P.Ws.10, L.W.18 and the police personnel proceeded to Balakaya 
valasa junction where he arrested the appellant and thereafter on interrogating
the appellant he took the mediators and the police personnel to the culvert
situated near the place of arrest where the appellant picked up a knife M.O.1
and the same was was recovered under a cover of mediators report.
13. This version of the prosecution as could be seen from the above referred
evidence is totally inconsistent on the aspect of recovery of M.O.1.  Therefore,
the prosecution in our view utterly failed to prove the factum of recovery of
M.O.1, which according to the prosecution is said to be the weapon of offence.
14. Another serious anomaly in the prosecution version is the factum of setting
the criminal law into motion.  According to P.W.1 on receiving the information
about the existence of a dead body at Konda gorja at 09:30 AM he went to the
place, saw the dead body and sent a written report through the village Talyari
to Rajam police station and basing on the said report, the S.I. of police-P.W.11
registered the case.  The evidence of P.W.11 is that he received the report at
09:30 A.M. and that P.W.1 himself personally came to the police station and
presented the report.  According to the prosecution the incident took place at
09:30 A.M. on 18.11.2003 and the distance between the place of occurrence and 
the police station, Rajam is 71/2 kilometers.  If that is so, it is impossible
for P.W.1 to go personally to the police station or send the written report to
the police station at 09:30 AM. From this what all we can understand is that
after knowing about the incident and visiting the venue of offence, the police
got prepared the report by anti timing, which is evident from the evidence of
P.Ws.1, 11 and in the F.I.R., P.W.11 mentioned that he obtained the signature of
P.W.1 simultaneously on the F.I.R. at 13:30 hours.
15. From the analysis of the above referred evidence, we are of the considered
view that the learned trial court had fallen into grave error in arriving at the
conclusion that the prosecution could be able to establish the circumstances
relied upon by it and the circumstances are enough to arrive at a decision that
the accused alone is the perpetrator of the crime.  We therefore hold that the
prosecution failed to establish any of the circumstances relied upon by it.
Even otherwise, the circumstances are not enough to establish the guilt of the
accused when they are put together. The judgment of the trial court convicting
the appellant is, thus, cannot be sustained and is liable to be set aside.
16. In the result, the Criminal Appeal is allowed. The conviction and sentence
passed by the II Additional Sessions Judge, (Fast Track Court) at Visakhapatnam
in S.C.No.56 of 2004, dated 31.10.2007, are hereby set aside.  The appellant is
found not guilty for the offence under Section 302 of IPC and he is acquitted of
the same.  He shall be set at liberty forthwith, if not required in any other
crime.  The fine amount, if any, paid by the appellant/A1 shall be refunded.

_____________________    
A. GOPAL REDDY, J    


____________________   
R. KANTHA RAO, J   
02-11-2011
