
THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE R.KANTHA RAO        

CRL.P.NO.4222 OF 2009    

14.10.2011 

N.Brahmaiah  

State of A.P. rep. by the Station House Officer, Kanigiri Police Station and
another..

>HEAD NOTE:    

Counsel for Petitioner : Sri P.Nagendra Reddy

Counsel for Respondent: The Public Prosecutor for R-1.

?Cases referred

ORDER:  

        This Criminal Petition is filed by the 1st accused in C.C.No.73 of 2009 on
the file of the Judicial First Class Magistrate, Kanigiri, Prakasham District.
2. I have heard Sri C.Padmanabha Reddy, learned senior counsel appearing for the
petitioner herein and the learned Public Prosecutor, representing the State.
3. No representation on behalf of the 2nd respondent-
de facto complainant though several adjournments were granted.
4. Brief facts relevant for considering the criminal petition are that according
to the petitioner, he is the accused No.1 in Crime No.111 of 2009 on the file of
Kanigiri police station, Prakasham District, for the offences punishable under
Sections 498-A, 506 read with Section 34 IPC and Section 4 of the Dowry
Prohibition Act, 1961.  The marriage of the petitioner with the
de facto complainant was performed in the year 2000.  After marriage, the
petitioner had put up family in London as he was working in London by the time
of marriage.  Later, in the year 2003, a daughter was borne, and in the year
2004, a son was borne.  Subsequently, there arose some misunderstandings between   
the petitioner and the de facto complainant (R-2) and they were constrained to
live separately as per the orders of the Court.
It is further submitted by the petitioner that the 2nd respondent-de facto
complainant made a complaint to the police against the petitioner in writing and
the police after conducting investigation, closed the file on 16-03-2005 as
undetected crime.  Later, the petitioner filed divorce case and the Croydon
Country Court granted divorce on 01-08-2006 dissolving the marriage between the
petitioner and the de facto complainant and the orders passed by the said Court
have become final.
It is further submitted that the de facto complainant subsequently came to India
in the year 2005 itself with prior permission of the Court and did not go back
to London.  She also filed maintenance case and some protection petition before
the Court in London and the same were dismissed.  Therefore, according to the
petitioner, there was no relationship between him and the de facto complainant
since 2005 onwards.  It is further submitted that on 03-05-2009, the petitioner
came to his native place, and at that time, the de facto complainant made a
complaint in Kanigiri police station on 06-05-2009.  Basing on the complaint,
police registered a case in Crime No.111 of 2009 for the alleged offences under
Sections 498-A, 506 read with Section 34 IPC and Section 4 of Dowry Prohibition
Act, 1961.  Police arrested the petitioner on 07-05-2009 and subsequently he was
released on bail by the Judicial First Class Magistrate, Kanigiri, with certain
conditions.
5. Sri C.Padmanabha Reddy, learned senior counsel for the petitioner, submitted
that Kanigiri police have no jurisdiction to entertain the crime as no part of
offence and no cause of action arose in their limits.  According to him, even as
per the de facto complainant the alleged harassment took place in London, in
respect of which, she had already made a complaint to the police, London, and
they after conducting investigation, closed the file as undetected crime.  The
learned senior counsel would further submit that Croydon Country Court granted
divorce and the de facto complainant already left U.K. in 2005 itself and there
is no relationship between the petitioner and the de facto complainant.
Submitting as above, the learned senior counsel sought to quash C.C.No.73 of
2009 on the file of Judicial First Class Magistrate, Kanigiri.
6. There is no dispute about the fact that even according to the complaint
lodged by the de facto complainant to the police, the entire incident took place
in London.  She is a resident of Chennai and has been residing there since 2005
after coming over to Chennai from London.  The petitioner also filed a copy of a
decree of divorce granted by the Croydon Country Court.  Thus, on the date of
the alleged incident, the marriage between the petitioner and the de facto
complainant was dissolved by a decree of competent Court which is binding on
both the parties.
7. The learned senior counsel relied on a decision reported in Pashaura Singh v.
State of Punjab1, wherein the Supreme Court held in paras 9 to 11 as follows:
"9. Insofar as offence under Section 498-A is concerned, the High Court in its
earlier order dated April 29, 2004 in the petition filed by the family members,
observed thus:
"I have perused the First Information Report registered against the petitioners.
The only allegation against the petitioner is that they started harassing
Kamaljeet Kaur Gill for not bringing more dowry.  No demand of dowry has been
made by the petitioners, nor is there any specific entrustment, as alleged in
the First Information Report of dowry articles to the petitioners.  Parties have
divorced each other, as per the order of the Supreme Court o British Columbia
(Annexure P-1).  Order is dated February 25, 2001.  It is after this divorce
that Pishora Singh got married in India on January 2, 2002."
10. Moreover, in the affidavit of Kamaljeet Kaur referred to hereinabove, there
is not a word about demand of dowry or harassment on account of dowry by the 
appellant.
11. We have no hesitation in holding that the first information report lodged by
Balwant Singh is manifestly attended with mala fides and actuated with ulterior
motive.  The prosecution of the appellant is not at all legitimate, rather it is
frivolous, vexatious, unwarranted and abuse of process.  The appellant has made
out a case for quashing the first information report and all subsequent
proceedings pursuant thereto."
8. The learned senior counsel also relied upon a judgment reported in Thota
Venkateswarlu Vs. State of A.P. Tr. Principal Secretary2, wherein the Supreme
Court, in para-6 of the Judgment, held as follows:
"Learned counsel urged that Section 188 Cr.P.C. recognizes that when an offence
is committed outside India by a citizen of India, he would have to be dealt with
as if such offence had been committed in any place within India at which he may
be found. Learned counsel, however, laid stress on the proviso which indicates
that no such offence could be inquired into or tried in India except with the
previous sanction of the Central Government [Emphasis Supplied]. Learned counsel
submitted that in respect of an offence committed outside India, the same could
not be proceeded with without previous sanction of the Central Government and
that, accordingly, even if any of the offences was allegedly committed inside
India, trial in respect of the same could continue, but the trial in respect of
the offences committed outside India could not be continued, without the
previous sanction of the Central Government."
9. In view of the fact that in the present case, the entire incident even
according to the de facto complainant (R-2) took place in London, the offence
being committed outside India, the trial in any Court in India cannot be
proceeded with beyond cognizance stage without previous sanction of the Central
Government.  Further, in her report to the police, the de facto complainant
suppressed the material facts viz., that there was a divorce of decree passed by
the Croydon Country Court on the petition filed by the 1st accused (petitioner)
dissolving the marriage between the petitioner and the de facto complainant,
that she filed a criminal case and also a maintenance case against the
petitioner in London and the police after investigation, closed the file as
undetected crime insofar as the criminal case is concerned and that she was also
refused maintenance. 
10. In view of suppression of material facts as above stated, by the de facto
complainant (R-2) and also as the Judicial Magistrate of First Class, Kanigiri,
Prakasham District, has no jurisdiction to try the offence against the
petitioner without previous sanction of the Central Government, keeping
proceedings on the file of the said Court any longer is nothing but abuses of
process of law.  Therefore, all the proceedings in C.C.No.73 of 2009 on the file
of Judicial First Class Magistrate, Kanigiri, Prakasham District, are quashed.
11. Accordingly, the Criminal Petition is allowed.




______________________    
14th October 2011                                          JUSTICE R.KANTHA RAO     

?1 AIR 2010 SUPREME COURT 922       
2 III (2011) CCR 452 (SC)
