
HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE V. ESWARAIAH AND HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE NOUSHAD ALI
               
WRIT PETITION No.22717 of 2011   

15-11-2012 

Chaluvadi Murali Krishna and another

District Legal Service Authority, Prakasam District, Ongole, rep. by its 1st
Additional District Judge cum Presiding Judge, Prakasam District, and others.

Counsel For the Petitioners: Sri P.V. Krishnaiah Sri Kotagiri Sreedhar

Counsel For Respondent Nos.2 to 14:  Sri T. Sreedhar

<Gist :

Head Note : 

? CITATIONS : 
1. (2005) 6 SCC 478 
2. (2012) 2 SCC 51 
3. (2008) 2 SCC 660 
4. 2010 (1) ALD 277 DB 

ORDER: (per Hon'ble Sri Justice Noushad Ali)
        
1.      Award passed by the District Legal Services Authority, Prakasam District,
the 1st respondent herein, dated 18.05.2011 in PLC No.657/2011 in Lok Adalat
Case No.870/2011, resolving the dispute based on the compromise arrived at
between the petitioners and respondents 2 and 3 herein, is under challenge in
this writ petition.
2.      Several cases are coming up before this Court invoking the extraordinary
jurisdiction of this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India
challenging the awards passed by Lok Adalats, though the awards are passed 
pursuant to the compromise between the parties. In most of the cases the parties
are alleging that the awards were thrust on them against their willingness or
that awards are obtained by the opposite parties by fraud and coercion.
Allegations to the said effect are often made without there being any basis. The
parties hardly realize that fraud and coercion are the elements which shall have
to be established on the basis of acceptable evidence adduced by the parties in
a competent Court of law and the High Court while exercising its power of
judicial review under Article 226 of the Constitution does not act as a trial
Court or as an appellate Court and review the orders on the mere assertions of a
party, however strong they are, and therefore cannot upset the Lok Adalat awards
in a routine manner and frustrate the very purpose of the Legal Services
Authorities Act. Therefore, we propose to broadly traverse the salient features
of the Act and the limitation in maintaining a writ petition against an award of
a Lok Adalat.
3.      Lok Adalats are constituted as an impetus to the Constitutional Philosophy
contained in the Directive Principles of State Policy. The Directive Principles
in Part-IV of the Constitution of India contained in Articles 37 to 51-A are
declared to be fundamental in the governance of the country and a duty is
enjoined upon the State to ensure the operation of the legal system to promote
justice on the basis of equal opportunity by providing free Legal Aid, by
suitable legislation or schemes or in any other way to ensure that opportunities
or securing justice are not denied to any citizen by reason of economic or other
disabilities. It is on the touchstone of this principle of governance, Legal
Services Authorities Act, 1987 has been enacted. Statutory Authorities are
constituted under the Act at the National, State and District level so as to
provide for the effective monitoring of Legal Aid Programmes and to supervise
the effective implementation of the Legal Aid Schemes. The Statutory support to
the Lok Adalats given under the Act would not only reduce the burden of arrears
of work in regular Courts, but would also take justice to the doorsteps of the
poor and the needy and make justice quicker and less expensive.
4.      In order to sustain the credibility of the Authorities, highest
Constitutional and Judicial Functionaries are entrusted with the functions under
the Act. At the National level, Central Authority is constituted consisting of
the Chief Justice of India as the Patron-in-Chief and a serving or retired Judge
of the Supreme Court to be nominated by the President of India in consultation
with the Chief Justice of India as the Executive Chairman, and other Members
possessing the prescribed qualifications to be nominated by the Government of
India in consultation with the Chief Justice of India. Similarly, a State
Authority is constituted by the Chief Justice of the High Court as the Patron-
in-Chief and a serving or retired Judge of the High Court to be nominated by the
Governor in consultation with the Chief Justice of the High Court as the
Executive Chairman, and other Members possessing the prescribed qualifications
to be nominated by the State Government in consultation with the Chief Justice
of the High Court. Similarly, a District Legal Services Authority is constituted
at the District level with the District Judge as its Chairman and other Members
with the prescribed qualifications to be nominated by the State Government in
consultation with the Chief Justice of the High Court. Legal Services Committees
are constituted at the Supreme Court level, High Court level, District level and
Taluk level to perform the assigned functions. The composition of the Legal
Services Authorities consisting of the highest Constitutional and Judicial
Functionaries is aimed at inducing confidence in the litigant public and to
ensure their cooperation for the settlement of disputes without recourse to the
expensive and time consuming litigation in the regular Courts. The Act does not
compel an unwilling litigant to invoke the remedies under the Act.
5.      Under Section 19 of the Act, a Lok Adalat assumes jurisdiction in any
case, whether pending or not before any Court for which the Lok Adalat is
organized, except in a case or matter relating to a non-compoundable offence
under any law. Under Section 20, Cognizance of a case relating to a pending
matter in a Court can be taken by the Lok Adalat in any case referred to it
where one of the parties thereof makes an application to the Court for referring
the case to the Lok Adalat for settlement or by the Court itself on its
satisfaction as to the prima-facie chances of settlement or the appropriateness
of the matter for being taken cognizance of by the Lok Adalat. Similarly anyone
of the parties to a matter not falling within the jurisdiction of, and is not
brought before any Court, may make an application to the Authority or Committee
organizing the Lok Adalat and refer the same to the Lok Adalat for
determination, in both situations, after giving a reasonable opportunity of
being heard to the parties. Under Section 21, an award so passed is final and
binding on all the parties to the dispute and no appeal shall be to any Court
against the award.
6.      Lok Adalat Award is not a result of a contest on merits just as a regular
suit by a court. On all force, the endeavour is only to see that the disputes
are narrowed down and make the final settlement so that the parties are not
again driven to further litigation. Though the award of a Lok Adalat is not a
result of a contest on merit, it is equal and on par with a decree on compromise
and will have the same binding effect and be conclusive. Just as a compromise
decree cannot be challenged in a regular appeal, the award of the Lok Adalat,
being akin to the same, cannot be challenged by any regular remedies available
under law, including by invoking Article 226 of the constitution of India and
challenging the correctness of the award on any ground - P.T. THOMAS vs. THOMAS   
JOB1. 
7.      Award of the Lok Adalat does not mean any independent verdict or opinion
arrived at by any decision making process. The making of award is merely an
administrative act of incorporating the terms of settlement or compromise agreed
upon by the parties in the presence of Lok Adalat in the form of an executable
order under the seal and signature of Lok Adalat - K.N. GOVINDAN KUTTY MENON vs.    
C.D. SHAJI2. 
8.      Thus a party having settled the matter in Lok Adalat and obtained an Award
on compromise is not entitled to resile from the same. The award attains
finality as regards the dispute between the parties and binds them all. A
judgment by consent or default is as effective an estoppel on the parties as a
judgment whereby the Court exercises its mind on a contested case - STATE OF  
PUNJAB vs. JALOUR SINGH3.     
9.      From a combined reading of Sections 19, 20 and 21 of the Act, it is clear
that an award made by a Lok Adalat on compromise is final and binding on the
parties to the dispute and it is not permissible for the parties to resile from
the compromise. Hence, award of the Lok Adalat cannot be challenged by invoking 
the remedy under Article 226 or 227 of the Constitution of India.
10.     There may be exceptional cases where an award was passed by a Lok Adalat   
without jurisdiction or without a compromise between the parties. Similarly
there may be cases wherein award may have been obtained by impersonation, fraud  
etc. In all such exceptional cases a writ under Article 226 or 227 may lie to
the High Court, provided they are clinchingly unequivocally proved on the basis
of material placed before the Court. There may be yet another situation where an
award may have been obtained by connivance, defeating the rights of a third
party, in such cases also a writ would lie, provided however, there is prima
facie, evidence of collusion, fraud and misrepresentation. Even in such cases,
if the question involves complicating issues requiring evidence, a writ cannot
be an appropriate remedy. In all the aforesaid situations wherein allegations of
fraud, misrepresentation, coercion etc. are made, remedy of such parties would
be to initiate a separate suit within the period of limitation for declaration
under Section 34 of the Specific Relief Act, 1963. (BATCHU SUBBA LAKSHMI VS.    
SANNIDHI SRINIVASALU4)     
11.     Coming to the instant cast, the Parties to the dispute are closely
related. The petitioners are the husband and wife. Petitioner No.2 is the eldest
daughter of respondents 2 and 3 (parents-in-law of petitioner No.1). Respondents
6 and 8 are two other daughters of respondents 2 and 3, who were given in
marriage to respondents 5 and 7. Respondents 5 and 7 are own brothers.
12.     According to the material averments in the affidavit filed in support of
the writ petition, the firm, viz., M/s. Sri Balaji Electricals and Sanitary ware
belonged to respondents 2 and 3.  Petitioner No.1 took up the management of the
firm allegedly when the business was in doldrums on the proposal of the 2nd
respondent from June/July 2009. The 5th respondent was assisting in the business
in the first instance, later respondents 2 and 3 apportioned 25% share in the
business in the name of petitioner No.1 and 20% share in the name of 2nd
petitioner. Similarly, respondents 5 and 6 were also given a share in the same
proportion and the remaining share of 10% was retained by respondents 2 and 3.
Accordingly a partnership deed was registered in the office of the Registrar of
Firms vide registration No.22/2009 dated 5.07.2010. Thus the 1st petitioner and
respondent No.5 became the managing partners and respondents 2, 3, 5 and 6  
became the partners of the firm.
13.     The further writ averments are that misunderstandings arose between the
parties after the marriage of the youngest daughter i.e., the 8th respondent
herein, with respondent No.7. With a view to gain control over the business of
the firm, respondents 5 and 7, who are brothers, started creating an impression
that petitioner No.1 was not running the business to its potentiality with a
mala fide intention to gain control over the business firm. In these
circumstances, respondents 2, 5, 6 and 8 colluded with other family members and
started making baseless allegations to the effect that petitioner No.1 was
harassing the 2nd petitioner and demanding more money. Respondent No.2 started  
asserting that the entire business belonged to him and he and the 5th respondent
started collecting the dues payable by the creditors of the firm for their
personal use, and making petitioner No.1 alone responsible for the liabilities
of the firm. As a consequence, the business responsibility was fully on the
shoulders of petitioner No.1 and unable to answer the creditors, he closed the
shop on 11.05.2011 and 12.05.2011. At that stage, respondents 2 and 3 approached 
the Additional S.P., Ongole on 11.05.2011 and made a complaint as if the 1st
petitioner has assaulted them and harassing the 2nd petitioner demanding
additional dowry and that he was taking steps to stop the marriage of their
youngest daughter-8th respondent herein and trespassed into their house. On the
basis of the said complaint a crime was registered by the 15th respondent in
Crime No.98/2011 dated 11.05.2011 for the offences under Sections 453, 323, 506
and 509 of I.P.C., in the I Town P.S Ongole.
14.     Allegedly on 16.05.2011 a home guard, viz., Babu Rao came to the business 
premises and broke open the shop and trespassed into the business premises. On  
being informed by the 2nd petitioner, the 16th respondent, who is a constable
arrived at the scene, but he too threatened the family members. The 4th
respondent herein, who is the father of the 2nd respondent herein also arrived
at the scene and yielded threats to his family members and manhandled his own 
grand-daughter, i.e., petitioner No.2 herein.
15.     It is further alleged that on the basis of the police complaint given by
respondents 2 and 3, the 15th respondent, viz., S.I. of Police, started
interfering in the matter, allegedly after receiving a huge bribe, and
pressurized him to return the business  to respondents 2 and 3. The 1st
petitioner therefore was advised by the 2nd petitioner to obey the directions of
the 2nd respondent and the advise given by the police, particularly, the 15th
respondent herein. Hence out of fear and intimidation and the threat of the 2nd
respondent through police, the 1st petitioner obliged the directions and
approached an advocate, and got a letter addressed to the District Legal
Services Authority, the 1st respondent herein to the effect that he and his wife
are willing to retire from the partnership and accordingly requested to pass an
award. A letter was filed on 17.05.2011. Respondents 2 and 3 visited the Lok
Adalat Court on 18.05.2011 and an award was passed on the same day. Respondents    
2 and 3 filed another petition in another Court of Lok Adalat and got closed the
criminal case F.I.R.No.98 of 2011, which was filed against him.
16.  Counter affidavit is filed by respondent No.2, on his own behalf and on
behalf of respondent Nos.3 to 14, denying the aforesaid allegations. It is
stated that the petitioners and respondent Nos.2 and 3 volunteered for a
settlement before the Lok Adalat and the Lok Adalat passed the award strictly in
accordance with law. The award is binding on the parties and the petitioners,
who voluntarily invoked the jurisdiction of the authority, cannot be allowed to
circumvent the same on the basis of false allegations. Petitioner No.1 is
unusually ambitious and a greedy person and succeeded in extracting money in the 
name of partnership and not satisfied with the same, he has challenged the award
unscrupulously for more wrongful gain. The allegations made by the petitioners
are false and the allegations, if entertained, would nullify the sanctity of the
Lok Adalat. It is stated that the writ petition is filed only to settle personal
scores against respondent Nos.2 to 8 and to harass all the family members.
Respondent Nos.4 to 8 are impleaded unnecessarily though no relief is sought
against them. Similarly, respondent No.9, who is an employee of the firm,
respondent Nos.10 to 12 are having mere acquaintance and respondent Nos.13 and  
14, who are the relatives of respondent Nos.2 and 3, are impleaded without any
purpose. Petitioner No.2 was made to suffer in the hands of petitioner No.1 and
demanded a share in the properties of respondent Nos.2 and 3 threatening the
future of petitioner No.2 and after the marriage of respondent No.6 with
respondent No.5, which was to the dislike of petitioner No.1, he stepped up his
torture against respondent Nos.2 and 3 and unable to bear the same, respondent
Nos.2 and 3 had to retire from the business and parted with a bigger share to
them. Petitioner No.1 was against the marriage of respondent No.8 with
respondent No.7. He was enraged after the marriage of respondent No.8 with
respondent No.7. Unable to bear the harassment of petitioner No.1, respondent
Nos.2 and 3 gave complaint to the Assistant Superintendent of Police on 9.5.2011
in inevitable circumstances. Though F.I.R.No.98/2011 was registered, the police
gently handled the case as it involved the future of petitioner No.2. Some
relatives and family friends counselled petitioner No.1 and he thereupon
demanded Rs.35,00,000/- on the pretext that he wanted to settle his own
business. Respondent Nos.2 and 3 were constrained to agree the proposal to avoid
complications and controversies. Pursuant thereto, he approached the Lok Adalat
and the award was passed after brief negotiations and discussions. The business
of the firm emanated out of the hard work and pain of respondent Nos.2 and 4 for
over 30 years and it had to be parted to petitioner No.1 in tragic
circumstances. 
17.     Sri Kotagiri Sreedhar, learned counsel for the petitioners urged two
grounds in assailing the award. Firstly, he would contend that the Legal
Services Authority is not competent to deal with a pre-litigation case.
According to the learned counsel the Legal Services Authority has no power to
entertain an application for settlement of dispute, unless the case has been
referred by a Court.
18.     Sri T. Sreedhar, learned counsel appearing for respondent Nos.2 to 14
would refute the said contentions and urge that a pre-litigation case is
perfectly maintainable.
19.     In order to decide the said contention, it is useful to refer to the
provisions of Sections 19 and 20 of the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987, to
the extent relevant, which read as follows:

"19. Organisation of Lok Adalats:--
(1) to (4) ..................
(5) A Lok Adalat shall have jurisdiction to determine and to arrive at a
compromise or settlement between the parties to a dispute in respect of-
 (i) any case pending before; or
(ii) any matter which is falling within the jurisdiction of, and
     is not brought before,

any court for which the Lok Adalat is organized:

        Provided that the Lok Adalat shall have no jurisdiction in respect of any
case or matter relating to an offence not compoundable under any law.]

20. Cognizance of cases by Lok Adalats:-- (1) Where in any case referred to in
clause (i) of sub-section (5) of section 19-
(i) (a) the parties thereof agree; or
    (b) one of the parties thereof makes an application to the court, for
referring the case to the Lok Adalat for settlement and if such court is prima-
facie satisfied that there are chances of such settlement; or
(ii) the court is satisfied that the matter is an appropriate one to be taken
cognizance of by the Lok Adalat,
     the court shall refer the case to the Lok Adalat:
                Provided that no case shall be referred to the Lok Adalat under sub-
clause (b) of clause (i) or clause (ii) by such court except after giving a
reasonable opportunity of being heard to the parties.
        
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force, the Authority or Committee organizing the Lok Adalat under sub-section
(1) of section 19 may, on receipt of an application from any one of the parties
to any matter referred to in clause (ii) of sub-section (5) of section 19 that
such matter needs to be determined by a Lok Adalat, refer such matter to the Lok
Adalat, for determination:
        Provided that no matter shall be referred to the Lok Adalat except after
giving a reasonable opportunity of being heard to the other party.

        (3) Where any case is referred to a Lok Adalat under sub-section (1) or
where a reference has been made to it under sub-section (2), the Lok Adalat
shall proceed to dispose of the case or matter and arrive at a compromise or
settlement between the parties."


  20.   A reading of Section 19 (5) makes it clear that a Lok Adalat is competent
to deal with the dispute in two situations (i) any case pending before any
Court; and (ii) any matter, which is falling within the jurisdiction of a Court
and is not brought before it. These two situations are different, one relates to
a case pending before a Court; and the other where there is no case pending in
any Court. In both the situations, Lok Adalat has jurisdiction to determine the
dispute; and arrive at a settlement.
21.     Similarly, Section 20 of the Act provides that Lok Adalat can take
cognizance of a case in two different situations, in one situation it can take
cognizance of any case referred to under Section 19(5)(i) of the Act and in
relation to a pending matter on an application made by one of the parties to the
dispute; and the other, the Lok Adalat can entertain an application from one of
the parties to a dispute referred to in Section 19(5)(ii) of the Act.
22.     Therefore, the aforesaid provisions i.e., Sections 19(5)(ii) and 20(2) of
the Act unambiguously confer jurisdiction on a Lok Adalat even without reference
of the dispute by a Court.
23.     Secondly, learned counsel for the petitioners would contend that the award
was obtained under threat and coercion and the same is not based on the
willingness of the petitioners.
24.     Averments of the petitioners are elaborately stated in the preceding
paras. On the basis of the said averments, the petitioners allege that the award
of the Lok Adalat was obtained under threat and intimidation and the award was
not based on their willingness. The petitioners seek to contend that an
inference should be drawn in this regard from the circumstances of the case.
According to the petitioners the events, viz., lodging of complaint with the
police, registration of crime on 11.05.2011, visiting of home guard Babu Rao by
trespassing into the business premises on 16.05.2011 and the threats yielded by
the 15th respondent on the same day, and petition filed by respondents 2 and 3
before the Lok Adalat on 18.05.2011 and closure of criminal case on the same
day, i.e., on 18.05.2011, are sufficient to infer that the Lok Adalat award was
passed under threat and intimidation. Therefore according to the petitioners the
said award should be set aside.
25.     We gave an earnest consideration to the said contention in the light of
the material and reject the same as unfounded.
26.     Firstly, it is to be noted that the allegations made by the petitioners in
this regard are categorically denied by the respondents. There cannot be any
dispute that coercion and fraud are facts which lie in the factual arena and the
same shall have to be established on the basis of evidence. A mere ipse dixit
statement alleging coercion or fraud, however strong it is, cannot find
acceptance by a Court of Law, because assertions themselves do not constitute
evidence. Further, a fact asserted by a party and denied by its opponent becomes
a disputed question of fact and, therefore, the burden lies on the  party to
prove the said fact, which it has asserted as true.
27.     In the instant case, the petitioners have not filed any material to
support the allegation and infuse confidence of the Court.
28.     On the other hand, it is not possible to give any credence to the
allegation. If really threat was yielded by respondent No.15 or by any other
police official, petitioner No.1 would not have maintained silence. Admittedly,
he himself got prepared the application through an Advocate for filing before
the Lok Adalat. Both the petitioners were present before the Lok Adalat and
affixed their signatures. The Lok Adalat was presided over by an Additional
District Judge and 2 other Advocates. The petitioners would not have lost the
opportunity to complain about the alleged coercion and refused to affix their
signatures. Further-more, the award was passed on 18.5.2011 and it is difficult
to believe that the petitioners would have kept quiet without making any
complaint immediately thereafter. Further, if really the respondents were bent
upon exerting coercion on the petitioners, there is no reason why they could
have withdrawn the criminal complaint against petitioner No.1. We have,
therefore, no hesitation to reject the contention on behalf of the petitioners
that the award was obtained under coercion.
29.     Therefore, the case on hand does not fall under the category of
exceptional cases to maintain a writ petition under Article 226 or 227 of the
Constitution of India. No material is placed by the petitioners even to show a
prima facie case of threat and coercion. We are convinced that during the course
of hearing the petitioners have invoked the writ remedy knowing fully well that
it is not possible to prove the allegations in a suit.
30.     We are inclined to believe that petitioner No.1 is a greedy person, who
wants to thrive at the cost of his father-in-law, the 2nd petitioner herein. He
could succeed in gaining control over the business of his father-in-law and
became the Managing Partner without investing a rupee of his own. There is no
difficulty in inferring that he felt threatened after the entry of respondents 5
and 7, who are his co-brothers, into the business and exerted pressure for a
bounty and the same has resulted in the controversy. We have no reason to
believe that the petitioner No.1, who is a highly educated person, would have
succumbed to coercion. It is not known as to why he has impleaded respondents 4, 
9, 10, 11, 12, 13 and 14, who are in no way connected with the dispute, against
whom no relief is claimed in the writ petition. Apparently the petitioner has
filed this writ petition with a mala fide intention to harass them. We are
therefore convinced that it is a fit case to award Rs.10,000/- exemplary costs.
31.     For the foregoing reasons, the writ petition is dismissed with exemplary
costs of Rs.10,000/- (Rupees ten thousand only). The petitioners shall pay the
costs to the credit of the A.P. Legal Services Authority, Hyderabad, within a
period of three weeks from today.
32.     In view of disposal of writ petition, W.P.M.P.Nos.27771, 27772, 27773,
27774 of 2011 are dismissed as unnecessary. 
_______________________    
JUSTICE V. ESWARAIAH.     
______________________    
JUSTICE NOUSHAD ALI.     
15th November, 2012.
