
HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE K.G.SHANKAR       

Criminal Petition No.10942 of 2009

26-7-2012 

U.Mahalakshmi, Kamalapuri Colony, Hyderabad   and another   

The State of Andhra Pradesh,  Rep. by Police, Women Police Station, Nalgonda, 
Through Public Prosecutor, High Court of Andhra Pradesh and another 

Counsel for the petitioners: Sri P.S.P.Suresh Kumar
                                                
Counsel for respondent No.1: Public Prosecutor, High Court of A.P.

Counsel for respondent No.2: Sri Pottigari Sridhar Reddy
        
<Gist : 

>Head Note: 

? Case referred:
Nil.

Order:

        The petitioners seek for quashment of C.C.No.282 of 2008 on the file of
the Special Judicial Magistrate of First Class (for Prohibition and Excise
Cases), Nalgonda. 
The 2nd respondent is the de facto complainant.
The 2nd respondent laid complaint against three accused.  The 1st accused is her
husband.  Accused 2 and 3, who are the elder sisters of the 1st accused, are the
petitioners in this petition.  The 2nd respondent laid a complaint making
allegations against the accused for the offences under Sections 498-A and 506
IPC as well as under Sections 3 and 4 of the Dowry Prohibition Act.  The same
was registered as Crime No.80 of 2007 on the file of the Women Police Station,
Nalgonda.  Subsequently, charge-sheet was laid.  The learned Judicial Magistrate
of First Class took the case on file as C.C.No.282 of 2008.
The petitioners consequently seek for the quashment of the case.

        2. The marriage between the 2nd respondent and the 1st accused was  
solemnized on 03-4-2002 as can be seen from the copy of the Wedding Card.  
However, in the complaint, the 2nd respondent claimed that the marriage was
solemnized on 03-4-2001.  Sri P.S.P.Suresh Kumar, learned counsel for the
petitioners, contended that the whole complaint is a make believe story and that
the
2nd respondent did not even mention the correct date of the marriage.  I am
afraid that the date of marriage as shown in the complaint perhaps was a
typographical mistake as the date of marriage was on 03-4-2002 whereas it was
shown in the complaint that the marriage was solemnized on 03-4-2001.

        3. However, the learned counsel for the petitioners contended that the
Police did not conduct proper investigation and that they blindly followed the
complaint, so much so, the charge-sheet also discloses as if the marriage was
solemnized on 03-4-2001.  I do not wish to go into this controversy at this
stage.

        4. The main contention of the learned counsel for the petitioners is that
as no overt acts were attributed against the accused 2 and 3, who are the
petitioners herein, the case against the accused 2 and 3 is liable to be closed.
He also submitted that when the 1st accused, who is the husband of the 2nd
respondent, breathed his last, prosecuting his sisters-accused 2 and 3 is
nothing but abuse of process of law.  The complaint alleged that the petitioners
instigated the husband of the
2nd respondent to demand further dowry.  The complaint further alleged that the
2nd respondent was driven out of the house by her husband and by the
petitioners.
In respect of the conduct of the petitioners, there is no time or date of the
incident.  A bald and sweeping allegation is made against the petitioners that
they instigated their brother to demand more dowry and that they joined their
brother in driving out the
2nd respondent from the matrimonial home. 

        5. In both the circumstances, the husband of the 2nd respondent is the
main culprit; the petitioners 1 and 2 more or less are abettors.  When the case
against the main accused stands abetted on account of the death of the main
accused, I am afraid that it is not just and reasonable to proceed against the
petitioners.

        6. Further, I agree with the contention of the learned counsel for the
petitioners that the allegations against the petitioners are bald and do not
call for any prosecution against the petitioners.

        7. The learned counsel for the petitioners also submitted that this case
was foisted by the
2nd respondent as a counter-blast to the divorce case filed by the 1st accused.
While the 1st accused filed a case for divorce against the 2nd respondent in
April, 2007, the complaint in the present case was filed on 17-5-2007.  Again, I
do not deem it appropriate to consider this aspect where the petition is liable
to be disposed of otherwise.

        8. As already pointed out, the allegations against the petitioners in the
complaint are bald and superficial.  I, therefore, consider it appropriate to
hold that no prima facie case is made out against the petitioners from the
complaint of the 2nd respondent where the husband of the 2nd respondent, who was 
the 1st accused, is no more.  I consider that this criminal petition deserves to
be closed against the petitioners as the same became superfluous on account of
the death of their brother.  The criminal petition consequently is allowed.  The
case in C.C.No.282 of 2008 on the file of the Special Judicial Magistrate of
First Class (for Prohibition and Excises Cases), Nalgonda, against the
petitioners 1 and 2 stands quashed.


___________________   
K.G.SHANKAR, J.   
26th July, 2012.
