
THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE G. KRISHNA MOHAN REDDY            

CRIMINAL PETITION No.9385 of 2010    

04-10-2012 

Medi Koteswara Prasad  

Medi Manemma and others   

Counsel for the petitioner:Sri K. Chaidambaram

Counsel for Respondent Nos.1 and 2: Sri Siva Sankara Rao Borra 
Counsel for Respondent No.3:            Public Prosecutor

<Gist:

>Head Note: 

?Cases referred:
NIL

ORDER:  
This Criminal Petition is filed under Section 482 of Cr.P.C. to quash
proceedings in D.V.C.No.12 of 2010 (DVC) on the file of the Court of II
Additional Judicial Magistrate of First Class, Tenali, Guntur District.
2.      The petitioner herein is the respondent and the respondents herein are the
petitioners in the DVC.  For the sake of convenience, I refer the parties as
arrayed in the DVC.
3.      The complaint was filed under Section 12 of the Protection of Women from
Domestic Violence Act, 2005 (for short 'the Act'), for granting the following
reliefs under Sections 19, 20 and 22 of the Act:
1. Residence order i.e., alternate accommodation/rent of the same level at
Rs.1,000/- per month in terms of 19(F) of the Act;
2. Maintenance of Rs.4,000/- per month to each petitioner in total Rs.8,000/-
per month under Section 20(b) &(c) of the Act; and
3. Compensation of Rs.5,00,000/- under Section 22 of the Act.

4.      It is necessary to briefly note the facts of the case in this context,
they are as follows:
        The petitioners are the wife and son of the respondent.  The first
petitioner married the respondent on 29-08-1989.
At that time the parents of the first petitioner gave a sum of Rs.70,000/-
towards Pasupukumkuma which was entrusted in fact to the respondent for the 
benefit of the family in the presence of elders apart from giving gold ornaments
and household articles worth Rs.40,000/-.  It is claimed that the marriage was
immediately consummated whereas during the course of marital life they begot the
second petitioner.  It is alleged that thereafter the respondent subjected the
first petitioner to mental and physical harassment for bringing amounts from her
parents towards dowry.  It is also alleged that the respondent developed illegal
contacts with one Estheru Rani following which he threatened the first
petitioner to give divorce.  It is further alleged that the respondent having
developed aversion towards the first petitioner made several attempts to get rid
of her whereas on one occasion in that context he tried to tie her neck with a
rope, but fortunately she escaped from him. It is further alleged that on 30-03-
2007 the respondent in a drunken state beat the first petitioner for selling her
parents land and paying the corresponding sale proceeds to him threatening that
unless the demand was met with, he would give divorce to her following which she
gave a report to the SHO, Taluka Police Station, for necessary action.  It is
further alleged that ultimately he deserted her.  Further it is claimed that the
respondent being a railway employee gets a salary of Rs.202,000/- per month
whereas the first petitioner is not having any means to maintain herself and the
child by reason of which she is to be provided with necessary monetary relief
and compensation under Section 20 and 22 of the Act apart from providing
accommodation under Section 19 of the Act. 
5.      It is represented on behalf of the respondent that the respondent filed
D.O.P.No.230 of 2009 on the file of the Court of District Judge, Guntur for
granting a decree of divorce dissolving their marriage under Section
10(1)(i)(ix)(x) of Divorce Act, 1869 which was allowed on 12-08-2010 on contest
by reason of which the complaint is not tenable.  It is admitted by learned
counsel for the petitioners that the decree of divorce granted in the said O.P.
became final.
        6.      Therefore, it is to be seen as to whether the DVC is maintainable in
view of the grant of divorce in favour of the respondent against the first
petitioner or for any other reasons.
        7.      Here the relevant provisions of the Act are to be taken into
consideration.
        8.      Section 2(a) of the Act contemplates that "aggrieved person" means
any woman who is, or has been in a domestic relationship with the respondent and
who alleges to have been subjected to any act to domestic violence by the
respondent.  Therefore, there should be domestic relationship between the
aggrieved person and the respondent apart from the question of subjecting the
aggrieved person to any act of domestic violence by the respondent.  This makes
it very clear that when such relationship is not there, the question of filing
the complaint correspondingly or prosecuting it with reference to granting any
reliefs under the Act does not arise at all.  Clause (f) thereunder defines
"Domestic relationship" as meant a relationship between two persons who live or
have, at any point of time, lived together in a shred household, when they are
related by consanguinity, marriage, or through a relationship in the nature of
marriage, adoption or are family members living together as a joint family.  By
virtue of clause (g) thereunder "Domestic violence"  has the same meaning as
assigned to it in Section 3 of the Act.  Section 3 of the Act contemplates that
for the purpose of this Act, any act, omission or commission or conduct of the
respondent shall constitute domestic violence in case if-
(a) harms or injures or endangers the health, safety, life, limb or well- being,
whether mental or physical, of the aggrieved person or tends to do so and
includes causing physical abuse, sexual abuse, verbal and emotional abuse and
economic abuse; or 
b) harasses, harms, injures or endangers the aggrieved person with a view to
coerce her or any other person related to her to meet any unlawful demand for
any dowry or other property or valuable security; or (c) has the effect of
threatening the aggrieved person or any person related to her by any conduct
mentioned in clause (a) or clause (b); or (d) otherwise injures or causes harm,
whether physical or mental to the aggrieved person." By virtue of clause (q) of
Section 2 of the Act, "Respondent" means any adult male person who is, or has
been, in a domestic relationship with the aggrieved person and against whom the
aggrieved person has sought any relief under this Act: Provided that an
aggrieved wife or female living in a relationship in the nature of a marriage
may also file a complaint against a relative of the husband or the male partner.
By virtue of clause (s) thereunder, "Shared household" means a household where
the person aggrieved lives or at any stage has lived in a domestic relationship
either singly or along with the respondent and includes such a household whether
owned or tenanted either jointly by the aggrieved person and the respondent, or
owned or tenanted by either of them in respect of which either the aggrieved
person or the respondent or both jointly or singly have any right, title,
interest or equity and includes such a household which may belong to the joint
family of which the respondent is a member irrespective of whether the
respondent or the aggrieved person has any right, title or interest in the
shared household. 
        9.      By virtue of the dissolution of the marriage between the first
petitioner and the respondent by a decree of divorce which became final, the
first petitioner cannot be termed as aggrieved person.  What is significant is
that only concerned woman, who is or has been in domestic relationship with the
respondent, who is alleged to have been subjected to any act of domestic
violence by the respondent can alone be termed as aggrieved person who can file
the complaint for relevant reliefs under different provisions of the Act.  As
such it is not proper to continue the proceedings against the petitioner in
consequence of which the proceedings are liable to be quashed.
10.     In the result, the Criminal Petition is allowed quashing the proceedings
initiated against the respondent in D.V.C.No.12 of 2010 on the file of the Court
of II Additional Judicial Magistrate of First Class, Tenali.
___________________________     
G. KRISHNA MOHAN REDDY, J       
Date:04-10-2012
