
HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE ASHUTOSH MOHUNTA AND HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE G.KRISHNA MOHAN REDDY                    

FCA No.7 of 2010 and another 

19-10-2012 

Smt. Guntamukkala Naga Venkata Kanaka Durga     

Guntamukkala Eswar Sudhakar and another    

Counsel for the Appellant: Sri Maturi Aravindu

Counsel for Respondents: Sri V. Venugopal Rao 

<Gist:

>Head Note: 

?Cases referred:

1. 2007(2) ALD 45 (SC) 
2. AIR 1995 GUJARAT 88   
AIR 1999 SC 945 = (1998) 9 SUPREME 220     

NA MOHAN REDDY      

F.C.A.Nos.7 and 47 of 2010 

COMMON JUDGMENT: (per Hon'ble Sri Justice G.Krishna Mohan Reddy)       

These appeals have arisen out of common order dated 
28-05-2009 passed in O.P.Nos.435 of 2006 and 391 of 2008 on the file of Judge,
Family Court-cum-IV Additional District Court at Vijayawada.
2.      The appellant (wife) in F.C.A.Nos.7 and 47 of 2010 is the petitioner in
O.P.No.435 of 2006 and respondent in O.P.No.391 of 2008. On the other hand the 
first respondent (husband) in F.C.A.No.7 of 2010 who is the sole respondent in
F.C.A.No.47 of 2010 is also the respondent in O.P.No.435 of 2006 and petitioner
in O.P.No.391 of 2008. Further the second respondent in F.C.A.No.7 of 2010 and
also O.P.No.435 of 2006 is not a party in the other proceedings.
3.      In fact O.P.No.435 of 2006 was filed under Section 18 of the Hindu
Adoption and Maintenance Act, 1956 (HAM Act) for grant of past and future
maintenance and for costs to the petitioner therein (wife).  On the other hand
O.P.No.391 of 2008 was filed by the petitioner therein (husband) under Section
13(1)(ia) of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 (HM Act) for dissolving his marriage
with the respondent (wife) and for costs.
4.      It is pleaded in O.P.No.435 of 2006 for the petitioner therein as follows:
On 27-04-2001 the petitioner (wife) married the first respondent as per Hindu
rites and customs. Immediately the marriage was consummated.  But from the  
beginning the first respondent subjected the petitioner to harassment to bring
additional dowry from her parents which was encouraged by his father i.e., the
second respondent and his mother.  Even the second respondent and his wife 
instigated the first respondent to beat the petitioner to achieve their demand.
The respondents and the mother of first of them also used to abuse the
petitioner in vulgar language and beat her without any fault of her.
They were not even providing food and amenities to her.  Further during the last
week of June, 2006 the parents of the petitioner went to the respondents' house
to see the petitioner. Then the respondents abused them in filthy language and
necked them out threatening that unless their demand was met, they would not
allow to see the petitioner.  Ultimately on 10-07-2006 the respondents also
necked out the petitioner from the matrimonial house snatching away all her gold
jewellery by reason of which she joined her parents' house.  Further she got no
capacity to maintain herself whereas the respondents got means to do so.  In
fact the petitioner prayed for awarding Rs.5,000/- towards her maintenance
against the respondents.
5.      The first respondent filed counter adopted by the second respondent
denying the material pleas taken therein. According to the first respondent the
petitioner herself deserted him without any fault on their part.  He claimed in
his pleadings specifically that in the month of July, 2006 she joined her
parents and had been living there.  Further he claimed that he sent one G.
Prakash and one R. Jaganmohan Rao to the petitioner to negotiate for restitution
of conjugal life which proved to be futile.  According to him the petitioner got
no interest to lead marital life with him.  He also claimed that in the
corresponding reconciliation proceedings the petitioner deliberately expressed
her unwillingness to join him. According to him further they are Goldsmith by
profession by which they prepare gold jewels on orders placed before them as a
result of which they earn Rs.1,500/- only per month.  Their plea ultimately is
that the petitioner is not entitled to any maintenance from them.
6.      In O.P.No.391 of 2008 the petitioner therein i.e., the first respondent in
O.P.No.435 of 2006 (husband) reiterated the pleas taken by him in the counter
filed in the other O.P.  It is further claimed by him that after the marriage
his family members treated her with great honour, love and affection and they
lead happy marital life as well as social and economic life then. He alleged
that she never used to shoulder any responsibility in the house and after the
marriage, she went to the house of her parents at Vijayawada during Ashada Masam 
and returned in Sravana Masam during the year 2001 whereas some change was found    
in her attitude thereafter.  His claim is that her mother gradually spoiled her
mind because of imaginations in consequence of which she developed little
aversion and dissatisfaction towards his family members.  It is his further
claim that she started demanding to set up separate family leaving his family
members, but he refused because of his family constraints.  Hence he pleaded for
granting divorce to him on the ground of irrevocable breakdown of the marriage
life.
7.      On the other hand, she filed counter repeating almost what she pleaded in
the petition filed by her in the other O.P.
8.      In fact evidence was let in O.P.No.435 of 2006 for both the petitions.
For convenience sake, we refer the parties as arrayed therein or as examined
before the Court below.
9.      For the wife she got herself examined as PW-1 whereas for the husband he
got himself examined as RW-1 and further got examined one R. Jagan Mohan Rao as   
RW-2 and his sister G. Radha Rani as RW-3.   For both the sides, no documents 
were marked. 
10.     As seen from the pleadings and the evidence adduced, it is not disputed
that PW-1 left the matrimonial house on 10-07-2006.  Mainly the Court below
considered the evidence of RW-2, Jaganmohan Rao, husband of PW-1's senior   
maternal aunt apart from some important admissions made by PW-1 in this context. 
The evidence of RW-2 is as follows:-  He and his wife used to contact PW-1 by
phone to know about her family life at her in-laws house.  Never PW-1 complained
against RW-1 or his family members to them.  In fact the parents of RW-1 are
affectionate and are also persons with responsibility towards relatives and
friends.  He corroborated the evidence of RW-1 that PW-1 was always under the
influence of her mother by reason of which she deserted RW-1 and joined with her
parents and in spite of the efforts made by RW-1, PW-1 did not join the
matrimonial house.  He also deposed that at the instance of
RW-1 and his family members, he and his wife went to the parents' house of PW-1
in the last week of August, 2006 and asked her mother to send PW-1 to the
matrimonial house, but she and PW-1 refused their request whereas subsequently 
PW-1 filed the maintenance case against RW-1.  A suggestion was given to RW-2 to  
the effect that he wanted to give his daughter in marriage to RW-1 subject to
granting divorce between RW-1 and PW-1 by reason of which he gave false evidence 
in favour of RW-1 which he denied.  It was also elicited from him that his
daughter was already married by reason of which that suggestion would not be
tenable.
11.     Apart from that PW-1 did not speak where and when the family members of 
RW-1 insisted or demanded her to bring additional dowry from her parents and
abused her.  Further if RW-1 was at fault, the probable conduct of her parents
would have been to conduct necessary reconciliation for the settlement of the
dispute, but there is no basis to say that they did so for which adverse
inference is to be drawn.  On the other hand
PW-1 deposed that she was beaten by RW-1, which plea in fact was not taken in 
her pleadings which, therefore, is not acceptable.  On the other hand RW-3,
sister of RW-1, deposed about the conduct of PW-1 in the house by and large.
12.     On the basis of the evidence adduced, the Court below came to the
conclusion that RW-1 substantiated his claim whereas PW-1 failed to substantiate
her claim, that PW-1 herself deserted RW-1 by reason of which RW-1 suffered
mental agony which would amount to cruelty whereas at the end on those grounds 
allowed O.P.No.391 of 2008 granting the relief prayed by him while dismissing
O.P.No.435 of 2006 rejecting the plea of providing maintenance to her.
13.     Learned counsel for PW-1 would contend that RW-1 in his cross-examination 
admitted that PW-1 did not treat him with cruelty, that he failed to establish
his claims, that RW-3 admitted that she did not like PW-1 and RW-1 getting on
together which proves how badly PW-1 was treated in the house and also after she
left the house whereas in fact PW-1 substantiated her claim.  Thereby according
to him the Court below failed to appreciate the matter properly.  Hence he seeks
that the findings given by the Court below are liable to be set aside.  It is
also according to him that there are good grounds to award Rs.5,000/- per month
towards the maintenance of PW-1 against RW-1.  
14.     While replying, learned counsel for RW-1 contends that RW-1 could
establish that PW-1 herself deserted RW-1 for more than two years and in spite
of efforts made by him (RW-1) she did not join the matrimonial house without any
lawful reason.  He also contends that there is absolutely no reason to
disbelieve the evidence of RW-2, a close relative of PW-1 who got no need to
speak falsehood against PW-1. He claims that the Court below properly examined 
and disposed of the matters in consequence of which the findings given
correspondingly are not liable to be interfered with.
15.     In order to dispose of the appeals, the following points are to be
answered: 
1. Whether RW-1 had placed sufficient evidence for granting divorce in his
favour and against PW-1? 
2. Whether PW-1 had placed sufficient evidence to hold that RW-1 deserted and
neglected her and thus she is entitled for maintenance as prayed for?
3. Whether the Court below properly appreciated the matter and its findings are
tenable or not?

Point No.1
16.     By virtue of Section 13(1)(ia) of the HM Act any marriage solemnized,
whether before or after the commencement of this Act, may, on a petition
presented by either the husband or the wife, be dissolved by a decree of divorce
on the ground that the other party has, after the solemnization of the marriage,
treated the petitioner with cruelty; or has deserted the petitioner for a
continuous period of not less than two years immediately preceding the
presentation of the petition.
17.     RW-1 has been seeking for divorce on the ground of cruelty and desertion
against PW-1.  In fact as observed by the Court below, PW-1 failed to
substantiate her claim to the effect that RW-1 and his family members treated
her with cruelty and also deserted her.  On the other hand RW-1 placed good
evidence to the effect that having been influenced by her mother PW-1 herself
left the matrimonial house and in spite of necessary efforts made by him, she
did not return back to lead marital life with him.  Here the evidence of RW-2 in
fact is very important. He clearly supported the claim of RW-1 by and large.
There is absolutely no reason to discard his evidence.  His evidence is to be
given utmost credibility because he happened to be a close relative of PW-1 and
he got no need to speak against PW-1. Thus it is clearly proved that PW-1
herself left RW-1.
18.     However, in fact RW-1 himself admitted in his
cross-examination that never PW-1 treated him with cruelty which, therefore, is
to be accepted as true and correct.  Further the expression cruelty is not
defined in HM Act.  The question of determination of cruelty depends upon the
facts and circumstances of each case.
19.     In SUJATA UDAY PATIL v. UDAY MADHUKAR PATIL 1 considered by the Court         
below, it is observed by the Supreme Court "The law has no standard by which to
measure the nature and degree of cruel treatment that may satisfy the test.   It
may consist of a display of temperament, emotion or pervasion whereby one gives
vent to his or her feelings, without intending to injure the other.
It need not consist of direct action against the other but may be misconduct
indirectly affecting the other spouse even though it is not aimed at that
spouse. It is necessary to weigh all the incidents and quarrels between the
parties keeping in view the impact of the personality and conduct of one spouse
upon the mind of the other. Cruelty may be inferred from the facts and
matrimonial relations of the parties and interaction in their daily life
disclosed by the evidence and inference on the said point can only be drawn
after all the facts have been taken into consideration. Where there is proof of
a deliberate course of conduct on the part of one, intended to hurt and
humiliate the other spouse, and such a conduct is persisted, cruelty can easily
be inferred."
20.     In fact by virtue of these observations of the Supreme Court, the Court
below came to the conclusion that due to the behaviour of PW-1, RW-1 suffered
mental agony which amounted to mental cruelty which is not acceptable in view of
the admission made by RW-1 that PW-1 never treated him with cruelty. 
21.     What is significant is that admittedly there has been no cohabitation
between PW-1 and RW-1 since 10-07-2006 whereas the petition for divorce was  
filed in 2008.  It is not in dispute that the petition was filed after a gap of
two years from 10.7.2006.  The time lapse after filing the corresponding
proceedings cannot be taken into consideration for computing that period. What
is important here is that the mandate of the relevant provision that there
should be desertion for a continuous period of two years immediately preceding
the presentation of the petition for divorce on that ground is complied with
whoever may be at fault.  Desertion is the active or willful termination of an
existing cohabitation without the consent, express or implied, of the party
alleging desertion and against his or her wish.  The circumstances of the case
also amply prove that PW-1 left the matrimonial house and in spite of necessary
efforts made by RW-1, she did not return back and on the other hand she has not
shown any interest to do so.  Therefore, without any hesitation, it is held that
she has abandoned the matrimonial house once for all and the marital bond has
been irretrievably broken down.  Hence, on that ground, RW-1 is entitled for
divorce against her.
Point No.2
22.     With regards to the question of awarding necessary maintenance to PW-1, in
respect of wife who was granted divorce, it is to be examined as to whether this
question can be considered under Section 18 of HAM Act. 
23.     As PW-1 alone has been responsible for the breakdown of the marital bond,
the Court below held that she was not entitled for any maintenance from RW-1.
24.     Under Section 18(1) of the HAM Act, a Hindu wife, whether married before
or after the commencement of this Act, shall be entitled to be maintained by her
husband during her life time, and by virtue of clause (2) thereof, a Hindu wife
shall be entitled to live separately from her husband without forfeiting her
claim to maintenance,-
(a) if he is guilty of desertion, that is to say, of abandoning her without
reasonable cause and without her consent or against her wish, or of wilfully
neglecting her;

(b) if he has treated her with such cruelty as to cause a reasonable
apprehension in her mind that it will be harmful or injurious to live with her
husband; 

(c) if he is suffering from a virulent form of leprosy;

(d) if he has any other wife living;

(e) if he keeps a concubine in the same house in which his wife is living or
habitually resides with a concubine else- where;
(f) if he has ceased to be a Hindu by conversion to another religion;

(g) if there is any other cause justifying her living separately.

25.     Therefore, clause 2(g) makes it clear that in order to claim maintenance,
there should be a cause justifying her living separately.  In other words this
makes it clear that if PW-1 is guilty of desertion against RW-1 she is not
entitled to any maintenance under this provision.
26.     Whereas Sections 11 to 18 of the HM Act deal with the question of nullity
of marriage and divorce, sections 19 to 21, 21A, 21B, 21C, 22 to 28 and 28A
thereunder deal with the question of jurisdiction and procedure in that behalf.
Section 25 of HM Act is relevant here.  This Section specifically deals with the
question of permanent alimony and maintenance subsequent to granting divorce in
respect of an individual though it is not specifically incorporated therein that
it is in relation to divorced wife or husband.  The question of permanent
alimony or the consequential maintenance arises only after granting divorce,
which makes it categorical that this provision is intended for divorced wife or
husband only.  This provision enjoins "Any court exercising jurisdiction under
this Act may, at the time of passing any decree or at any time subsequent
thereto, on application made to it for the purpose by either the wife or the
husband, as the case may be, order that the respondent shall pay to the
applicant for her or his maintenance and support such gross sum or such monthly
or periodical sum for a term not exceeding the life of the applicant as, having
regard to the respondent's own income and other property, if any, the income and
other property of the applicant the conduct of the parties and other
circumstances of the case, it may seem to the court to be just, and any such
payment may be secured, if necessary, by a charge on the immovable property of 
the respondent."  This provision already mandates that the question of granting
maintenance to such divorced wife or husband would arise subject to the conduct
of the parties.
27.     Learned counsel for RW-1 would contend that Section 18 of the HAM Act only 
applies when marriage between two spouses is subsisting and the wife continues
to have the status of wife.  According to him after granting divorce she is not
entitled to any maintenance under that provision.  He also contends that when
divorce is granted against PW-1 on the ground of desertion of RW-1, on that
ground also she is not entitled for any maintenance from RW-1.
28.     Section 18 of the HAM Act does not specifically speak of granting
maintenance to a divorced wife.  In fact significantly clause 2(a) thereunder
provides that a Hindu wife shall be entitled to live  separately from her
husband without forfeiting her claim to maintenance if he is guilty of
desertion, that is to say, of abandoning her without reasonable cause and
without her consent or against her wish, or of willfully neglecting her.
It infers that if the wife alone is guilty of desertion of the husband, she is
not entitled for any maintenance from him.
A question arises thereby as to whether the provisions of Section 25 of the HM
Act can be invoked while dealing with a petition filed under Section 18 of the
HAM Act for granting maintenance to a divorced wife against whom divorce was
granted in favour of her husband on her own fault which would fall within the
ambit of Section 13 of the HM Act.
29.     In VIHALAL MANGALDAS PATEL v. MAIBEN VIHALAL PATEL2, it was observed (at          
para-7 therein) with reference to exactly similar circumstances as follows,
"Originally, the Hindu marriage, succession, minority, guardianship, adoption
and maintenance were part of one Hindu Code Bill and later on they took
statutory form by different Acts, but the Legislative intention to provide
maintenance to the spouse even after divorce which is contained in Sec. 25 of
the HM Act, has to be read into both the sections and provisions in both the
Acts. Same Legislature cannot be imputed with two different intentions in
respect of the same couple on the same question. Under Sec. 25 of the HM Act, if
the provision regarding maintenance is to be applicable, both to a wife and a
dovirced wife, there is no reason why the same word "wife" which is used in Sec.
18 should not be read in the same manner because both these provisions deal with
the question of maintenance between a husband and a wife. Under Sec. 25 of the
HM Act, there cannot be any doubt or dispute that the wife would necessarily
include a divorced wife for the purposes of maintenance and alimony even though
the section uses the words "wife" or "husband" and not "divorced wife" or
"divorced husband" and it also provides for maintenance not exceeding the life
of the applicant. Similarly, in Sec. 18 of the HAM Act, though the words used
are "wife and husband" the maintenance is provided by the husband during the
life time of the wife. Thus, the scheme of both these sections is the same; the
purpose is the same; the words used are the same. Therefore, when the word
"wife" in Sec. 25 of the HM Act includes a divorced wife, so also in Sec. 18 of
the HAM Act, the word "wife" has to be interpreted to mean a divorced wife. Any
other construction would lead to anomalous and contradictory situations and
orders. If the wife makes an application under Sec. 25 of the HM Act for
maintenance even after divorce, that would be maintainable, but if she makes an
application for the same purpose under Sec. 18 of the HAM Act, it would not be
maintainable even though both the provisions have same purpose in mind and the
same intention to provide maintenance to the wife. Therefore, it is reasonable
to hold that the words "wife" and "husband" are used to describe the
relationship to provide for maintenance during the life time of the wife and it
includes a divorced wife and by doing so, there is no violation done of the
language or the meaning because the meaning is always to be taken from the 
context and intention. For example, a married woman living happily with her
husband can be held to be a widow on the question of succession to the property
of her former deceased husband and by describing her as widow, there is no
violence done to her present marital status of having a husband and happily
living with the husband because the meaning has to be given in the context of
the purpose and the intention. Similarly, when a question of maintenance arises
between a husband a wife, it arises only in a situation where there are serious
disputes between the husband and a wife and which may arise before divorce or
thereafter and Legislature makes the provision for the same."
30.     On necessary analysis we find it difficult to accept these observations as
it appears that the legislative intendment in framing Section 18 of HAM Act and
Section 25 of HM Act are quite different.  This is born out from the fact that
Section 18 of HAM Act is intended for granting divorce to a wife when her
marriage with her husband has been subsisting against her husband subject to the
limitations provided therein, whereas Section 25 of HM Act is intended for
granting maintenance to a divorced wife or husband subject to their conduct.  No
doubt, "wife" includes a divorced wife under normal parlance, but the question
of awarding maintenance to her either as a wife or divorced wife should be
within the legislative intendment or spirit.  In other words, when the
legislature framed Section 18 of HAM Act in the context of providing maintenance
to a wife against her husband while their marriage has been subsisting, that is
quite different from its intention in framing Section 25 of HM Act, the
provisions of which are made applicable only to a divorced wife or husband
subject to the conduct of himself or herself.  The interpretation made in the
decision cited to treat a wife who is not a divorcee and the wife who is a
divorcee on equal footing for the purpose of awarding maintenance under Section
18 of HAM Act does not appear to be logical.
31.     The legislative intendment of framing various provisions for granting
maintenance to a wife or a husband or any of their relatives as enshrined
definitely was to uphold the concept of marriage. 'Marriage' is the sacred
union, legally permissible, of two healthy bodies of opposite sexes.  It has to
be mental, psychological and physical union.  When two souls thus unite, a new
soul comes into existence.  That is how the life goes on and on this planet (see
Mr. 'X' v. Hospital 'Z'3).  By marriage two souls are united following which
they start living together.  The purpose of life is to live happily which can be
attained by maintaining peace and tranquility between two persons or among group
of persons within the society at large whatever may come or intercept.  To
achieve that object one has to mould himself or herself while dealing with any
eventuality which he or she may come across.  When there is no adaptability
differences are bound to arise which may lead to break down of relationship
between two individuals or among different individuals as the case may be unless
rectified by prudence and sensibility.  The system of marriage have bearing not
only upon two individuals i.e., spouses but also among their family members and
the society because the family is a unit in the society.  According to Hindu
philosophy the purpose of marriage is to serve mainly the other components of
the society.  That objectivity is not only for the purpose of serving the
society at large but also maintaining love, peace and tranquility among the
members of the society and contributing for its prosperity.
32.     In the context of the observations made above awarding maintenance to a
wife because of whose fault the marriage between her and her husband has been 
broken is against the concept of marriage.  How can one of the spouses who got
no respect for the marital bond be granted maintenance.  The wife or husband
will have the obligation of maintaining the other spouse when the other spouse
is neglected by him or her without lawful excuse having got sufficient means
while the other spouse got no means to maintain herself or himself having
entered into the wedlock.
33.     Thus it is not proper to uphold the plea of the P.W.1 to provide
maintenance to her in the circumstances enumerated as against R.W.1.  The point 
is answered accordingly.
Point No.3
        34.  In view of the findings on Point Nos.1 and 2, it is clear that the
Court below by and large appreciated the relevant facts and law properly.  There
are no reasons to interfere with the findings of the Court below.
        35.     In the result, both the appeals are dismissed confirming the orders
passed by the Court below. The miscellaneous petitions if any shall stand
closed.  No costs.
_________________   
ASHUTOSH MOHUNTA, J       
_____________________    
G. KRISHNA MOHAN REDDY, J       
October  19, 2012.
