
THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE K.G.SHANKAR        

CRIMINAL PETITION NO.10900 of 2009    

26.07.2012 

Kalpana Kopaley @ K.Kalpana   

State of Andhra Pradesh, represented by Public Prosecutor, High Court of A.P.
and another

Counsel for the Petitioner: Sri Sharad Sanghi

Counsel for respondent No.1: Public Prosecutor

Counsel for respondent No.2: Sri George Victor

< Gist:

> Head Note: 

? Cases referred:  NIL

ORDER:-  


The petitioner/A-3 seeks for quashment of the case against her in C.C.No.890 of
2008 on the file of the X Metropolitan Magistrate, Cyberabad, Malkajgiri.

2.      Sri Sharad Sanghi, learned counsel for the petitioner, contended that the
2nd respondent-de facto complainant had compounded the offence and that the case 
was acquitted against A-2.  He further contended that as the petitioner could
not appear at the time of the compounding of the offence, as N.B.W. was pending
against her, the trial Court did not compound the offence against the
petitioner.  He submitted that N.B.W. had already been recalled and that the
petitioner is not able to obtain orders of compounding of the offence from the
trial Court as the 2nd respondent has not been cooperating before the trial
Court to report settlement.

3.      The 2nd respondent filed a counter contending that there is a prima facie
case against the petitioner and this petition is liable to be dismissed.

4.      The case was registered against three accused including the petitioner
herein under Sections 498-A, 494 and 420 I.P.C. as well as under Sections 3 and
4 of the Dowry Prohibition Act on the complaint of the 2nd respondent herein.  A
charge sheet was subsequently laid before the court, which was registered as
C.C.No.890 of 2008 on the file of the X Metropolitan Magistrate.  The case of
the petitioner, however, is that A-1 is the husband of the petitioner/A-3 and
that the de facto complainant was subsequently married to A-1 while the marriage
between A-1 and the petitioner continued to subsist.  The de facto complainant,
on the other hand, contended that she was the legally wedded wife of A-1 and
that the petitioner contacted marriage with A-1 knowing fully well that the
marriage between the de facto complainant and A-1 had been subsisting.

5.      In that background, the de facto complainant entered into compromise with
A-2, who is the mother of A-1. The learned X Metropolitan Magistrate recorded
compromise on 09.11.2009 that the case was compounded as against A-2.   

6.      Obviously, both Sections 320(1) and 320(2) Cr.P.C. envisage that what can
be compounded is the offences and not case against individual accused.  Once an
offence is compounded, it stands compounded against all the accused and not 
against individual accused.
        
7.      Consequently, whether the de facto complainant compounded or did not agree 
to compound the offence against the petitioner/A-3, the offence automatically
stood compounded against the petitioner/A-3 as well once the case was compounded  
against A-2.  In that view of the matter, C.C.No.890 of 2008 against the
petitioner/A-3 deserves to be quashed.

8.      Accordingly, the Criminal Petition is allowed.  The case against the
petitioner/A-3 in C.C.No.890 of 2008 on the file of the X Metropolitan
Magistrate, Cyberabad, Malkajgiri stands quashed.

_________________   
 K.G.SHANKAR,J   
26th July, 2012
