
THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE L .NARASIMHA REDDY AND  THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE                     

F.C.A. No.142 of 2012 AND BATCH    

10-06-2013 

Ganti Srinivas..appellant

Mrs. G.Vasantha..Respondent  

Counsel for the appellant:Sri D.V. Reddy
                                
Counsel for the Respondent:Sri R. Satyanarayana Reddy  

<GIST: 

>HEAD NOTE:    

?Cases referred

THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE L. NARASIMHA REDDY          

AND  

THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE S.V. BHATT      


F.C.A. No.142 of 2012 & F.C.A.Sr.240 of 2013 

COMMON JUDGMENT: (Per the Hon'ble Sri Justice S.V. Bhatt)    

        These two appeals under Section 19 of the Family Courts Act, 1984, arise
out of a common order dated 10-12-2011 passed by the Family Court, Ranga Reddy   
District, in O.P.Nos.386 and 1375 of 2008.
        
        The appellant is the husband of the respondent.  Their marriage took place
on 04-08-1993, and they were also blessed with two children in the years 1994
and 1997.  Differences have arisen thereafter.  The appellant filed O.P.No.386
of 2008 under Section 13(1)(ia) and (ib) of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 (for
short
'the Act') against the respondent, for divorce.  The respondent,
on the other hand, filed O.P.No.1375 of 2008 under Section 9 of the Act, for
restitution of conjugal rights.  Through a common judgment, the trial Court
dismissed O.P.No.386 of 2008 and allowed O.P.No.1375 of 2008.  
        
        Sri D.V. Reddy, learned counsel for the appellant submits that though the
parties herein lived amicably up to the year 1997, differences have arisen
thereafter, particularly after the appellant left for Canada, for better
prospects in employment.  He contends that the efforts made by the appellant to
patch up the differences did not fructify.  Learned counsel submits that the
respondent has the habit of picking up quarrels, without any justification, and
to go over to the house of her parents, and live there for long spells.
He contends that not only the efforts of the mediators to bring about
reconciliation failed, but also the notice got issued by the appellant to
require the respondent to join his company resulted in the institution of cases
under Section 498-A IPC etc., with baseless and wild allegations.   Learned
counsel submits that the various acts and omissions on the part of the
respondent constitute desertion and cruelty, and the trial Court ought to have
allowed the O.P. 386 of 2008, filed by him.  He further submits that the filing
of O.P.No.1375 of 2008, by the respondent, was only a make-believe affair and
that she has no intention to join the company of the appellant.
        
        Sri R. Satyanarayana Reddy, learned counsel for the respondent, on the
other hand, submits that it is the appellant,
who deserted the respondent, and when he has left for abroad,
he cannot expect the respondent to live in the house of his parents.  He submits
that when the appellant himself has created a situation for the respondent to
live separately, he cannot call it as desertion
on the part of the respondent, much less cruelty.  He has also pleaded that the
respondent was left with no alternative, except to approach the Police with her
grievances.
        
        Both the OPs were tried together by the trial Court.  Necessary points
were framed therein.  The appellant deposed as PW-1 and his mother deposed as  
PW-2.  Exs.P-1 to P-11 were filed by them.  The respondent deposed as RW-1, and  
she filed Exs.R-1 to
R-4.  In both the OPs, the trial Court held against the appellant herein.
        
        Now, the point that arises for consideration before us, is,
as to whether the appellant has proved the grounds of cruelty and desertion, on
the part of the respondent, and is entitled for the decree of divorce.

        In his deposition, the appellant has reiterated the contents of the OP.
He submits that the respondent has deserted him by residing in the house of her
parents without any justification, and despite the issuance of notice, she did
not come back. 
The respondent, on the other hand, pleads that she was forced to live in the
house of her parents, unable to bear the harassment.
She also alleged that the appellant used to demand additional dowry.   In the
teeth of these allegations, we find it difficult to record any finding as to the
desertion on the part of the respondent.

        However, the ground of cruelty, in the instant case, stands on a different
footing.  The developments, that have taken place, particularly after the
appellant left for Canada, in search of better employment, disclose that the
appellant and his family members were subjected to harassment and cruelty on
account of institution of various proceedings.  All the criminal cases
instituted by the respondent ended in acquittal.  The documents pertaining to
those cases are filed as Exs.P-2 to P-8.  To constitute a ground of cruelty, on
the part of one spouse, towards another, it is not necessary that there must be
physical altercations, or assaults.  In the recent past, the Hon'ble Supreme
Court took the view that the institution of criminal cases, by a wife, against
the husband and his family members, would, by itself, constitute cruelty,
particularly when it ends up in acquittal.  In addition to that, PWs 1 and 2
have spoken to certain other facts also.
        
        During the pendency of the OPs, an important development has taken place. 
The parties have arrived at an understanding
on 13-07-2006, and in terms thereof, a sum of Rs.7,25,000/- was paid to the
respondent.  Though an attempt is made on the part of the respondent to plead
that the said amount represented the dowry received from her parents and that
the same was returned, we find it difficult to believe the same.  When there was
an agreement between the parties to part with ways, and when the appellant has
changed his position by paying a sum of Rs.7,25,000/-, obviously towards
permanent alimony, we find that it is not at all feasible for them to live
together.  The acts and omissions on the part of the respondent constitute
cruelty.
        
        We accordingly allow the FCA Sr.No.9709 of 2012 and set aside the order
passed by the trial Court in O.P.No.386 of 2008.
We allow the said O.P and grant a decree of divorce, on finding that the
appellant has proved the ground of cruelty on the part of the respondent.  Once
the O.P.No.386 of 2008 is allowed, O.P.No.1375 of 2008 becomes infructuous, and 
we accordingly allow the FCA No.142 of 2012, by setting aside the decree in that
OP. 
        
        The miscellaneous petitions filed in these appeals shall also stand
disposed of.
        
        There shall be no order as to costs.
_______________________    
L. NARASIMHA REDDY, J.     
_______________________    
S.V. BHATT, J. 
Dt.10-06-2013
