
THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE C.PRAVEEN KUMAR          

CRIMINAL PETITION No. 4928 OF 2013     

09-10-2013 

Sri Nikhil Navin Satra and 2 others.....PETITIONERS/ACCU 
        
The State of A.P. rep.by Public Prosecutor, High Court of A.P.,
Hyderabad......RESPONDENTS/COMPLAINANT         
        
Counsel for Petitioners/Accused: M/s. Shyam S. Agarwal 

Counsel for Respondents/Complnt: M/s. K.Prabhakar Reddy   

<GIST : 

>HEAD NOTE :   

?Cases referred :
   2011(5) SCC 708 
   2007(1) ALT (Crl.)293 A.P.
   1998(1) ALT(Crl.) 1(A.P.)
    2007(1) ALT (Crl) 293 (AP)
   (2005)(2) ALT (Crl)463 (AP)
    2008 Crl.L.J, 4092
    2003(11)  SCC 126
    2011(11)SCC 301 


HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE C. PRAVEEN KUMAR         

CRIMINAL PETITION NO.4928 OF 2013     

ORDER :  

        The present application under Section 482 Cr.P.C. is filed by the accused
1 to 3 questioning the investigation in Crime No.49 of 2013 of Women Police
Station, Saroornagar, Cyberabad, which was registered for the offences
punishable under Sections 498-A IPC and Sections 3 and 4 of the Dowry 
Prohibition Act.
        2.  The allegations in the report would disclose that the marriage of the
1st accused with the 2nd respondent took place on 27.05.2011 at Mumbai. 
Thereafter, she joined her matrimonial house at Mumbai, where both of them lived
happily for a period of one month in a joint family consisting sister-in-law,
brother-in-law and parents-in-law.  Thereafter, the attitude of the 1st accused
suddenly changed.  He started consuming alcohol daily and used to torture the
2nd respondent physically and mentally. When the same was informed to the other 
inmates of the house, they openly supported the acts of A-1 and the sister and
brother of A-1 also used to beat and harass the 2nd respondent.  A-1 started
pressurizing the 2nd respondent to get huge amounts from her parents for his
foreign tours and also for purchasing house-hold articles like furniture and
electronic items etc.  The in-laws supported the act of A-1.  In spite of making
repeated requests by the 2nd respondent that her parents are poor and cannot
fulfil the demand as the marriage was performed by borrowing a sum of
Rs.5,00,000/- the accused did not agree for the same.  On 08.05.2012 the accused
called the parents of the 2nd respondent and demanded for an additional dowry of
Rs.5,00,000/-.  When the parents of the 2nd respondent expressed their inability
to pay the said amount, a big quarrel ensued and later they threatened the
informant and her parents not to inform the same to the police.  On that
occasion, they took signatures on blank papers and sent away the informant and
her parents to Hyderabad stating that she will be accepted into the matrimonial
home only if their demand is fulfilled.  Since then the 2nd respondent is
staying with her parents at Hyderabad.  Efforts made by her parents proved
futile.  It is specifically alleged in the complaint that while staying in
Hyderabad, the 2nd respondent contacted her husband and in-laws on phone with a 
view to settle the issue but the accused started abusing the 2nd respondent and
warned her not to contact them anymore.  As there was no other option, the
present report came to be lodged.
        3.  The learned counsel for the petitioners mainly submits that the police
at Hyderabad has no jurisdiction to entertain the complaint as the alleged acts
of harassment took place only in Mumbai.  He further submits that having settled
all the issues with the accused and after collecting all her belongings from the
house of the accused, the present complaint came to be lodged with a malafide
intention.  He thus submits that continuation of proceedings against the
petitioners would be an abuse of process of law.
        4.  On the other hand, the learned counsel for the 2nd respondent opposed
the application contending that a reading of the report would prima facie
disclose commission of offence and that the offence with which the petitioners
are charged is continuous in nature.  It is thus stated that the Courts at
Hyderabad would get jurisdiction to try the offence.
        5.  Section 482 of Cr.P.C. envisages three circumstances under which
inherent jurisdiction can be exercised viz. (1) to give effect to an order under
the Code; (2) to prevent abuse of process of Court; and (3) to otherwise secure
ends of justice.  It is neither possible nor desirable to lay down any
inflexible rule, which would govern the exercise of inherent jurisdiction. In
order to quash a First Information Report under this Section, the High Court has
to see whether prima facie case against the accused is made out or not.  When
the allegations in the Report make out a prima facie cognizable offence, it is
the duty of police to conduct investigation.  The said power cannot be invoked
to interdict a legitimate prosecution and it has to be exercised very sparingly
to render real and substantial justice to the parties.  As held by the Apex
Court, it is to be exercised very sparingly and with circumspection in rarest of
the rare cases to prevent abuse of process of Court or to otherwise secure ends
of justice.
        6.      In Sushil Suri v. C.B.I1 the Apex Court while considering the scope
and ambit of inherent jurisdiction of High Court made the following
observations.
"16. Section 482 Cr.P.C., itself envisages three circumstances under which the
inherent jurisdiction may be exercised by the High Court, namely, (i) to give
effect to an order under Cr.P.C.,; (ii) to prevent an abuse of the process of
court; and (iii) to otherwise secure the ends of justice. It is trite that
although the power possessed by the High Court under the said provision is very
wide but it is not unbridled. It has to be exercised sparingly, carefully and
cautiously, ex debito justitiae to do real and substantial justice for which
alone the Court exists. Nevertheless, it is neither feasible nor desirable to
lay down any inflexible rule which would govern the exercise of inherent
jurisdiction of the Court. Yet, in numerous cases, this Court has laid down
certain broad principles which may be borne in mind while exercising
jurisdiction under Section 482 CrPC. Though it is emphasised that exercise of
inherent powers would depend on the facts and circumstances of each case, but
the common thread which runs through all the decisions on the subject is that
the Court would be justified in invoking its inherent jurisdiction where the
allegations made in the complaint or charge-sheet, as the case may be, taken at
their face value and accepted in their entirety do not constitute the offence
alleged."

        7.  The centripetal issue that emanates for consideration in this petition
is whether the police at Hyderabad get jurisdiction to investigate into the
matter and whether the court in Hyderabad would get territorial jurisdiction to
entertain the case.
        In Valluri Ramachandra Rao and others v.  State of A.P., rep. by its
Public Prosecutor, High Court of A.P., Hyderabad and another2,  this Court in
dealing with the jurisdiction of the Courts in case of dowry death held as under
:-
        "We have made a cursory survey of the relevant provisions which, in our
opinion, provide the idea whether Madanapalle Police Station has rightly
entertained the complaint of the father of the victim girl and we have no
hesitation in concluding that in case of a dowry death and particularly when
there are clear allegations by the father of the victim girl that petitioners
demanded monies by way of dowry and received the same in part at Madanapalle,  
and through his victim daughter conveyed further demands to him to Madanapalle,
Madanapalle Police committed no error of jurisdiction when it entertained the
complainant and registered the crime for investigation.  It is a clear case in
which all transactions pertaining to demand of dowry and payment thereof have
taken place at Madanapalle and since the father of the victim girl has not been
able, as alleged, to meet the demand.  The victim has allegedly suffered the
torture at the hands of the petitioner-appellants in Jalgaon in the State of
Maharashtra and met the ultimate death at the said place.  The jurisdiction to
investigate, thus, in terms of Section 156(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure
being coextensive with the jurisdiction of the Court to inquire into or try the
case as contemplated under Section 179 of the Cr.P.C., cannot be denied to
Madanapalle police.  In any case, since there are allegations that the victim
had informed her father (informant) who was at Madanapalle of the demands by
telecommunication, there is no warrant for any objection by the petitioners-
appellants to question the jurisdiction of the Madanapalle police........"
        In Ramesh Venkat Perumal v. The State of A.P. rep. by Public Prosecutor
and another3,  this Court held as  follows :
"14. "If a married woman is forced to stay at her parents' house in order to
meet the illegal demands of her husband or relatives of her husband, naturally
she suffers mental agony even during her stay at her parents' house and hence,
it is a continuing offence and continues during her stay at her parents' house".
15.  In Valluri Ramachandra Rao & others v. State of A.P.,4 this Court
reiterated the principle laid down in the above decision.
16.  In Basheer Moazam v. State of A.P.5 this Court held as follows :
"The three provisions, namely, Sections 177 to 179 of Cr.P.C., indicate that in
case of an offence under Section 498-A of IPC, the case can be filed by the
aggrieved wife/woman at a place where the demand was made for dowry or property 
thereby causing cruelty and also at a place where the woman was forced to live,
that is to say, the consequence that ensued as a result of cruelty.  To give an
illustration, after marriage if the wife is subjected to cruelty by the husband
or by his relatives at one place and due to such harassment, the wife is forced
to go either to her parents place or a friend's place, there is nothing in law
which prohibits the wife to initiate criminal action at a place where she is
forced to live as a consequence of being subjected to cruelty."
        8.  Similarly in Issa Venkateswarlu v. State of A.P.6, this Court while
dealing with the situation where a complaint was said to have been lodged at
Guntakal, when the alleged acts of harassment took place at Chowdepally in
Chittor District held that court at Guntakal has jurisdiction to try the case.
In State of M.P.  v.  Suresh Kaushal7, the Apex Court, while considering the
scope of Section 179 Cr.P.C. with reference to a complaint relating to an
offence under Section 498-A read with 34 IPC held as under :
"The above section contemplates two Courts having jurisdiction and the trial is
permitted to take place in any one of those two Courts.  One is the Court within
whose local jurisdiction the act has been done and the other is the Court within
whose local jurisdiction the consequence has ensued.  When the allegation is
that the miscarriage took place at Jabalpur it cannot be contended that the
court at Jabalpur could not have acquired jurisdiction as the acts alleged
against the accused took place at Indore".
        9.  In Sunanda Kumar Kashyap  v.  State of Bihar8,  the Apex Court dealt
with the situation, where the acts of harassment took place at Ranchi and
thereafter her husband took her to her parental home at Gaya, dropped her there
with a threat of dire consequences in case she fails to bring additional dowry.
Dealing with the aspect as to whether the Court at Gaya had jurisdiction to try
the matter, the Apex Court after referring to various cases, held that the
proceedings at Gaya had jurisdiction to try an offence punishable under Section
498-A I.P.C.   The Court held that an offence under Section 498-A I.P.C. was a
continuing one and the proceedings at Gaya were a consequence of harassment and   
ill-treatment meted out to the complainant and as such Clause (c) of Section 178
Cr.P.C. is attracted.
        10.  Keeping in view the principles of law laid down by the Apex Court,
with regard to the territorial jurisdiction of the Courts in entertaining the
complaints under Section 498-A IPC, I shall now proceed to deal with the matter.
        11.  A perusal of the first information report would disclose that the
marriage between A-1 and the 2nd respondent took place at Mumbai and both of 
them lived happily for a period of one month at Mumbai.  Thereafter, the accused
started harassing the 2nd respondent to get an additional dowry of Rs.5,00,000/-
.  When the 2nd respondent expressed her inability to arrange the same, she was
harassed physically and mentally.  The first information report indicates the
manner in which the 2nd respondent was subjected to harassment by the accused.  
Ultimately, on 10.05.2012 she was sent out of the house and since then she has
been staying with her parents at Hyderabad.  The last paragraph of the report
clearly shows that she contacted her husband and in-laws on phone, so as to
settle the issue, but they were abusing her and warned her not to contact them
again.  The alleged abuse and also giving a warning over phone to the 2nd
respondent not to contact them again, is nothing but a consequence of harassment
and ill-treatment meted out to the 2nd respondent at Mumbai.
        12.  From the above, it is clear that the 2nd respondent started staying
with her parents because of harassment in the hands of the accused.  The fact
that the 2nd respondent was living away from her husband, because of harassment 
by the accused will definitely amount to mental harassment, falling within the
meaning of "cruelty" as defined in Section 498-A I.P.C.  As stated earlier, when
the 2nd respondent contacted her husband and in-laws on phone, she was  
threatened and abused which is a fall out of the acts of harassment which took
place at Mumbai.  The Judgment of the Apex Court in Sunanda Kumar Kashyap and    
that of this Court in M.Sudheer v.  State of A.P. and Issa Venkateswarlu would
clearly confer jurisdiction on the Courts at Hyderabad to try the matter,
consequently the police at Hyderabad will get jurisdiction to investigate into
the matter.
        13.  The averments in the report clearly disclose that a quarrel occurred
on 08.05.2012 at Mumbai when the parents of the 2nd respondent were called to
Mumbai.  On that day, the accused is alleged to have taken the signatures of her
parents on blank papers and thereafter they were sent out of the house.  The
argument of the learned counsel for the petitioners that the slip dated
07.05.2012 containing the signatures of the 2nd respondent and her father, which
reveal the 2nd respondent agreeing for a divorce by mutual consent and also
receiving all articles and amount, cannot be looked into at this stage.  The
circumstances under which the signature was taken and the contents of the said
document have to be established during the course of trial.  Basing on the said
document, it cannot be said that the present report has been lodged with a
malafide intention.  Further, in the anticipatory bail application filed by A-2,
the 2nd respondent herein was physically present before the trial Court, wherein
she reported that signature on the said slip was taken under the pressure of the
mediators and a memo to that effect was also filed by her.  The case is still at
the stage of investigation.  Truth or otherwise of the allegations made have to
be investigated by the police.
        14.  As the allegations in the report prima facie disclose ingredients
constituting an offence punishable under Section 498-A I.P.C. and Sections 3 and
4 of the Dowry Prohibition Act, it cannot be said that the said report is bereft
of basic facts constituting the alleged offences.  For the aforesaid reasons,
this Court is of the view that the present petition is sans merit and is liable
to be rejected.
        15.  Accordingly, the criminal petition filed for quashing the
investigation in Cr.No.49 of 2013 of Women Police Station, Saroornagar,
Cyberabad,  is dismissed.
        As a sequel to it, the miscellaneous petitions, pending if any, shall
stand dismissed. 
___________________________     
JUSTICE C. PRAVEEN KUMAR       
09-10-2013
