
THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE L.NARASIMHA REDDY AND THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE M.S.K. JAISWAL        

F.C.A.No.2 of 2011 

04-12-2013 


Gujjala Ratnakar Reddy ..appellant

Gujjala Janaki  ..Respondent 

Counsel for the appellant: Sri B. Narayana Reddy

Counsel for the Respondent:  Sri B. Ranganatha Rao 

<GIST: 

>HEAD NOTE:    

?Cases referred

(Judgment of the Bench delivered by
the Hon'ble Sri Justice L. Narasimha Reddy)


THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE L. NARASIMHA REDDY          

AND  

THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE M.S.K. JAISWAL       


F.C.A.No.2 of 2011 


JUDGMENT:  (Per the Hon'ble Sri Justice L. Narasimha Reddy)  

        
The petitioner in F.C.O.P.No.117 of 2005 on the file of the Family Court,
Warangal, filed this appeal under Section 19 of the Family Courts Act, 1984,
feeling aggrieved by the dismissal of the O.P.
The marriage between the appellant and the respondent took place, way back on 
14-03-1986.  Shortly after the marriage,
the appellant got employment in Kendriya Vidyalaya, Bangalore, and the parties
lived there, for about 12 years.  They had a daughter, who is now grown up.  The
appellant filed the O.P., under Section 13(1) (ia) (ib) and clause (iii) of
Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 
(for short 'the Act').  He stated that the respondent was harassing him in
different ways, such as exhibiting rude and indifferent behaviour and using
filthy language.  He stated that on several occasions, the matter was brought to
the notice of the elders also, and in spite of their intervention, there was no
change in the attitude and conduct of the respondent.  The respondent is said to
have raised hands threatening to beat him.
The appellant stated that to get the mental status of the respondent checked, he
has taken her to a Gastroenterologist, by name, Dr. Badrinarayana Soma, and
thereafter, a Neurosurgeon/Psychiatrist, Dr. Ch. Mohan Rao; and they are said to
have treated her.  He further stated that at one point of time, he left the
house, unable to bear the harassment of the respondent, and ever since then,
there is no union between them.  He stated that the marriage between them is
irretrievably broken, and that he is entitled to be granted a decree of divorce.
Reference was also made to a legal notice dated 01-08-2005, issued by him,
requiring the respondent to join him for filing a divorce petition, with mutual
consent.
The respondent filed a detailed counter.  She denied the allegations made
against her.  She pleaded that the appellant was harassing her for additional
dowry, and he left her and her daughter, abruptly, and that the daughter had to
be admitted
in Junior College with the financial help of her family members.
It was stated that she is leading her life with the financial help extended by
her brothers, when the appellant totally neglected her.  She further pleaded
that when elders insisted, the appellant dropped her in his parents' house at
Warangal, though his place of employment is Ramagundam.   
The trial Court dismissed the O.P. through order dated
21-10-2009.  Hence, this appeal.

Heard Sri B. Narayana Reddy, learned counsel for the appellant and Sri B.
Ranganatha Rao, learned counsel for the respondent.
The appellant pleaded as many as three grounds for decree of divorce against the
respondent, viz., cruelty, desertion and the one of suffering from mental
disorder on the part of the respondent.  The latter opposed the O.P., by filing
counter.  The trial Court framed only one point for its consideration, viz.,
whether the appellant is entitled for divorce.  On behalf of the appellant, PWs
1 to 3 were examined and Exs.A-1 to A-9 were filed.  The respondent deposed as
RW-1 and she filed Exs.B-1 and B-2.   The O.P. was dismissed. 
Now the point that arises for consideration in this appeal is,
as to whether the appellant has proved the grounds of cruelty, desertion and
suffering of the respondent, continuously, or intermittently from mental
disorder.
It is 20 years after the marriage, that the appellant filed the O.P., for
divorce by pleading the three grounds, referred to above.  Though the ground of
cruelty was mentioned in the O.P., no specific acts in relation thereto were
pleaded.  According to the appellant,
the alleged conduct of the respondent caused harassment and cruelty to him.  The
O.P., itself is very vague and general in this behalf.

A perusal of paragraph 2 of the O.P., discloses that the grievance of the
appellant was mostly about the alleged "extraordinary behaviour and rude manner
of the respondent".
The only other detail, if one may call it, as furnished in the O.P.,
is that, at one point of time, the respondent raised hand to beat him, and
thereafter, the conduct of the respondent became unabated.  The appellant is
said to have done everything possible to maintain his social status and family
background, but was not successful on account of the conduct of the respondent.
The evidence of the appellant, as PW-1, did not add any clarity, to the
otherwise vague and general allegations made in the O.P.  The only thing, which,
one can presume, is that, it is the appellant, who developed some dislike,
approximating to hatred, towards the respondent, and just tried to call it as,
cruelty.
Coming to the ground of desertion, we come across a rare phenomenon, where the  
person, who left the matrimonial home; complains of desertion on the part of the
other.  This is what the appellant said, in paragraph 4 of the O.P:

"...It is submitted that in the year 2004 when the daughter was preparing for
10th class examination,
the Petitioner due to the continuous harassment of the respondent and in order
to not to disrobe the academic carrier of the child and to avoid further
embarrassment had resided separately by leaving the respondent and the daughter 
in the quarter allotted to him at the place of employment i.e., Kendriya
Vidyalaya Quarters of Secunderabad..."

No where it was mentioned that the respondent has left the house of the
appellant and deserted him.  Having left the house, and started living
elsewhere, curiously, the appellant has chosen to plead the grounds of desertion
against his wife, the respondent.  There cannot be any better instance of an
oppressor making an attempt to play the role of a victim.
The ground referable to Section 13(1)(iii) of the Act is
an extraordinary one.  It is only when a spouse suffers from incurable mental
disorder, which renders him, or her, unfit, to lead the matrimonial life, that
the Court can consider the feasibility of granting divorce.  Using his perverted
intelligence, the appellant made an attempt to make the Court to believe that
the respondent is mentally unstable and she is a psychiatric patient.
His outrageous attitude is reflected from the fact that he filed a petition
before this Court to send the respondent to a psychiatrist.  Even from the O.P.,
it is evident that he first took the respondent to a Gastroenterologist.  The
relevant portion in paragraph 3 of the O.P., reads:

"...Petitioner found the mental imbalance of the respondent in as much as at
times the respondent used to change her version with quick succession and
contrary versions and there by the Petitioner in order to have her mental status
had even approached a doctor and to that effect initially a Gastroenterologist
Dr. Badri Narayana Soma, MD., D.M., Hyderabad and on further advise after
preliminary test the respondent again took the treatment from
Neurosurgeon/Psychiatrist from Dr.Ch. Mohan Rao, who in turn treated the
respondent and after deep study of the history of respondent had prescribed
certain specified course of medicines and advised to inform about the mental
condition of the respondent from time to time in order to facilitated to coup up
the exigencies of the respondent and her mental condition and for that purpose
even the respondent gave up to follow the treatment and to that effect her
harassment was increased rampantly against the Petitioner who was not in a
position to bear the mental, physical harassment of respondent any longer".

A perusal of this pleading, in a way, gives an impression that there is
something seriously wrong with the appellant.  He was not clear as to what he
was doing.  One can easily estimate the mental balance of a person, who
approaches a Gastroenterologist, to get a patient treated for alleged mental
illness.
PW-2 is a relation of the appellant.  From this witness, it was elicited that
the maternal aunt and uncle of the appellant are suffering from mental illness.
PW-3 is a Doctor, specialized in Psychiatry.  She stated that she cannot express
any opinion by seeing the papers placed before her.  To be precise, she stated,
"by seeing copy (Xerox) I cannot say whether the patient referred to me is
suffering from any Psychiatric illness".

From this, it is clear that the appellant was reeling under several false
impressions.  During the course of counselling,
before us, the appellant, respondent and their daughter appeared.  The
respondent expressed her unconditional readiness to join the appellant.  Though
the appellant promised before us, on as many as three occasions, to take the
respondent and their daughter, to his place of working, he evaded by citing
totally untenable reasons and telling falsehoods.
We do not find any merit in the appeal. It is accordingly dismissed.  The
miscellaneous petitions filed in this appeal shall also stand disposed of.
  There shall be no order as to costs.
______________________    
L. NARASIMHA REDDY, J.     
_______________________    
M.S.K. JAISWAL, J.  
Dt.04-12-2013
