
THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE L.NARASIMHA REDDY AND THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE M.S.K.JAISWAL              

C.M.A.No.2703 of 2003  

30-12-2013 

B.V.Ramakrishna Raju.. Appellant 

Mrs.B.Bharathi  .. Respondent 

Counsel for appellant : Sri E. Phani Kumar

Counsel for respondent: Sri K. Balakrishna

<GIST: 

>HEAD NOTE:    

?CASES REFERRED : -------   


THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE L. NARASIMHA REDDY          
        AND     
THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE M.S.K. JAISWAL       

C.M.A.No.2703 of 2003  

JUDGMENT : (Per LNR,,J)   
The marriage between the appellant and the respondent took place in the year
1965.  They were blessed with one son and two daughters.  The marriage of the
first daughter was performed on 21.05.1998.  Shortly thereafter, the appellant
filed O.P.No.370 of 1999 in the Family Court, Hyderabad, against the respondent,
for divorce, under Section 13(1)(ia) of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 (for short
'the Act').  He pleaded that after the marriage of their elder daughter, the
respondent came under the influence of her brother and henchmen, and with that,
she revolted against him without any cause.  He pleaded that the behaviour of
the respondent turned out to be quarrelsome, and unable to bear the harassment
caused to him, he gave a portion of two rooms in his house to the respondent, as
a licensee from June, 1998 onwards.  He alleged that he is not in talking terms
with his wife and children, ever since June, 1998, and he was subjected to
harassment and cruelty, particularly, on account of a complaint lodged by the
respondent with the police against him in November, 1998, alleging that he is
harassing her for dowry.  He, ultimately, pleaded that there is no scope for
change of attitude in the mind of the respondent and, accordingly, prayed for
divorce.

The respondent filed a counter, opposing the O.P.  She stated that it is the
appellant, who harassed her, on one pretext or the other, including the one of
demand of additional dowry and landed property.  She stated that the appellant
has driven her away from the house.  In addition to opposing the O.P., the
respondent filed O.S.No.176 of 1999, against the appellant, for maintenance for
herself and children.

Through order, dated 26.03.2003, the trial Court dismissed the O.P.No.370 of
1999 and decreed the O.S.No.176 of 1999, granting maintenance to the respondent 
at the rate of Rs.2,500/- per month.  A sum of Rs.2,50,000/- was granted,
towards marriage expenses for the second daughter. 

This appeal, under Section 19 of the Family Courts Act, 1984, is filed against
the decree in O.P.No.370 of 1999.

Sri E. Phani Kumar, learned counsel for the appellant, submits that the trial
Court did not properly appreciate the oral and documentary evidence and
dismissed the O.P.  He contends that the very fact that the parties are living
separately from the past 1 1/2 decades, is sufficient to grant a decree for
divorce.  The learned counsel submits that though there were no serious disputes
between the parties, the humiliation and harassment caused by the respondent to
the appellant would constitute cruelty.

Learned counsel for the respondent, on the other hand, submits that even if one
goes by the contents of the O.P. filed by the appellant and the evidence on
record, it would be just impossible for any Court to grant a decree of divorce.
He contends that on a totally small and trivial issue, as to whether a cot
should be shifted from one room to another, the appellant picked up a quarrel;
so much so, he has driven out, not only his wife, the respondent, but also his
children, from the residence.  He contends that the appellant has subjected the
respondent to cruelty and desertion, and being a housewife, having respect to
the values of the family, the respondent has put up with the harassment caused
to her.

The appellant claimed the relief of divorce against his wife, the respondent,
pleading the ground of cruelty.  The O.P. was heard along with the suit filed by
the respondent for maintenance and other ancillary reliefs.  The nature of
contest between the parties is, indeed, amazing.

On behalf of the appellant, P.Ws.1 to 4 were examined and Exs.P.1 to P.71 were
filed.  On behalf of the respondent, R.Ws.1 to 4 were examined and Exs.R.1 to
R.12 were filed.  The salary certificates of the appellant were taken on record
as Exs.X.1 and X.2.

The issues framed in the trial Court were only referable to the suit and no
point, as such, was framed in respect of the O.P.  The trial Court found that
the ground of cruelty is not proved.  Therefore, the point that arises for
consideration in this appeal is as to whether the appellant has proved the
ground of cruelty against the respondent.

This is a rare case in which a person, that too, holding a senior post in the
office of the Accountant General, thought of seeking divorce from his wife, 35
years after the marriage.  The curious part of it is that an event, which, by
any standard is trivial, if not silly, is cited as the basis.  Filing of a
complaint by the respondent against the appellant before the police, alleging
that he demanded additional dowry, is also mentioned.

The cruelty, which a party to a marriage can plead, may be the result of certain
specific acts, on the part of the other spouse, or it can be the culmination of
various acts and omissions spread over a long period.  In the O.P., the
appellant was not specific about the acts of cruelty.  In the O.P., he stated:
"(c)    The petitioner's son, who was born in 1970, had studied upto B.Sc., and
subsequently, having developed bad company of friends, he left the house during
the year 1991 and as on date, there is no contact with the petitioner.  The
petitioner's 1st daughter's marriage was performed on 21.05.1998 with Mr.
P.Kumar Raju. 

(d)     The petitioner and the respondent have last resided together in the
premises shown in the description above.  That immediately within one week,
after the marriage of the first daughter, the respondent herein under the
influence of her brother and henchmen revolted against the petitioner without
any good cause or bona fide reason.  The petitioner tolerated the abnormal
behaviour of the respondent with a fond hope that she would realize the
petitioner's love and affection towards her, but however the respondent
continued to be under the influence of her brother Mr. V. Rama Raju.

(e)             The petitioner, who was commanding good respect in society including
at his place of service, could not adjust to the quarrelsome nature of the
respondent, who became a puppet in the hands of her brother and that upon the
request made by the respondent, the petitioner had given a portion of two rooms
in the petitioner's house to be occupied by the respondent as a licensee since
June 1998 onwards, after getting separated at her option in May, 1998."

Two other reasons stated in the O.P. are that from June, 1980 onwards, the
respondent is living separately together with the second daughter, and that she
filed a complaint in November, 1998, alleging harassment for additional dowry.
Rest of the narration is about the exchange of notices.

The affidavit filed by the appellant as P.W.1 in lieu of chief-examination far
exceeded the scope and content of the O.P. The following extract from the cross-
examination of P.W.1 would give an indication as to the origin of the dispute
and nature of grievance of the appellant:
"The dispute between me and my wife cropped up about one week after the marriage 
of my eldest daughter for the first time when she asked for shifting of a cot
from one room to another and when I stated on that day, it was not auspicious
and it can be changed, she got it shifted despite I objected through 3rd persons
and I asked her to leave the room.  There were no any differences between us
even prior to that or later other than this.  When I questioned for her shifting
despite my objection she got called her brothers and others and rowdy elements.
I did not lodge any police complaint about any rowdy elements brought by my wife
against me.  It is not true to say that I am a man of uncontrolled emotions and
provocations and for nothing I raised galata and bet my wife and broken her
mangalasuthram and I made it into pieces which is now shown to me in pieces and 
sent her out and that it is only then her brothers came to persuade me."

At another place, he said:
"It is true that the letters written by my wife relied on by me no where
discloses any disharmony between me and my wife so also from the contents of my  
letters to her filed by me."

One rarely comes across a person, who treats an incident mentioned in the above
paragraph as the basis for snapping the matrimonial relationship, that lasted
for 3 1/2 decades.  The first step which the appellant took for the shifting of
the cot from one room to another by the respondent was that he has driven away
the respondent and their daughter from the house, as is evident from Para (e) of
the O.P. extracted above.

There cannot be a more cruel behaviour or conduct than this.  Without stopping
and repenting at that, he has filed the O.P. for divorce.

The nature of harassment caused to the respondent is evident from the following
suggestions made to the appellant in his cross-examination:
"It is not true to say that there are documents in my office to show that the
property belongs to my wife as declared by me.  It is not true to say that on
3.11.1977 I harassed my wife and insisted her to transfer property in my name.
It is not true to say that the entire house is under the possession and
enjoyment of my wife.  In the year 1998, I purchased washing machine in my name.
Prior to that, we used to wash the clothes without the assistance of the
machine.  It is not true to say that in the year 1998, I pressed the neck of my
wife caught held of her tuft and also attempted to cut the throat of the
respondent with vegetable knife and that the brother of the respondent and my
son came to rescue the respondent.  I do not know whether my wife has lodged
police complaint during such circumstances vide crime No.270/98 before P.S.
Panjagutta, Hyderabad.  Witness adds that I came to know about the lodging of
such complaint only through their pleadings in O.S.No.176/99.  It is not true to
say that I have influence of police as such I got managed the final report
without filing the charge sheet."

He admitted that he did not attend the marriage of his second daughter, inspite
of knowledge and information, and that he did not contribute anything for it.
P.W.2 is the maternal uncle of the appellant.  Except stating that he too did
not attend the marriage of the second daughter of the appellant, and that he
arranged for the piles operation of the appellant, he did not state anything,
which is relevant for the purpose of this case.  It was suggested to him that
the appellant is addicted to vices, and his plea that he used to go to
Ramakrishna Mutt is not true.  P.Ws.3 and 4 are the employees of A.G. office and
subordinates to the appellant.  Their evidence is absolutely of no use.

Coming to the evidence of the respondent, not only she reiterated the contents
in the counter filed in the O.P., but her two daughters have supported her case.
If one looks into the contents of the cross-examination of R.Ws.2 and 3, the
daughters of the appellant and the respondent, lack of culture on the part of
the appellant would be manifest.  For all practical purposes, it can be said
that the appellant treated his two daughters as his enemies.  The documentary
evidence was mostly in relation to the claim made by the respondent about the
amounts and property.  Even if the O.P. and the evidence of the appellant herein
are taken on their face value, one just cannot think of granting a decree for
divorce, dissolving the marriage that subsisted for 35 years.  It is only the
unguided superiority of the appellant and his feeling that being husband of a
woman and father of children, he can do whatever he thinks, that appear to be
the cause for the present state of affairs.

This Court is, indeed, shocked at the frivolous nature of the  grounds pleaded
by the appellant for seeking divorce against the respondent.  It also
demonstrates typical male chauvinism.  The only strength of the appellant is the
weakness of the respondent, which is generated, on account of her unstinted
respect for family values.  The appellant has mistook the respect given to him
for licence to do whatever he wants.  This can be the result of total lack of
culture and regard for the scruples.  He has grossly misused the facility
created under the Act for proper and extreme situations.  His conduct deserves
to be deprecated.

Hence, the appeal is dismissed, with costs of Rs.10,000/- (Rupees Ten thousand
only) payable to the respondent, within two (2) months, from today.

The Miscellaneous Petitions, if any, pending in the appeal shall stand
dismissed. 
______________________    
L. NARASIMHA REDDY,  J.    
_______________   
M.S.K. JAISWAL,  J.  
30th December, 2013
