
THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE R.KANTHA RAO        

CRIMINAL PETITION No.11849 of 2010    

07-02-2013 

Gummallka Satyanarayana and  others....Petitioners/A2 to A7 
                                
State, rep.by its Public Prosecutor, High Court of A.P., Hyderabad and
another.....Respondents

Counsel for the Petitioners:Sri DASARI S.V.V.S.V.PRASAD   

Counsel for the 1st respondent: PUBLIC PROSECUTOR     

<Gist:

>Head Note: 

?Cases Referred: 

1.2009(3) ALT (Crl.) 316 (SC)
2.2013(2) ALT (Crl.) 21 (SC)


The Court made the following:

THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE R.KANTHA RAO        

CRIMINAL PETITION No.11849 of 2010    

ORDER:  

The criminal petition is filed by the petitioners/A2 to A7 under Section 482
Cr.P.C. to quash the proceedings in C.C.No.353/2010 on the file of the
Additional Judicial Magistrate of First Class, Narsapur, West Godavari District.
I have heard the learned counsel appearing for the petitioners, the learned
counsel appearing for the 2nd respondent/de facto complainant and the Additional
Public Prosecutor, representing the State.
The brief facts of the case which is sought to be quashed may be stated as
follows:
The de facto complainant and A1 fell in love with each other and A1 promised to
marry the de facto complainant.  When the de facto complainant asked A1 to marry
her, he stated that his parents and close relatives were not agreeing for his
marriage with her and thereby refused to marry her.  On that the de facto
complainant resorted to go on hunger strike in front of the house of A1.
Thereafter, one Polisetti Vasudevarao and some elders interfered and tried to
convince the parents and close relatives of A1, but they did not agree.  On
that, the elders performed the marriage of the de facto complainant with A1 at
Annavaram Temple on 30.11.2001.  
The marriage was consummated at the house of one Singuluri Gurumurthy and there  
the de facto complainant and A1 led conjugal life for three days.  Thereafter,
A1 took the de facto complainant to his parents' house, but the parents of A1
and the other relatives who are the petitioners herein did not allow them into
the house and demanded the de facto complainant to bring an amount of Rs.5 lakhs 
as dowry.  On that, A1 kept the de facto complainant in her grandmother's house
for some time and used to lead conjugal life with her there.  After the death of
the grandmother of the de facto complainant, A1 shifted the de facto complainant
to the house of her maternal aunt and there he used to lead conjugal life with
the de facto complainant.
Subsequently, in the year 2009, the de facto complainant received a notice from
the Court of the Senior Civil Judge, Narsapur in O.P.34/2009 and she came to
know that A1 filed a case against her seeking divorce.  Thereafter, the de facto
complainant filed the aforesaid criminal case.
The present criminal petition is filed by the parents and other close relatives
of A1 to quash the proceedings in the said criminal case.
The learned counsel appearing for the petitioners would submit that the
petitioners have nothing to do with the matters between A1 and the de facto
complainant and the de facto complainant keeping in mind the differences with
A1, falsely involved all the petitioners in the above criminal case, and
therefore, the proceedings are liable to be quashed against them.
As per the contents of the complaint made by the de facto complainant, the
petitioners allegedly demanded dowry of Rs.5 lakhs 3 days after her marriage
with A1 i.e. in the year 2001.  The complaint was filed in the year 2010 i.e.
nearly after 9 years.  It is mentioned in the complaint that there were no
contacts between the petitioners and A1, and therefore, the allegation made by
the de facto complainant that the harassment by the petitioners is still
continuing cannot be believed.
Section 498A of IPC reads as follows:
"498A: Husband or relative of husband of a woman subjecting her to cruelty:-
Whoever, being the husband or the relative of the husband of a woman, subjects
such woman to cruelty shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to three years and shall also be liable to fine."

In similar circumstances, in Manju Ram Kalita v. State of Assam1 the Supreme
Court held as follows:
"Cruelty" for the purpose of Section 498-A IPC is to be established in the
context of Sec.498-A IPC as it may be a different from other statutory
provisions.  It is to be determined/inferred by considering the conduct of the
man, weighing the gravity or seriousness of his acts and to find out as to
whether it is likely to drive the woman to commit suicide etc.  It is to be
established that the woman has been subjected to cruelty
continuously/persistently or at least in close proximity of time of loding the
complaint."

The accusation levelled against the petitioners seems to be under Explanation
(b) of Section 498A IPC.  From the explanation, it can be understood that the
harassment meted out to the woman must be with a view to coerce her or any 
person related to her to meet any unlawful demand for any property.
In the complaint, it is mentioned that the petitioners demanded dowry of Rs.5
lakhs 3 days after the marriage when A1 brought the de facto complainant to his
parents' house and they did not allow them into the house.  Then A1 took her
back and both of them stayed at the house of the grandmother of the de facto
complainant and thereafter at the house the maternal aunt of the de facto
complainant.  Therefore, the allegation of harassment by the petitioners in
connection with demand of dowry cannot be inferred.  As per the explanation to
Section 498A IPC, mere demand for dowry is not enough to constitute the offence,
but harassment with a view to coerce the woman to meet with unlawful demand of
dowry is required to attract the offence under the said provision.
In Geeta Mehrotra v. State of U.P.2 the Supreme Court at paragraphs 19 and 24
held as under:
"If the FIR as it stands does  not  disclose  specific  allegation  against
accused more so against the co-accused specially in  a  matter  arising    out
of matrimonial bickering, it would be clear abuse of the legal  and    judicial
process to mechanically send the named accused in the  FIR  to    undergo  the
trial  unless  of  course  the  FIR  discloses   specific    allegations which
would  persuade the court  to take cognizance of  the    offence alleged against
the relatives of the main accused who are prima    facie not found to have
indulged in physical and mental torture of  the    complainant-wife."

From the facts of the present case, the alleged harassment for dowry by the
petitioners herein relates back to the year 2001.  The allegation that the
petitioners herein still are demanding the de facto complainant to get an amount
of Rs.5 lakhs as dowry to allow her into her in-laws house seems to be absurd
because A1 and the de facto complainant have been staying away from the 
petitioners since several years.  From the facts of the case it can be clearly
understood that due to the differences between A1 and the de facto complainant,
the de facto complainant after receiving the notice in divorce petition filed
the present case implicating all the petitioners, who are the relatives of her
husband. 
Normally, in a case of this nature, there will be tendency of roping as many as
relatives of the husband as accused in the case filed under Section 498A of IPC.
There is inordinate delay of 9 years in filing the complaint in question and
therefore, the offence under Section 498 of IPC is barred by limitation and the
learned trial Court ought not to have taken cognizance of the case for the
offence punishable under Sec.498A IPC against the petitioners.  Except stating
that when A1 brought the de facto complainant to his parents' house in the year
2001, the petitioners demanded an amount of Rs.5 lakhs as dowry, nothing has
been stated against the petitioners.  Basing on the said stray allegation which
relates back to the year 2001 prosecuting the petitioners for the offence
punishable under Section 498A IPC is nothing but abuse of process of law.  If
the trial is allowed to continue against the petitioners, it would result in
miscarriage of justice. Hence the criminal proceedings pending against the
petitioners in the aforesaid criminal case are liable to be quashed.
Consequently, the entire proceedings in C.C.No.353/2010 on the file of the
Additional Judicial Magistrate of First Class, Narsapur, West Godavari District
against the petitioners/A2 to A7 are hereby quashed.
The Criminal Petition is accordingly allowed.
Pending miscellaneous petitions, if any, shall stand closed in consequence.
_____________________    
R.KANTHA RAO,J    
Date: 07.02.2014
