
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE L.NARASIMHA REDDY AND THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE M. S. K.JAISWAL                      

CRIMINAL APPEAL No.795 of 2009     

24-03-2014 

Shankurigari Venkatesh and others..Appellants

State of Andhra Pradesh, rep., by its Public Prosecutor, High Court of A.P.,
Hyderabad       .. Respondent 

Counsel for the Appellants :  Smt. A. Gayatri Reddy

Counsel for Respondent :  Public Prosecutor

<Gist :

>Head Note : 

?Citations:

THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE L. NARASIMHA REDDY          
AND  
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE M.S.K.JAISWAL        

CRIMINAL APPEAL No.795 of 2009     


JUDGMENT: (per the Honble Sri Justice L.Narasimha Reddy)  


        Section 498-A or for that matter Section 304-B I.P.C. were
introduced by the Parliament to curb the harassment to women after
their marriage and even the principles of the Indian Evidence Act,
1872, were changed to ensure that the perpetrators of crimes against
innocent women are not left scot-free.  However, as in the case of
many such measures taken by the State, the instances of misuse  
thereof are not lacking.  The case on hand is the one such.

        A1 to A4 in S.C.No.305 of 2008 were tried for the offence of
causing the death of Smt.Padmamma, wife of A1, on 17.03.2008 by  
harassing her to bring additional dowry.  The marriage between A1 and
the deceased Padmamma was performed about four years prior to   
2008 and a female child was born.  PW.1, the brother of Padmamma,  
filed a complaint, Ex.P1, on 18.03.2008 before P.S. Kondurg stating,
inter alia, that on the evening of 17.03.2008 he received a message to
the effect that his sister and niece jumped into a well to commit
suicide.  He attributed that, to the harassment caused by A1, his
parents and brother.  Ex.P1 is silent as to what was done by PW.1
soon after he received the information.  The record, however, discloses
that PW.1 has gone to the well in which his sister jumped together
with her daughter and that the body of the baby girl alone was
noticed.  On the next day, he is said to have gone to the well and
searched for the body and he noticed that some wires were tied
around the body and ultimately it was brought to the surface of water.

        Crime No.25 of 2008 was registered against A1 to A4 for the
offences punishable under Sections 302 r/w.34, 498-A r/w.34 I.P.C.,
and Section 3 and 4 of the Dowry Prohibition Act (for short,
the D.P. Act).  Along with the bodies of Padmamma and her daughter,
the body of another male person, by name, Kashaiah was recovered 
from the well.  The scene of offence panchanama was drawn and 
inquest and post mortem of bodies, were conducted.  The death of the
male person i.e., Kashaiah was not made the subject matter of these
proceedings.  After completion of the investigation, the prosecution
filed a charge sheet.  The case was committed to the Court of
IV Additional Sessions Judge (Fast Track Court), Mahabubnagar and 
it was numbered as S.C.No.305 of 2008. 

      The trial Court framed as many as five charges and the accused
pleaded not guilty.  To prove its case, the prosecution examined PWs.1
to 16 and Exs.P1 to P15 were filed.  On behalf of the defence, no oral
evidence was adduced, but Exs.D1 and D2 were filed.  The material
objects were marked. 

      Through judgment dated 28.04.2009, the trial Court acquitted
the accused of the charge framed under Section 3 of the D.P. Act,
Section 302 r/w.34 and 306 I.P.C.  However, it convicted them of
the offences punishable under Section 4 of the D.P. Act and
Section 498-A r/w. 34 I.P.C.  The fourth charge referable to Section
302 r/w.34 I.P.C. was alerted to be the one under Section 304-B I.P.C.
For the offence punishable under Section 304-B I.P.C., sentence of
imprisonment for life was imposed and for the offence punishable
under Section 4 of the D.P. Act, punishment of rigorous imprisonment
for six month and fine of Rs.5,000/- each was imposed.  As regards the
offence punishable under Section 498-A r/w.34 I.P.C., punishment of
R.I. for three months and fine of Rs.500/-, in default to undergo S.I.
for one month, were imposed.  A4 was found to be juvenile and
accordingly he was sent to borstol school.  He is said to have been
released from the school.  This appeal is preferred by A1 to A3.

      Smt. A. Gayatri Reddy, learned counsel for the appellants,
submits that in Ex.P1 itself, PW.1 stated that his sister jumped into the
well to commit suicide and in the cross examination of PW.1, it was
elicited from him that along with the deceased another person by
name Kashaiah also committed suicide in the same well.  She submits  
that the evidence of PW.5 is clearly indicative of the fact that the
deceased was having illicit intimacy with Kashaiah and both of them
were admonished on several occasions, before the incident.  Learned
counsel submits that the prosecution has deliberately omitted the
record pertaining to the paramour of the deceased i.e., Kashaiah and
painted a picture as though the suicide of the deceased was on
account of the harassment for dowry.  Learned counsel further submits
that PW.2, the mother of the deceased, clearly admitted that their
family was held responsible for the death of her daughter-in-law in
their house and that they have also been accused of committing other
offences.  Learned counsel further submits that the official witnesses,
such as PW.12 and the investigating officer, admitted that apart from
the deceased and her daughter, another male person also committed 
suicide and in that view of the matter, no ingredients of Section 304-B
I.P.C. or other provisions cited by the prosecution are present in the
instant case.

      Learned Public Prosecutor, on the other hand, submits that the
suicide of the deceased was proved to be on account of the
harassment caused by A1 to A4 to the deceased and that the trial
Court has arrived at just and proper conclusion.  She contends that the
evidence of PW.5 was in total deviation of what he had stated before
the police and accordingly the witness was declared as hostile.
Learned Public Prosecutor further submits that the other male person
whose body was found in the same well has nothing to do with the
family of the accused and the deceased and accordingly the matter
pertaining to him was dealt with separately.

      There is no dispute that the deceased Padmamma was married 
to A1 and out of their marriage, a girl child was born.  The record does
not disclose that any complaints were submitted or cases were
registered against the accused alleging that they have harassed the
deceased Padmamma at any time before the incident.  The police 
became aware of the incident only when PW.1, the brother of the
deceased, submitted the complaint at 12.30 noon on 18.03.2008. 
He has, no doubt, mentioned in detail, the alleged acts of harassment
against his sister.  However, he stated that unable to bear the
harassment, his sister was vexed with her life and at 9.00 A.M., on
17.03.2008, she left the house together with her daughter of two
years; and jumped into the agriculture well of Boddugari Chennaiah
situated in Mustipally Village, and committed suicide.  He did not state
as to who gave that information to him, and when.  It is only in the
chief examination that PW.1 stated that he received the intimation
about 5.00 P.M. on 17.03.2008 and he went and saw the dead body  
and since it was becoming dark, he went home and on the next day he 
submitted a complaint.  He further stated that the dead body of his
sister was not floating in the well and after seeing the dead body of his
niece, he searched for the dead body of his sister by getting down into
the well and he found that some wires were tied around the body and
that the neck portion of the body appeared black.  He did not mention
about the presence of any other dead body in the well.

      It was only in the cross examination that PW.1 stated that he
noticed three dead bodies in the well, i.e., those of his sister, his niece
and one Mr. Kashaiah.  A suggestion was made to him in the 
cross examination that his sister was having illicit intimacy with one
Kashaiah since one year and A1 and his parents informed him about it
several times.  It was also suggested that panchayats were held in this
context, in Mustipally Village and the elders chastised and admonished
the deceased and Kashaiah and it is in this context, that Kashaiah and
Padmamma jumped into the well together with the minor child.  PW.1, 
no doubt, denied the suggestions, but the recovery of the body of
Kashaiah along with the body of the deceased speaks volumes about  
the matter.  Extensive suggestions were made in relation to the
allegations made by him about the demand of dowry. 
        PW.2 is the mother of the deceased.  She too admitted that
three bodies were recovered from the well and suggestions were also
made about the illicit intimacy of the deceased Padmamma with 
Kashaiah and holding of panchayats in relation thereto.  PW.3, the
maternal uncle of the deceased, did not support of the case of the
prosecution and was declared as hostile and same is the case with
PW.4, who is said to have gone to the well, on hearing the hues.  The
evidence of PW.5 gains much importance.  In the chief examination,
he stated:
Padmamma had illegal intimacy with Kashaiah for which we 
chastised her two or three times.  Therefore, she along with
her child and Kashaiah jumped into the well and died.  I do not
know whether any panchayat was held in the village of parents
of Padmamma or not.  The relationship between deceased and  
accused was cordial, when Padmamma was alive.   

        Naturally this witness was declared hostile.  However, no
suggestion whatever was made on behalf of the prosecution to
contradict what he had stated in the chief examination.  PWs.6 and 7
are said to be the panchayatdars and they too did not support the case
of the prosecution.  PW.8 is the younger sister of the deceased.  Her
evidence is mostly about the alleged demand of dowry.  However,
once the elderly members of the family i.e., the mother and brother
have spoken about it, there is not much, that PW.8 can add.
Suggestions about illicit intimacy of the deceased with Kashaiah were
made to this witness also.  PW.12 is the panch witness at the inquest.
He too stated that when the bodies of the deceased Padmamma and   
her daughter were recovered, there was a dead body of another
person and it was also recovered by the police.  The other part of the
evidence stated by him is that he saw some wires by the side of the
dead bodies and he came to know that the wires came out along with 
the dead bodies.  PW.15, the investigating officer, admitted that the
reasons for delay in submission of the complaint were not mentioned.
He further admitted that he did not make a note in the inquest about
the finding of three dead bodies at the scene and that he has
conducted inquest over the third dead body also and sent for post
mortem examination.  This witness, however, stated that no wires
were tide around the dead body of Padmamma.   

      From the conspectus of the evidence on record what becomes
clear is that it was not even alleged that on 17.03.2008 any of the
accused indulged in verbal duel or physical quarrels with the deceased
Padmamma.  In Ex.P1 itself, PW.1 has simply stated that vexed with 
her life, Padmamma proceeded to the well together with the child and
jumped therein.  Though he made an attempt to state that the cause
of vexation is the demand of dowry by the accused, he was not able to
substantiate the same.  Neither any independent witness has
supported his allegation, nor did he submit any complaint at any earlier
point of time, in relation thereto.

        The fact that the death of the deceased occurred within
seven years from the date of marriage and that her parents made an
allegation about the demand of dowry is sufficient to invoke or attract
Section 304-B I.P.C.  In the instant case, the prosecution itself was
halfhearted in making mention of Section 304-B.  Even the trial Court
framed a charge under that provision, as an alternative one.  If the
ingredients are proved, the conviction ordered by the trial Court can
certainly be countenanced.

        That the death of a woman, i.e. the deceased, occurred within
seven years of her marriage, is beyond any pale of doubt.  What
remains to be seen is, the cause of death.  Since the person accused of
committing the offence under Section 304-B I.P.C. is placed in a
relatively disadvantageous position, when compared to the persons
accused of other offences, strict scrutiny of the basic facts that invite
the accusation under Section 304-B I.P.C. is warranted.  It is only after
the prosecution discharges its initial burden of proving the ingredients
of Section 304-B I.P.C., that the burden to prove his innocence would
shift to the accused.  It has already been mentioned that though
certain allegations of demand of dowry were made, PWs.1 and 2 did 
not substantiate the same either by referring to the submission of any
complaints, or by examining any independent witnesses.  However, if
there are other circumstances to suggest that the death, albeit suicidal,
of the deceased was prompted on account of demand of dowry, the  
prosecution, of the accused, for committing offence under Section 304-
B I.P.C. can certainly be undertaken.  In this connection, the
alternatives, if any suggested by the defence are also required to be
taken into account.  If such alternatives derive any support from the
evidence on record, the same deserve to be examined carefully.

        The complaint submitted by PW.1 was not truthful, in the sense
that though by the time he submitted the complaint he was aware of
the fact that as many as three dead bodies were recovered from the
well, he did not mention about the third one.  Even in chief
examination, he was silent about it.  It was only in the cross
examination that he admitted that the dead body of the third person
was also noticed and he in fact identified the body as that of Kashaiah.
The defence made a specific suggestion to PWs.1 and 2 to the effect
that the deceased Padmamma was having illicit intimacy with
Kashaiah, several panchayats were held in that context and both of
them were admonished by the elders.  PWs.1 and 2, no doubt, have  
denied those suggestions.  However, if we take into account the
evidence of PW.5, the independent witness, it becomes clear that there
existed illicit intimacy between those persons.  Otherwise, there is no
reason why, they should commit suicide together.  If at all anything, it
indicates the level or depth of their affinity towards each other.
PW.5 went a step further and stated that the relationship between
Padmamma and A1 was cordial.   

        PW.1 made a well thought over and meditated effort to
implicate A1 to A4, to cover up the affair of his sister, taking advantage
of her unfortunate death.  This is evident from the fact that though he
became aware of the incident in the afternoon of 17.03.2008, he
submitted a complaint only in the afternoon of the next day.  He did
not mention about the death of Kashaiah in the same well.  The record
further discloses that the First Information Report reached the
concerned Court at 10.30 P.M., on 18.03.2008.  It means that there
was nearly 36 hours delay in submission of the complaint.  PW.1 did
not mention the source of information also.  Added to the totally
distorted version of PW.1, the commissions and omissions on the part
of the prosecution weaken the case presented by them.  When three 
dead bodies were found in the well, it is not known as to how the case
pertaining to third person was dealt with separately and why the post
mortem report and other documents were not made part of the record
of the present case, at least when the allegation as to the illicit
intimacy between Padmamma and Kashaiah was coming from mere       
circles.

      Extensive suggestions were made to PW.2 to the effect that
herself, her son, PW.1, and other family members were alleged to have
committed the murder of her daughter-in-law.  PW.1 struggled to
explain the same by stating that her daughter-in-law died soon after
delivering the child.  Suggestions were also made to PW.1 about the
illegal and criminal acts said to have been resorted to, by him.
        
      In his statement recorded under Section 313 Cr.P.C., A1 stated
that his wife Padmamma was having illicit intimacy with Kashaiah and
though panchayats were held and Kashaiah was admonished, they did   
not stop their relationship and he does not know as to how the death
of his wife occurred.  This certainly gains support from the evidence on
record.  It is important to note that the investigation was undertaken
by an officer of the rank of Sub-Divisional Police Officer, as required
under Section 304-B I.P.C. and the investigation undertaken by him is
totally unsatisfactory.  But for the indifference exhibited by him, the
accused would not have been subjected to the hardship, which they
have undergone by serving sentence at far.      We are, therefore, of
the view that the prosecution failed to discharge its initial burden in
relation to the accusation under Section 304-B I.P.C., and the occasion
to shift the burden to the accused, did not arise.

        In the result, the Criminal Appeal is allowed. The conviction and
sentence ordered in S.C.No.305 of 2008 on the file of the IV Additional
District and Sessions Judge (Fast Track Court), Mahabubnagar, dated
28.04.2009, against the appellants  A1 to A4, are set aside.  The
appellants  A1 to A3 shall be set at liberty forthwith, unless their
detention is needed in any other case.  The fine amount, if any, paid
by the appellants  A1 to A4 shall be refunded to them.

        The miscellaneous petition filed in this appeal shall also stand
disposed of.
____________________   
L. NARASIMHA REDDY, J     
_______________   
M.S.K.JAISWAL, J   
Date:24.03.2014
