
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE U. DURGA PRASAD RAO           

Criminal Petition No.10816 of 2014

22-09-2014 

Smt. Sharwari Alagharu..... Petitioner/A.5

The State of Telangana, Rep. by its Public Prosecutor,High Court of Judicature
at Hyderabad for the States of Telangana and A.P.and another.   . Respondents 

Counsel for Petitioner  : Sri Venkateswar Varanasi

Counsel for Respondent No.1: Public Prosecutor for State

<Gist:

>Head Note: 

?Cases referred:

HONBLE SRI JUSTICE U. DURGA PRASAD RAO          
Criminal Petition No.10816 of 2014
ORDER:  
        The petitioner/A5 who is the sister-in-law of de facto complainant
seeks quashing of proceedings in FIR No.506 of 2013 of PS, Central Crime
Station, Hyderabad.
2)      A1 is the husband of de facto complainant. A2 and A3 are parents and
A4 and A5 are sisters of A1. The de facto complainant is a Software
Engineer in Accenture. She lost her father in her childhood and ever since her
mother, who is a woman entrepreneur doing family business under the name 
and style M/s.Sri Venkata Raghavendra Industries, Dasnapur, Adilabad
(Cotton Oil Extraction Unit) and pearl business has brought up her. A1 and
his father were also doing business.  On the demand of accused, her mother
gave large sum of dowry and gold ornaments and performed the marriage 
lavishly with a fond hope that her daughters marital life will be happy one.
However, the complaint would show her marital bliss became mirage even 
from the second day after marriage and ultimately the complainant was
forced to lodge the instant complaint.
3)      On her complaint dated 30.11.2013, woefully narrating the tortures
meted out by the accused even from the reception held following marriage
held on 14.02.2013 and extended to nuptial night and continued later and
some of which if true, are not only shuddering but shameful even to repeat in
this petition, the police of Women Police Station, CCS, DD, Hyderabad
registered FIR and investigated the matter.
4)      On behalf of petitioner/A5 it is submitted that she is the married sister
of A1 and she is residing at Bangalore away from the matrimonial home of
complainant and she never indulged in harassing the complainant and even if
the complaint allegations are presumed to be true, none of those allegations
would reflect any specific overtacts against the petitioner except general and
sweeping exaggerations which are false and baseless. It is thus prayed that
the petition may be allowed.
5)      Learned Public Prosecutor vehemently opposed the petition.
6)      On a perusal of FIR, this Court cannot agree with the petitioners
submission that there are no specific allegations against the petitioner and
other accused.  The petitioner is concerned, for instance, it is alleged that on
the eve of marriage reception arranged on the evening of 15.12.2013 the
petitioner and her another sister forced the de facto complainant to drink
alcohol, when she smoothly refused stating that she had no such habit, they
allegedly abused her and hurt in the presence of her relations and friends.
It is further alleged that after the newly wedded complainant joined her
husband in her marital home, the petitioner and her sister behaved with her
indifferently not even considering that she is a newly wedded girl. They put a
nasty condition that they would not allow her to share bed room with her
husband unless she agreed to take drinks and when she refused, they made  
her to sleep in common hall and did not give any privacy. As a height of their
torture, it is alleged, the petitioner and her sister denuded her and made
ashamed her by pointing out her body parts. They took measurements of her 
body and warned that they would throw her out of the house, if she wont
reduce a minimum of ten Kgs. in one month.  Besides, though the 
complainant by virtue of her employment as Software Engineer has to attend
her job, all the accused made her to work from early morning to late night as
a slave in their house and they have insulted and humiliated with their words
and deeds.  The mother-in-law and father-in-law also joined hands and
supported A1 and their daughters.
7)      The above are some of the specific overt acts attributed against
accused including the petitioner/A5. It may be noted that the atrocities and
horrendous acts of A1husband and A2father-in-law of complainant are  
if not depicted here, that is for want of necessity but not paucity in this
petition of A5. Suffice to mention that one of the allegations against A1 is
that besides being a sex pervert he used to force the complainant to
experiment with unusual, unhealthy and vulgar sexual activities beyond
imagination of a normal Hindu woman and zenith of all is that A1 used to
proclaim before his wife that he gifted his ex-girlfriends to his dad on
latters
birthday for one night-stand. Whereas A2 threatened the mother of
complainant that he has political influence and criminal background and that
once he was in Tihar jail in an illegal drug manufacturing case and he knows
the loopholes in the law and nothing will happen to him and his son even if
they lodge any complaint against them. It is true, the complaint is recent and
investigation is nascent and the truth or otherwise of the shameful, barbarious
and torturous acts of the accused have still to be investigated by the police.
But as the matter stands, the complaint allegations cannot be lightly swept off
with a broom of baseless brand. Accordingly, I find no merits in the
petition.
8)      In the result, this Criminal Petition is dismissed.
        As a sequel, miscellaneous petitions pending, if any, shall stand closed.
_________________________    
U.DURGA PRASAD RAO, J      
Date: 22-09-2014
