
HONOURABLE SRI JUSTICE S.RAVI KUMAR          

CRIMINAL PETITION No.4190 OF 2013     

17-9-2014 

T.B.Shankar Rao and others...Petitioners.

The C.B.I. State of Andhra Pradesh, represented by its Special Public
Prosecutor, for CBI (P.Kesava Rao). ..Respondent.

Counsel for the petitioners :  SRI M.JAGADISH KUMAR.  

Counsel for respondent: SPECIAL PUBLIC   
                         PROSECUTOR FOR CBI
                        (P.KESAVA RAO).
<GIST: 

>HEAD NOTE:    

? Cases referred:
1 (2008) 9 SCC 677 
2 (2003) 4 SCC 675 
3 (2009) 6 SCC 351 
4 2003 (4) SCC 675 
5  (2010) 15 SCC 118 
6 AIR 1975 SC 1002  
7 (2008) 16 SCC 1 
8 2014 LAW SUIT (SC) 145   


HONOURABLE SRI JUSTICE S.RAVI KUMAR          
CRIMINAL PETITION No.4190 OF 2013     
Dated 17-9-2014 

ORDER:  
     This petition is filed to quash proceedings in C.C.No.3 of
2003 on the file of II Additional Special Judge for C.B.I. Cases,
Nampally, Hyderabad. 
        Petitioners herein are A.5 to A.8 in the above referred C.C.
C.B.I., Hyderabad filed charge sheet against petitioners and seven
others for offences under Indian Penal Code and also for the
offences of Prevention of Corruption Act.
        The offences alleged against the petitioners are only under
Indian Penal Code which are punishable under Sections 120-B, 
420, 468 and 471 I.P.C.  Out of eleven accused, A.1 to A.3, A.10
and A.11 are public servants and Bank officials and remaining
are private persons.  The petitioners herein are also private
persons.  The first petitioner (A.5) and second petitioner (A6) are
husband and wife. Third petitioner (A.7) is mother-in-law of
first petitioner (A.5) and 4th petitioner is a private limited
company represented by first petitioner (A.5).
        According to Charge Sheet allegations, in pursuance of
criminal conspiracy, petitioners with a dishonest intention
applied for loans for establishing poultry units and
manufacturing poultry medicines without any lands for poultry
units on their own to Andhra Bank, Shamsheergunj Branch, 
Hyderabad.  In connivance with the officials of the bank,
petitioners obtained loan to the extent of 81.25 lakhs under the
scheme of term loans and OCC facility and by availing the said
loan, lands were purchased subsequently and those lands were 
offered as security and thereby, caused loss to the bank and
obtained wrongful gain for them.
        According to petitioners, first petitioner (A.5)  representing
M/s. Sunita Poultry Farm obtained term loan of Rs.23.75 lakhs in
1995-1996 repayable in monthly installments, over a period of
84 months with a gestation period of one year after sanction of
loan amount, he started paying the amount right from
22-2-1996 and paid installments till 31-12-1999 and
thereafter, as per the settlement and compromise with Andhra
bank paid 18.68 lakhs between 30-12-2002 to 29-5-2003 and 
repaid the entire loan amount.  Similarly, second petitioner (A.6)
obtained loan of Rs.23.75 lakhs during 95-96 and commenced  
payment of installments from 12-4-2006 and paid upto
28-2-2000 and in pursuance of the settlement/compromise, 
paid an amount of Rs.23.76 lakhs between 30-12-2002 to 
29-5-2003.
        Similarly, 3rd petitioner (A.7) obtained loan of Rs.23.75
lakhs during 95-96 and commenced payment of installments  
from 12-4-1996 and paid upto 28-3-2000 and as per the
settlement/compromise with the bank, paid an amount of 
Rs.23.76 lacks between 30-12-2002 to 29-5-2003. 
        According to petitioners, the total loan amount from the
bank was repaid by the end of May, 2003 in pursuance of one
time settlement/ compromise with the bank and this compromise  
was arrived after long correspondence between the petitioners
and the bank and therefore, allegation that loans were obtained
to cause loss to the bank and gain to the petitioners is not well
founded.
        According to the petitioners, they commenced payment of 
EMI from the inception i.e., 1996 onwards and therefore, the
allegation that the loans were obtained with dishonest intention
at the inception is also not well founded.
        Heard both sides.
        Advocate for petitioners submitted that all the petitioners
are charged for the offences under Sections 420, 468, 471 and
120-B I.P.C. and that for the offence of cheating, there must be
dishonest intention from the inception, but from the fact it is
clear that there is no prima facie material to show that they have
such intention from the inception, on the other hand, material on
record would disclose that they have no such intention and they
commenced payment of EMI from the middle of 1996.  He   
further submitted that the other allegation against the petitioners
is that they have used forged documents and caused loss to the
bank.
     He further submitted that repayment schedule commenced 
in the year 1996 and even by the date of FIR, substantial loan
amount is paid back and if really, the intention of the petitioners
was to cause loss, there should not have been repayment of
substantial amount.  He further submitted that the total amount
obtained under different loan accounts is 81.03 lacks and the
total money paid by way of installments was Rs.70.29 lakhs and
the amount paid after settlement is 77.43 lakhs, thus a total sum
of Rs.147-72 lakhs is paid and all the loan accounts are cleared
by middle of 2003.
     He further submitted that there is absolutely no loss to the
bank, on the other hand, the entire loan amount with interest
was repaid.  He further submitted that petitioners earlier filed a
quash petition relying on two Supreme Court judgments of
NIKHIL MERCHANT vs .CENTRAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION            
AND ANOTHER ( ) AND B.S. JOSHI & ORS VS STATE OF          
HARYANA & ANR ( ), but this court by relying on judgments of 
CENTRAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION Vs. A.RAVISHANKAR             
PRASAD AND OTHERS ( ) AND ALSO RUMI DHAR (SMT.) vs.          
STATE OF WEST BENGAL AND ANOTHER ( ), dismissed the said         
quash petition.  But in GIAN SINGH Vs. STATE OF PUNJAB AND      
ANOTHER ( )case, three judges bench of the Honourable  
Supreme Court upheld the view of NIKHIL MERCHANT AND     
B.S.JOSHI CASES (1st and 2nd cited) while answering the reference 
made to that bench and relying on the same, this court in
Criminal Petition No.1510 of 2009 quashed proceedings in
C.C.No.57 of 2005 on the file of Special Judge for C.B.I. Cases,
Hyderabad by order dated 16-10-2012 on a similar set of facts
and therefore, continuation of proceedings against the
petitioners would amount to abuse of process of court and as
such, they are entitled to the relief claimed.
     He further submitted that decision in GIAN SINGHs case
(5th cited) was not delivered by the date of disposal of earlier
quash petition.  He further submitted that even otherwise second
quash petition is not a bar and it is maintainable as per the
decision of Supreme Court in SUPERINTENDENT AND      
REMEMBRANCER OF LEGAL AFFAIRS, W.B., VS. MOHAN SINGH               
AND OTHERS.( ).  He further submitted that even if the facts as
narrated in charge sheet are accepted in toto, there may be
irregularities in sanction of the loan but there is no illegality and
on this ground also, proceedings are to be quashed.
        On the other hand, Special Public Prosecutor for C.B.I.
submitted that the allegations against the petitioners are in
respect of serious offences of cheating and use of false and
fictitious documents.  He further submitted that there is also
allegation of opening of fictitious accounts and that petitioners
knowing fully well that the accounts are fictitious withdrawn the
amounts and therefore, there is strong material against the
petitioners and the same require trial.  He further submitted that
even charges are framed and some witnesses were examined and   
all the objections raised by the petitioners are matter of evidence
which are to be decided during trial.  He further submitted that
mere repayment of loan will not absolve the petitioners from the
offences and therefore, there are no grounds to quash the
proceedings.
        In reply, learned advocate for petitioners submitted that in
SUPERINTENDENT AND REMEMBRANCER OF LEGAL AFFAIRS,                 
W.B., VS. MOHAN SINGH AND OTHERS.( 6th cited), Honourable       
Supreme Court while holding that there is no bar to file a second
petition and quashed proceedings in that case holding that there
was no progress in the trial for a period of one and half year
after the disposal of the first quash petition, but here in our case,
first quash petition was dismissed four years back and till now
there is no progress in the trial  and therefore, the objection of
learned Public Prosecutor is not tenable.
     Now the point that would arise for my consideration in
this petition is whether proceedings in C.C.No.3 of 2003 on the
file of II Additional Special Judge for C.B.I. Cases, Nampally,
Hyderabad is liable to be quashed or not?.
POINT: 
        As already referred above, petitioners are facing charges
for the offences under Sections 420, 468, 471 and 120-B IPC.
        As seen from the charges framed, the allegation against
petitioners are that they obtained agricultural term loan on
fictitious firms and withdrawn 81.25 lakhs from Andhra bank,
thereby, caused wrongful loss to the Bank and correspondingly
they had wrongful gain.
     The other allegation is that they have used invalid and
incomplete documents as collateral security with false quotations
for availing above referred loans and use of invalid and
incomplete documents or false quotations is only to have
wrongful gain of availing loan.
        From the correspondence and certificates issued by the
Andhra bank Shamsheergunj Branch, it is clear that loan
amounts are repaid partly by way of equated monthly
installments as agreed and the remaining amount under one time 
settlement/compromise with the bank. 
        According to petitioners, as per the NIKHIL MERCHANT vs  
.CENTRAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION AND ANOTHER (1st            
cited), proceedings have to be quashed.
      In NIKHIL MERCHANT vs .CENTRAL BUREAU OF       
INVESTIGATION AND ANOTHER (1st cited), the Honourable      
Supreme Court in a similar set of facts quashed the proceedings.
The point that was decided in that case by the Supreme Court is
whether criminal proceedings can be quashed pursuant to the
compromise arrived at.
        The facts and observations of the Honourable Supreme 
Court in that decision are as follows:
        The facts of the case warrant interference in these
proceedings.
        The basic intention of the accused in this case
appears to have been to misrepresent the financial status
of the company N, in order to avail of the credit facilities
to an extent to which the Company was not entitled.  In
other words, the main intention of the Company and its
officers was to cheat the Bank and induce it to part with
additional amounts of credit to which the Company was
not otherwise entitled.
        Despite the ingredients and the factual content of an
offence of cheating punishable under Section 420 IPC, the
same has been made compoundable under Section 320(2)    
Cr.P.C. with the leave of the court.  However, forgery has
not been included as one of the compoundable offences,
but it is in such cases that the principle enunciated in
B.S.Joshi case, (2003)4 SCC 675, becomes relevant. 
        In the instant case, the disputes between the
company and the Bank have been set at rest on the basis of
the compromise arrived at by them whereunder the dues 
of the Bank have been cleared and the bank does not
appear to have any further claim against the Company.
What, however, remains is the fact that certain documents
were alleged to have been created by the appellant herein
in order to avail of credit facilities beyond the limit to
which the Company was entitled.  The dispute involved
herein has overtones of a civil dispute with certain
criminal facets.
        On an overall view of the facts and keeping in mind
the decision in B.S.Joshi Case (2003) 4 SCC 675, and the
compromise arrived at between the Company and the  
Bank as also Clause 11 of the consent terms filed in the
suit filed by the Bank, this is a fit case where technically
should not be allowed to stand in the way in the quashing
of the criminal proceedings, since the continuance of the
same after the compromise arrived at between the parties
would be a futile exercise.

        Admittedly, petitioners earlier filed criminal petition
NO.1968 of 2009 and this court along with other similar
petitions by a common order dated 17th December, 2009  
dismissed the said application holding that this NIKHIL
MERCHANTs case (1st cited) cannot be applied in view of the
decisions of RAVISHANKAR PRASAD AND RUMI DHARS CASE.            
(3rd and 4th cited).
        A reference was made to the Honourable Supreme court  
in GIAN SINGHs case (5th cited)  wherein the correctness of the
decision of the NIKHIL MERCHANT AND B.S.JOSHI CASES        
(1st and 2nd cited) and other decisions of Honourable Supreme
Court were doubted by two Judge bench of Honourable Supreme   
Court and a three judges Bench of Honourable Supreme Court  
after analyzing decisions of Supreme Court on the subject
including RAVISHANKAR PRASAD AND RUMI DHARIS          
CASE. (3rd and 4th cited), upheld the correctness of view taken in
NIKHIL MERCHANT, B.S.JOSHI (1st and 2nd cited) AND MANOJ       
SHARMA vs. STATE AND OTHERS ( ).      
     The Honourable Supreme Court made the following
observations in GIAN SINGHs case (5th cited).
      The position that emerges from the above
discussion can be summarised thus: the power of the High 
Court in quashing a criminal proceeding or FIR or
complaint in exercise of its inherent jurisdiction is distinct
and different from the power given to a criminal court for
compounding the offences under Section 320 of the Code. 
Inherent power is of wide plenitude with no statutory
limitation but it has to be exercised in accord with the
guideline engrafted in such power viz; (i) to secure the
ends of justice or (ii) to prevent abuse of the process of any
Court.  In what cases power to quash the criminal
proceeding or complaint or F.I.R may be exercised where
the offender and victim have settled their dispute would
depend on the facts and circumstances of each case and no 
category can be prescribed. However, before exercise of
such power, the High Court must have due regard to the
nature and gravity of the crime. Heinous and serious
offences of mental depravity or offences like murder, rape,
dacoity, etc. cannot be fittingly quashed even though the
victim or victim's family and the offender have settled the
dispute. Such offences are not private in nature and have
serious impact on society. Similarly, any compromise
between the victim and offender in relation to the offences
under special statutes like Prevention of Corruption Act or
the offences committed by public servants while working
in that capacity etc; cannot provide for any basis for
quashing criminal proceedings involving such offences.
But the criminal cases having overwhelmingly and pre-
dominatingly civil flavour stand on different footing for
the purposes of quashing, particularly the offences arising
from commercial, financial, mercantile, civil, partnership
or such like transactions or the offences arising out of
matrimony relating to dowry, etc. or the family disputes
where the wrong is basically private or personal in nature
and the parties have resolved their entire dispute. In this
category of cases, High Court may quash criminal
proceedings if in its view, because of the compromise
between the offender and victim, the possibility of
conviction is remote and bleak and continuation of
criminal case would put accused to great oppression and
prejudice and extreme injustice would be caused to him by
not quashing the criminal case despite full and complete
settlement and compromise with the victim. In other
words, the High Court must consider whether it would be
unfair or contrary to the interest of justice to continue
with the criminal proceeding or continuation of the
criminal proceeding would tantamount to abuse of process
of law despite settlement and compromise between the 
victim and wrongdoer and whether to secure the ends of
justice, it is appropriate that criminal case is put to an end
and if the answer to the above question(s)is in affirmative,
the High Court shall be well within its jurisdiction to
quash the criminal proceeding.
        Now the contention of the learned Public Prosecutor for
C.B.I. is that while quashing the proceedings on the ground of
compromise, the High Courts have to consider the nature and
gravity and since this offence against petitioners is grave in
nature, the repayment of loan amount is not a ground to quash.
        But from a reading of the above observations of the
Supreme Court in GIAN SINGHs case (5th cited), it is clear that
Criminal Cases having overwhelmingly and predominatingly 
civil flavour stand on different footing for the purpose of
quashing particularly the offences arising from commercial
financial, mercantile, civil and partnership or such like
transactions or the offences arising out of matrimonial relating to
dowry etc., or family disputes.
        In NIKHIL MERCHANTs (1st cited), almost on a similar set
of facts the Honourable Supreme court quashed the proceedings 
while taking into consideration the parties therein have cleared
the amounts due to the bank.  In that case also, the allegation
against the accused therein was that they have availed loan
credit facility by making false representation to avail loan to
which the accused therein was not entitled.  In that case also, the
offences leveled against the accused therein are for the offences
under Sections 420, 468 and 471 I.P.C. besides 120-B I.P.C.
        The objection of learned Special Public Prosecutor for C.B.I.
is Honourable Supreme Court (in GIAN SINGHs case (5th cited), 
pointed out some restrictions and those restrictions would apply
to the facts of this case.
     Recently, Honourable Supreme Court had considered this
aspect in a similar set of facts and held that the restrictions
pointed out in GIAN SINGHs case (5th cited) are not applicable
and confirmed the view in NIKHIL MERCHANTS case    
(1st cited). This observation was made in C.B.I., A.C.B, MUMBAI
Vs. NARENDRA LAL JAIN & ORS. ( ) and the relevant portion is as  
follows:
     In the present case, as already seen, the offence with
which the accused-respondents had been charged are  
under Section 120-B/420 of the Indian Penal Code.  The
civil liability of the respondents to pay the amount to the
bank has already been settled amicably.  The terms of such
settlement have been extracted above.  No subsisting
grievance of the bank in this regard has been brought to
the notice of the Court.  While the offence under Section
420 IPC is compoundable the offence under Section 120-B 
is not.  To the latter offence the ratio laid down in B.S.Joshi
and Nikhil Merchant would apply if the facts of the given
case would so justify.  The observation in Gian Singh (para
61) will not be attracted in the present case in view of the
offences alleged i.e., under Sections 420/120B I.P.C.
        In the present case, having regard to the fact that
the liability to make good the monetary loss suffered by
the bank had been mutually settled between the parties
and the accused had accepted the liability in this regard,
the High Court had thought it fit to invoke its power under
Section 482 Cr.P.C.  We do not see how such exercise of 
power can be faulted or held to be erroneous.  Section 482
of the Code inheres in the High Court the power to make
such order as may be considered necessary to, inter alia,
prevent the abuse of the process of law or to serve the ends
of justice.  While it will be wholly unnecessary to revert or
refer to the settled position in law with regard to the
contours of the power available under Section 482 Cr.P.C.
it must be remembered that continuance of a criminal
proceeding which is likely to become oppressive or may
partake the character of a lame prosecution would be
good ground to invoke the extraordinary power under
Section 482 Cr.P.C.

        As rightly pointed out by advocate for petitioners, the facts
in NIKHIL MERCHANTs (1st cited) are almost similar to the case
on hand.
        In our case, from the correspondence between petitioners
and Andhra Bank, it is clear that Bank accepted one time
settlement and in pursuance of such settlement the entire loan
amount is paid and there is no grievance to the Bank.
        Though other side has not raised any objection with regard
to maintainability of second petition, Advocate for petitioners
submitted that second petition is not a bar and to support his
argument, he placed reliance on a Supreme Court decision.
        In SUPERINTENDENT AND REMEMBRANCER OF LEGAL               
AFFAIRS, W.B., VS. MOHAN SINGH AND OTHERS.          
(6th cited), Honourable Supreme court held that dismissal of
earlier application for quashing is not a bar to consider fresh
application.
        In that case, the Honourable Supreme Court observed as 
follows:
      The earlier application which was rejected by the
High Court was an application under Section 561 A of the
Code of Criminal Procedure to quash the proceeding and
the High Court rejected it on the ground that the evidence
was yet to be led and it  was not desirable to interfere with
the preceding at that stage.  But, thereafter, the criminal
case dragged on for a period of about one and half years
without any progress at all and it was in these
circumstances that respondents No.1 and 2 were 
constrained to make a fresh application to the High Court
under Section 561-A to quash the proceeding.  It is
difficult to see how in these circumstances it could ever be
contended that what the High Court was being asked to do
by making the subsequent application was to review or
revise the order made by it on the earlier application.
Section 561-A preserves the inherent power of the High
Court to make such orders as it deems fit to prevent abuse
of process of the Court or to secure the ends of justice and
the High Court must, therefore, exercise its inherent
powers having regard to the situation prevailing at the
particular point of time, when its inherent jurisdiction is
sought to be invoked.  The High Court was in the
circumstances entitled to entertain the subsequent
application of Respondents Nos.1 and 2 and consider
whether on the facts and circumstances then obtaining the
continuance of the proceeding against the respondents
constituted an abuse of the process of the Court or its
quashing was necessary to secure the ends of justice.  The
facts and circumstances obtaining at the time of the
subsequent application of respondents Nos.1 and 2 were 
clearly different from what they were at the time of the
earlier application of the first respondent because, despite
the rejection of the earlier application of the first
respondent, the prosecution had failed to make any
progress in the criminal case even though it was filed as
far back as 1965 and the criminal case rested where it was
for a period of over one and a half years.  It was for this
reason that, despite the earlier order dated 12th December,
1968, the High Court proceeded to consider the
subsequent application of respondents Nos.1 and 2 for the
purpose of deciding whether it should exercise
  @ page-SC 1005  
 its inherent jurisdiction under Section 561A.  This the
High Court was perfectly entitled to do and we do not see
any jurisdictional infirmity in the order of the High Court.
        From a reading of the above judgment of the Honourable
Supreme Court, where there was no progress over a period of
one and half year after disposal of the earlier quash application,
the second application was considered and quash of proceedings 
ordered by the High Court were upheld.  In this case also,
decision of GIAN SINGHs case (5th cited) was not there when the
first application of the petitioners is disposed of and in view of
the change of circumstance and also due to the fact that no
progress is made in the trial, the petitioners again moved for
quash and in view of the above referred judgment of the
Supreme Court, this second petition is absolutely maintainable.
        As already referred above, the facts and circumstances in
this case are similar to that of NIKHIL MERCHANTs case 
(1st cited).  In that case also the offences against the accused
therein are for offences under Sections 120-B, 420, 468, 471
I.P.C. who were private persons and for the offences under
Prevention of Corruption Act were against the Bank Officials.
        In this case also, the offences against private persons are
under Section 120-B, 420, 468 and 471 I.P.C. and the offences
against bank officials are under the Prevention of Corruption Act
besides the IPC offences.
        In this case also. in pursuance of the settlement and
compromise between the bank and petitioners, entire loan
amount is paid.
        As seen from the record, the total loan amount was
Rs.81.03 lakhs and the amount repaid by the petitioners was
Rs.147.72 lakhs.
        Considering the judgments of the Honourable Supreme  
Court referred above, and applying the principles and
observations made in the above referred decisions, I am of the
view that continuation of the proceedings against the petitioners
would be futile exercise, therefore, to secure ends of justice,
powers under Section 482 Cr.P.C. have to be exercised.
     For these reasons, this Criminal Petition is allowed and
proceedings in C.C.No.3 of 2003 on the file of II Additional
Special Judge for C.B.I. Cases, Nampally, Hyderabad against
petitioners, are hereby quashed.
        As a sequel to the disposal of this Criminal petition, the
Miscellaneous Petitions, if any, pending, shall stand dismissed.
____________________   
JUSTICE S.RAVI KUMAR     
Dated 17-9-2014.
