
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE A. RAJASHEKER REDDY           

C.C.C.A.No.355 of 2007 

24-12-2014 

Mohmed Maqsood Ali. Appellant    

Baby Neha Fathima Begum. Respondent      

Counsel for Appellant:  Sri K. Chidambaram

Counsel for respondent: Sri V. Jayakar Rao

<Gist:

>Head Note: 

?Cases referred:

HONBLE SRI JUSTICE A. RAJASHEKER REDDY          
C.C.C.A.No.355 of 2007 
Date:   24-12-2014 

HONBLE SRI JUSTICE A. RAJASHEKER REDDY          
C.C.C.A.No.355 of 2007 

ORDER:  

        This appeal is directed against the decree and judgment dated 15-
02-2007 passed in O.S.No.17 of 2004 on the file of Additional
Metropolitan Sessions Judge for trial of JHCBBC-cum-Additional Family
Court-cum-XXIII Additional Chief Judge, Red Hills, Nampally, Hyderabad,
decreeing the suit by awarding an amount of Rs.2,500/- per month
towards maintenance to the plaintiff payable by the defendant from the
date of filing of the suit i.e. 11-02-2004 till the marriage of the plaintiff.
2.      The brief facts, which are necessary for disposal of the appeal, are
that the respondent-plaintiff filed the suit stating that the mother of the
respondent-plaintiff viz., Rehana Begum is the legally wedded wife of the
appellant-defendant and their marriage was solemnized on 25-04-1996
as per muslim rites and customs and they lived together in the house of
the respondent-defendant for a period of three months after the marriage
and thereafter, the respondent-defendant left for Kuwait in pursuance of
his employment and came back to India after three years in the month of
December, 1999.  The respondent-plaintiff was born to her mother and
the appellant-defendant during their wedlock on 25-12-1996.  After the
appellant-defendant returned to India, he and his family members started
harassing the mother of the respondent-plaintiff for additional dowry, for
which the mother of the plaintiff launched criminal prosecution against
the appellant-defendant and thereafter, a compromise was entered into
between them and that the appellant-defendant has to pay Rs.60,000/- to
the mother of the respondent-plaintiff towards full and final settlement
and Rs.20,000/- was paid in cash and failed to pay balance amount of
Rs.40,000/- as agreed, as such, the plaintiff filed the suit seeking for grant
of Rs.2,500/- per month towards her maintenance as the mother of the
respondent-plaintiff is not capable to maintain her.
3.      The appellant-defendant resisted the suit by filing written
statement contending that the mother of the respondent-plaintiff is his
legally wedded wife and he and the mother of the plaintiff lived together
in his house and thereafter he left for Kuwait and disputed the paternity of
the respondent-plaintiff.  It is stated that the mother of the respondent-
plaintiff was pregnant at the time of marriage and she suppressed the said
fact and played fraud on the defendant and after coming back to India on
26-12-1999 he has given divorce to the mother of the plaintiff on
04-01-2000.  The mother of the respondent-plaintiff lodged a complaint
with the police registered as Crime No.4 of 2000 and thereafter, they
entered into compromise agreeing the appellant-defendant to give
Rs.60,000/- to the mother of the respondent-plaintiff towards full and
final settlement and that he paid Rs.20,000/- and the balance amount of
Rs.40,000/- was agreed to be given after she withdraws the criminal case
and as she did not withdraw the same, the balance amount was not paid 
and sought for dismissal of the suit.
4.      The Court below, considering the rival contentions of both parties
and relying on the evidence of PW.1, the mother of the plaintiff and
Exs.A.1 to A.4, decreed the suit awarding an amount of Rs.2,500/- per
month towards maintenance to the respondent-plaintiff from the date of
filing of the suit i.e. 11-02-2004 till her marriage.  Challenging the said
decree and judgment, the appellant-defendant filed the present appeal.
5.      Learned counsel for the appellant-defendant contends that no
averment is made in the plaint regarding cohabitation between the
mother of the respondent-plaintiff and the appellant-defendant and
unless there is cohabitation, it cannot be said that the birth of the
respondent-plaintiff took place out of their wedlock.  He also contends
that the burden lies on the respondent-plaintiff to prove her paternity and
when the paternity is denied, the respondent-plaintiff should have filed a
suit for declaration of her status in the absence of which the suit is liable
to be dismissed.  He further contends that by mere marriage the paternity
of the plaintiff is not proved.
6.      On the other hand, the learned counsel for the respondent-plaintiff
contends that the appellant-defendant himself filed a petition seeking
D.N.A. test and the respondent-plaintiff has not objected for the same and
DNA report was also submitted wherein it is stated that the plaintiff is the
daughter of the defendant and since the report was made against the
appellant-defendant, he did not get the report marked and suppressing
the said fact, he filed the present appeal and obtained interim stay.  He
further contends that mere suppression of documents does not entitle the
appellant-defendant to get any relief.  He further contends that an
averment was made that the marriage was consummated between the    
mother of the plaintiff and the defendant and out of their wedlock the
plaintiff was born on 25-12-1996.  He further contends that the mother
of the plaintiff and the defendant lived together in the house of the
defendant for a period of three months after the marriage and thereafter,
the defendant left for Kuwait in pursuance of his employment and came
back to India after three years in the month of December, 1999.  He
further contends that a presumption can be drawn that any person was
born during the continuance of a valid marriage between his mother and
any man, or within two hundred and eight days after its dissolution, the
mother remaining unmarried. 
7.      In view of rival contentions of both the parties, the points that arise
for consideration is whether the respondent-plaintiff is born out of
wedlock of the mother of the respondent-plaintiff and the appellant-
defendant; and whether the presumption under Section 112 of the
Evidence Act can be drawn during subsistence of marriage between the 
mother of the respondent-plaintiff and the appellant-defendant?
8.      In the present case, it is not in dispute that the marriage between
the mother of the respondent-plaintiff and the appellant-defendant was
took place on 25-04-1996, that they lived together after the marriage and
the compromise entered between the appellant-defendant and the mother 
of the respondent-plaintiff vide Ex.P.1.  It is also not in dispute that the
appellant-defendant paid Rs.20,000/- and agreed to pay another
Rs.40,000/- and the birth of the respondent-plaintiff took place on
25-12-1996 is also not in dispute.  There is a categorical averment in the
plaint about consummation of marriage and cohabitation between the
appellant-defendant and the mother of the respondent-plaintiff and
except disputing the paternity of the respondent-plaintiff, the defendant
did not take any steps to prove the same and the burden lies on the
appellant-defendant since he admitted the marriage between him and the
mother of the respondent-plaintiff.  Though the learned counsel for the
respondent-plaintiff stated that the application is filed at the instance of
the appellant-defendant for DNA test and a report was received by the
court, the said report was not marked since it went against the appellant-
defendant.  That assertion is not disputed by the learned counsel for the
appellant-defendant. This itself shows that the appellant-defendant
deliberately did not want to mark the said report.  It is relevant to refer the
provision of Section 112 of the Evidence Act, which reads as follows:
Section 112: Birth during marriage, conclusive proof of legitimacy:
    The fact that any person was born during the continuance of a
valid marriage between his mother and any man, or within two
hundred and eight days after its dissolution, the mother remaining
unmarried, shall be conclusive proof that he is the legitimate son of
that man, unless it can be shown that the parties to the marriage had
no access to each other at any time when he could have been begotten.
        
9.      From the above, the mandate of Section 112 of the Evidence Act is
very clear that any person born during the continuance of the marriage
between the mother and any man after 280 days after dissolution of
marriage and the mother remaining unmarried, it is a conclusive proof
that he is the legitimate son of that man.  So, in view of clear mandate
provided in the section, the admission of marriage between the mother of
the respondent-plaintiff and the appellant-defendant and the compromise
between the mother of the respondent-plaintiff proved that the
respondent-plaintiff was born during subsistence of wedlock of the
mother of the respondent-plaintiff and the appellant-defendant and the
paternity of the respondent-plaintiff cannot be doubted in any way, more
so, the evidence given by the G.P.A. holder of the appellant-defendant is
only on his personal knowledge, as such, he cannot depose about the
paternity of the respondent-plaintiff, which cannot be said that it is in his
personal knowledge. Appellant-defendant has also not examined himself
and the evidence of DWs.2 and 3 cannot in any way throw much light on 
the paternity of the respondent-plaintiff, as such, he failed to discharge his
burden of proof.
10.     Therefore, in the above facts and circumstances, I do not see any
legal infirmity in the order passed by the Court below, warranting
interference of this Court, and hence, the appeal is liable to be dismissed.
11.     Accordingly, the appeal is dismissed confirming the judgment and
decree dated 15-02-2007 in O.S.No.17 of 2004 on the file of Additional
Metropolitan Sessions Judge for trial of JHCBBC-cum-Additional Family
Court-cum-XXIII Additional Chief Judge, Red Hills, Nampally, Hyderabad.
There shall be no order as to costs.
        As a sequel thereto, miscellaneous petitions, if any, pending shall
stand closed.
_____________________    
A. RAJASHEKER REDDY, J      
Date: 24-12-2014
