
HONOURABLE SRI JUSTICE R. SUBHASH REDDY AND HONOURABLE SRI JUSTICE A.SHANKAR NARAYANA 

CIVIL MISCELLANEOUS APPEAL No.3863 OF 2003         

26-03-2014 

Smt. Radhika @ M. Lavanya ..Appellant  

M.Lokender..Respondent  

Counsel for the appellant :Sri C.B. Ram Mohan Reddy 

Counsel for the respondent:-

<GIST: 

>HEAD NOTE:    

?CASES REFERRED:      

1.  2002(5) SCC 706 = 2002(5) ALD SC 6  
2.  AIR 1975 SC 1534 
3.  AIR 1973 DELHI 200 AT 209  
4.  AIR 1981 DELHI 53 
5.  AIR 2000 AP 328 
6.  2013 (1) ALD 165 (DB)
7.  ILR 2004 KAR 808, 2003(6) KarLJ 120 
8.  AIR 1975 All 94


HONOURABLE SRI JUSTICE R. SUBHASH REDDY            

AND  

HONOURABLE SRI JUSTICE A. SHANKAR NARAYANA             

CIVIL MISCELLANEOUS APPEAL No.3863 OF 2003         

JUDGMENT: (Per Honble Sri Justice A. Shankar Narayana)   

        The instant appeal is preferred by the appellant  wife
challenging the order in O.P. No.68of 2002, dated 15-05-2003, passed
by the Judge, Family Court, Secunderabad, upholding the plea of the
respondent  husband, for dissolution of marriage and granting
divorce decree under Section 13 (1) (i-a) & (i-b) of the Hindu
Marriage Act, 1955 (for short, the Act).

        2.  For the sake of convenience, the parties are, hereinafter,
referred to as arrayed in the O.P. before the Court below.

        3.  The O.P. was allowed in favour of the petitioner arriving at
the conclusion that he could prove adultery between the respondent
and her employer viz., Ashok, by reason of which, the Court below
held that her cruelty against the petitioner was also established.
Aggrieved of the same, the instant appeal is preferred.

        4.  Since certain facts are relevant for proper appreciation
of the matter, they are set out, as per the pleas, the parties have
put-forth respectively.  Their marriage was solemnized on
08-12-1985 at Secunderabad, and their marriage was consummated.   
Out of their wedlock, two daughters and a son were born.
The petitioner alleged that sometime after the marriage, respondent
started behaving violently causing physical and mental cruelty to him,
but, he withstood the same with a hope that there would be change in
her attitude.  Since the father of the respondent died in 1997,
respondents younger sister was shelter-less; she started staying with
them and even the petitioner raised Rs.2,00,000/- for her marriage
expenses.  The petitioner refers to certain alleged acts of respondent in
the direction of humiliation caused to him, which details are
unnecessary to refer to in the instant appeal.  The petitioner alleges
that the respondent was leading irresponsible and vagabond life
without caring the children and developed extra-marital relations with
her employer, a resident of Seethaphalmandi, and she was found
moving along with him at odd hours in his car bearing No.APK 
7089 - Maruti Zen and even witnessed by their common relative and
mediator to their marriage.  Her employer, even threatened him to do
away with his life, if he comes in their way, due to which, he suffered
heart-attack and admitted in Care Hospital, Secunderabad, and despite
intimation given to the respondent, she had no courtesy to visit him.
He states that the respondent deserted him from December, 1998, and, 
therefore, sought the aforesaid relief.

        5.  Respondent specifically denied the allegations levelled by
the petitioner touching the acts of cruelty directed against her.
She admits the death of her father taking place on 24-03-1997 in a
road accident.  She denied the allegations that one S. Gyaneshwar,
who is a mediator to their marriage and a common relative, found her
on one late night near Tankbund of Fisheries Department, and when
he questioned her as to why she was there at that odd hour, she evaded
to give reply and that he scolded her.  She has also denied the
allegation that her employer has threatened the petitioner on telephone
to do away with his life, if he comes in their way.  She admits that the
petitioner suffered heart-attack on 05-10-2000 and was admitted in
Care Hospital, but denied the allegation that she did not have courtesy
to visit him.  She has categorically denied the allegation that she
subjected the petitioner to physical and mental cruelty and the
desertion alleged by him.

     6.  In her further pleas, she specifically averred that the
petitioner was addicted to consumption of alcohol at Hyderabad and
started ill-treating her in filthy language and pressurised her to get
gold ornaments and money for doing business and that from the very
first day, the mother of the petitioner, who came from village, openly
expressed her displeasure against her and used to comment and  
demand her to bring money from her mothers house and was  
instigating the petitioner to marry some other girl for dowry and was
insisting her to leave the life of the petitioner, but she bore all these
insults keeping in view, the welfare of the children.  She avers that she
was forced to do private job due to financial constraints of the
petitioner and was earning Rs.3,000/- per month and the petitioner
developed some suspicion and started relating her with her staff and
even telling the same to her Management and unable to bear his
harassment and the awkward situation in the office, she was
compelled to resign the job, and she had to change three jobs.
She also alleged that the petitioner along with his mother, on the
instigation of his elder brother viz., Narsimha Rao, demanded and
forced her to get Rs.1,00,000/- and gold ornaments from her mother
and pressurized her to pursue her mother to transfer a small piece of
house plot situated at Malkajgiri, on his name; and when she
expressed her helplessness, he resorted to abusing and subjecting her
to physical torture.  She avers that she did not leave the company of
the petitioner on her own; but due to financial problems, petitioner,
himself, forcibly drove her away from the house to get Rs.1,00,000/-
from her mother.  She claimed that since the petitioner was not
providing any maintenance to lookafter the welfare of her three
children, she has been maintaining the children by doing job.

        7.  Concerning the alleged extra-marital relations with her
employer, she submits that the petitioner is in the habit of relating her
with the staff and management and that her employer, Ashok was her 
boss and Managing Director of M/s. Confruit Exports India Limited.
These allegations are imaginary and created for the purpose of
obtaining divorce.  Hence, sought to dismiss the O.P. for divorce filed
by the petitioner.

        8.  The Court below on the basis of the pleadings put-forth by
the parties, formulated the point for consideration thus:

    Whether the petitioner established that the respondent
living in adultery and she treated him cruelly?


        9.  During the enquiry, petitioner besides examining himself as
PW.1, examined four witnesses as PWs.2 to 5 and exhibited the  
wedding card as Ex.A-1 in the direction of substantiating his stand.
The respondent got examined herself as RW.1, but she has not 
examined any other witnesses and no document is marked on her   
behalf.

        10.  The Court below, having recorded the gist of the evidence
of PWs.1 to 5 and mainly relying on the evidence of PWs.2 to 4,
observing that the respondent was living separately and since refused
to lead conjugal life with the petitioner, amounts to proving that the
respondent is living in adultery and that the evidence of PWs.4 and 5,
since unchallenged, and their evidence coupled with the evidence of
PWs.1 to 3 proves cruelty, acceded to the relief sought for by the
petitioner.  That conclusion arrived at by the Court below, since
relevant for assessing the controversy between the parties, in the light
of evidence on record, the same is extracted, contained in paragraph
No.14 of the impugned order:

         Since four years the respondent living
separately and refused to conjugal life with the
petitioner without conjugal life the marriage cannot
subsist for long.  The act of the respondent in
refusing conjugal life to the to the petitioner,
clinchingly established that the respondent living in
adultery.  The evidence of Pw4 and 5 became 
unchallenged, their evidence coupled with the
evidence of Pw1 to 3 amounts to cruelty.

        11.  The Court below, no doubt, placed reliance on the
decisions of the Honble Supreme Court in Parveen Mehta v.
Inderjeet Mehta , Dr. M.G. Dastane v. Mrs. S. Dastane , and
decisions of Delhi High Court in Rita Nijahawan v. Balakrishna
Nijahawan  and Smt. Shakuntala Kumar v. Om Prakash Ghal , in  
the context of consequence of refusal to lead conjugal life, amounting
to mental cruelty and then concludes in paragraph No.15 that the
respondent was leading an adulterous life with her employer by
deserting the petitioner.

        12.  Aggrieved of the order of the Court below, respondent
preferred the instant appeal raising the following grounds:

        13.  The respondent agitates that the Court below failed to
afford an opportunity to cross-examine PWs.4 and 5 and depriving the
said opportunity, the Court below came to the conclusion that she has
no interest in cross-examining these witnesses and that itself is
sufficient to set aside the decree of divorce.  The Court below also,
somehow, ignored the fact of both the parties residing together from
the date of solemnization of marriage on 08-12-1985 to 1987 and
blessed with three children, which is undisputed and granted decree of
divorce without considering the welfare of the respondent and three
children on the basis of un-corroborated testimony of the petitioner.
It is also stated that the Court below did not properly appreciate the
allegation of adultery with her employer despite the respondent
specifically denying the said allegation and, though, the same was not
at all proved, still, just on the basis of vague allegation, granted decree
of divorce.  It is further stated that since the said Ashok, against whom
the allegation of adultery was attributed, is not made as a party to the
proceedings, nor any iota of evidence brought on record connecting
her with her employer, the decree of divorce granted by the Court
below cannot be sustained.

     14.  Heard Sri C.B. Ram Mohan Reddy, learned counsel for the
respondent (appellant), and perused the material on record.

     15.  There was no representation for the petitioner (respondent)
on 04-02-2014, on which day, arguments on behalf of the learned
counsel for the respondent (appellant) were heard.  To afford an
opportunity to the petitioners counsel, the matter was adjourned to
05-02-2014.  Even on 05-02-2014, there was no representation for the
petitioner.

     16.  The learned counsel for the respondent (appellant) contends
that since the petitioner failed to implead the alleged adulterer, and, as
such, the original petition was hit by non-joinder of necessary party
and to fortify his contention, he has relied on a decision of a Division
Bench of this Court in Mirapala Venkata Ramana v. Mirapala
Peddiraju .  He has also placed reliance on yet another decision of
this Court rendered in the same context in Ch. Padmavathi v.
Ch. Sai Babu .  Last decision relied on by him is in Arun Kumar
Agarwal v. Radha Arun and another 

     17.  His next contention is that the evidence of PWs.2 to 4
ex facie is totally unnatural and granting decree of divorce basing on
such evidence would render the impugned order unsustainable.

        18.  In view of the above submissions, the points that arise for
consideration are:

(1)     Whether non-joinder of the alleged adulterer as a
respondent to the proceedings, makes the claim of the
petitioner bad?

(2)     Whether the order under challenge can be sustained? 

POINT Nos.1 AND 2:  
        19.  In the context of first submission made by the learned
counsel for the respondent, it is to be seen whether arraying the
so-called adulterer as a co-respondent is a condition precedent to
entertain the petition for divorce and also how far the order passed by
the Court below is sustainable?

        20.  This Court in Mirapala Venkata Ramanas Case (Supra 
5), placing reliance on Udai Narain Bajpai v. Smt. Kusum Bajpai ,
held that since the respondent (husband) therein failed to implead the
alleged adulterer, the O.P. is hit by non-joinder of necessary party.
The Court extracted the observations, in Udai Narain Bajpais Case
(Supra 8), which are thus:

        Learned counsel for the respondent also placed
reliance on the decision in AIR 1942 All 223
Bowman W.P. v. H.D. Bowman for the purpose of   
contending that till such time as the appellants
application for amendment of his petition by addition
of the alleged adulterers as co-respondents was
allowed and the petition was amended accordingly,
it was not in accordance with law and not
maintainable.  It was urged that till the
co-respondents were impleaded it was not open to the
Court either to frame issues in the petition or admit
evidence on Issue No.5 and consequently the framing
of the issues by the trial Court as well as the finding
on Issue No.5 are without jurisdiction.  There is force
in this contention which must be accepted.


        21.  In Padmavathis Case (Supra 6), placing reliance on the
decision in Udai Narain Bajpais Case ( Supra 8) of Allahabad High
Court and Mirapala Venkata Ramanas Case (Supra 5), referring to
Rule 8 of the Rules framed under the Act, which mandates making the 
alleged adulterer as a co-respondent, where husband alleges adultery
on the part of the wife in seeking divorce, and also referring to Section
13(1)(i) of the Act, allowed the appeal setting aside the order of the
Family Court dismissing the plea of the petitioner therein to dissolve
the marriage by a decree of divorce for non-joinder of the alleged
adulterer.

        22.  In Arun Kumar Agarwals Case (Supra 7), a Division
Bench of Karnatka High Court, addressed the object of impleadment 
of alleged adulterer as a co-respondent in paragraph Nos.6 and 10,
which are thus:

        6.  Section 13(1)(i) provides that any marriage
solemnized, whether before or after the
commencement of this Act, may, on a petition 
presented by either the husband or the wife, be
dissolved by a decree of divorce on the ground that
the other party has, after solemnization of the
marriage, had voluntary sexual intercourse with any
person other than his or her spouse.  A petition under
Section 13(1)(i) necessarily therefore involves an
allegation of voluntary sexual intercourse by the
spouse with a third party.  Where such adulterer is
named in the petition and evidence is let in to show
that the spouse had intercourse with such person, the
Court will have to record a finding that the spouse
had voluntary sexual intercourse with such named
person.  There is no gainsaying that such a
finding/decision will adversely affect the reputation
of the person who is alleged to have committed the
adulterous act.  Public interest and principles of
natural justice require that the person concerned
should have an opportunity to defend his reputation
before such a finding is recorded.  It is precisely for
this reason that Rules framed by several High Courts
(Allahabad, Andhra Pradesh, Mumbai, Delhi, 
Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Kerala, Chennai, Orissa,
Patna, Punjab and Rajasthan) specifically require that
the alleged adulterer should be impleaded as a co-
respondent in a petition under Section 13(1)(i) of the
Hindu Marriage Act, even though no relief may be
claimed against him.  We strongly commend  
amendment of the Hindu Marriage (Karnataka) 
Rui.es, (Sic. Rules,) 1956, to introduce such a
provision.  As observed by a Division Bench of
Calcutta High Court in Sikha singh v. Dina
Chakrabarty and Ors., the rule requiring joinder of
the adulterer as a co-respondent proceeds on a public
policy to prevent collusion and character
assassination.

10.  There can be no doubt that in a proceedings
where the Court has to decide whether the spouse of
the petitioner had voluntary sexual intercourse with
another person, by adding such person (alleged
adulterer) as a respondent, the Court would be in a
better position to effectually and completely
adjudicate upon the controversy.  Nor can it be said
that in a proceeding under Section 13(1)(i) of the
Hindu Marriage Act, when the spouse and alleged 
adulterer are impleaded as respondents, the alleged
adulterer is improperly joined as a respondent.
Therefore, the alleged adulterer will be a proper party
to a proceedings under Section 13(1)(i) of the Hindu
Marriage Act.  The Family Court and the learned
Single Judge merely concentrated on the fact no
relief was sought against the second respondent.
They therefore considered only whether the adulterer
is a necessary party to a petition seeking divorce on
the ground of adultery, but completely ignored that
the alleged adulterer is a proper party.

Thus, the object of statutory rule requiring joinder of the alleged
adulterer as a co-respondent being, not only proceeds on public policy
to prevent collusion and character assassination, but also to enable the
Court to effectually and completely adjudicate upon the controversy
between the parties.  In the instant case, the petitioner, despite
mentioning the name of the alleged adulterer as Ashok, still, did not
join as a co-respondent for the reasons best known to him.

        23.  Following the legal position enunciated in the above
decisions, we are of the considered view, that non-joinder of alleged
adulterer as a co-respondent to the instant proceedings, certainly,
renders the impugned order unsustainable.

        24.  Even on merits, a careful scrutiny of material on record
reflects that there is no convincing evidence to arrive at a definite
finding in favour of the petitioner on the plea of adultery set up by the
petitioner.  The Court below mainly relied on the evidence of PWs.2
to 4, touching the plea of adultery set up by the petitioner.
PW.2, S. Gyaneshwar, who claims that the respondent is his close 
relative being his cousin sisters grand-daughter and also said to have
mediated for the marriage of the parties, states that on 28-01-1999,
after attending a function at his sisters daughter at Kairathabad,
Hyderabad, on his way back on two-wheeler at about 10-30 p.m., saw 
the respondent standing alone and when questioned by him, she 
replied that she was waiting for somebody to come and that he has
scolded her and told her that he would drop her at her husbands
place, for which she has stated that she was not staying with her
husband and staying at her mothers house at Chikkadpally and then
he dropped her at her mothers house that night.  He also states that he
came to know that she was leading an irresponsible and wayward life.
That was the evidence in his affidavit filed in chief-examination on
22-01-2003.  He was cross-examined on 25-01-2003.  When he was   
cross-examined probing into the assertions he made in the
chief-examination, he answers that on 28-01-1999, he attended
Vadibiyyam function at his sisters daughter at Kairathabad,
Hyderabad, and he had been to the said function along with his wife
and children.  No doubt, he denied the suggestion that the said
Vadibiyyam function is concerned with women only.  But, the
evidence of this witness appears to be wholly improbable for the
reasons that at that odd hour while he was proceeding on a scooter
with his family, it is difficult for him to look at the passers-by on the
footpath or the persons standing by the side of the road and it,
therefore, appears that he was set up to speak in favour of the
petitioner.

        25.  PW.3 is one P. Om Prakash.  According to his own 
assertion, he is brother-in-law of the petitioner.  He too asserts in his
affidavit in chief that the respondent was leading a wayward life by
abandoning her children and the petitioner, that he along with one
K. Swathanthra Kumar mediated to see that the respondent joins the
petitioner.  He also states that on 24-04-2002 at about 11-30 a.m.,
he saw the respondent with a stranger going on a motorcycle at
St. marks High School, East Marredpally, Secunderabad, and on 
enquiry, he came to know that she was going along with her
employer, Ashok, with whom she was leading a free life.  No doubt,
he had denied the suggestion that he did not find the respondent at
11-30 a.m. on 24-04-2002 as asserted by him, but, the very fact that
he was silent in his chief-examination as to the details on what
purpose he was present near St. Marks High School, East 
Marredpally, Secunderabad, renders his evidence, wholly unnatural
and artificial.

        26.  PW.4 is one Tirath Raj.  He states that he was counselling
the parties regarding their marital problems and that the petitioner was
approaching him for consulting him in the year 1999, when he was
mentally disturbed and was on the verge of commission of suicide and
he consoled him and he developed suicidal tendency since the
respondent deserted him.  He states that he has also consulted the
respondent when she had taken away the children.  Surprisingly, he
asserts in the chief-examination that the respondent informed him that
she was moving around and having close contacts only with her boss
and employer, Ashok, and that she intends to divorce her husband.
The Court below appears to have closed the evidence of this witness
without affording reasonable opportunity to cross-examine him.

        27.  The Court below ought to have afforded an opportunity to
the respondent to subject this witness for cross-examination by acting
liberally rather than conservatively.

        28.  PW.5 is one K. Suresh Kumar, who claims that he was  
doing real estate business on commission basis in association with the
petitioner.  He states that in the month of April, 2001 when he was
attending to the office work, in the office  cum  house of the
petitioner, respondent along with her mother forcibly gained entry and
took some cash and documents and clothing of the children and while
leaving told him that the petitioner was not a good man and heavily
indebted to several persons in Karimnagar and came to Hyderabad 
and for that reason she left the petitioner and settled with her
employer and advised him not to work with the petitioner or else he
also would be duped.  He states that he has seen the respondent and
her employer several times going in his car and seen them together at
Necklace Road embracing each other in the late hours and seen them 
several times together near Minerva complex, Hyderabad.
Evidence of this witness was also closed without resorting to a liberal
approach and affording further chances to cross-examine him by the
respondent.

        29.  Evidence of these two witnesses, when examined 
intrinsically, would reflect that they were set up by the petitioner for
the reason that what was not pleaded and spoken by the petitioner as
to the attempt to commit suicide and suicidal tendency, said to have
developed by him, was being asserted by PW.4, for which, it has to be
inferred that he is intended to improve the case of the petitioner in an
attempt to get decree of divorce.  We are, therefore, constrained to
observe that the Court below failed to assess the evidence of PWs.2 to
5 in proper perspective and arrived at a wrong conclusion and granted
decree of divorce believing the evidence of these witnesses which
does not at all inspire confidence.

        30.  In view of the foregoing discussion, we are of the
considered opinion that the impugned order passed by the Court
below is unsustainable not only on the ground that the alleged
adulterer is not made a co-respondent accounting for infraction of
Rule 8 of the Rules framed under the Act, but even on merits, there is
absolutely no tenable ground to conclude that the respondent was
living in adultery and consequently causing mental cruelty to him.
Therefore, we find point Nos.1 and 2 in favour of the respondent and
against the petitioner.
        31.  In the result, the appeal is allowed setting aside the order of
the Court below and also dismissing the plea of the petitioner to
dissolve the marriage with the respondent by a decree of divorce.
There shall be no order as to costs.

        32.  As a sequel thereto, Miscellaneous Applications, if any,
pending in this appeal shall stand disposed of.

___________________________     
R. SUBHASH REDDY, J     
___________________________     
A. SHANKAR NARAYANA, J      
March 26, 2014.
