
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE L.NARASIMHA REDDY and THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE  M.S.K.JAISWAL               

Crl.Appeal No. 1753  of  2009

12-03-2014 

Yamsani Ravinder (A.1) Appellant  

State of A.P., rep. by its P.P.,High Court of A.P., Hyderabad ...Respondent

Counsel for the Appellant:  Sri C.Vasundhara Reddy

Counsel for respondent:  Public Prosecutor

<GIST: 

>HEAD NOTE:    

?CASES REFERRED :.         


HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE L.NARASIMHA REDDY         
AND  
HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE M.S.K.JAISWAL       

Criminal Appeal No.1753 of  2009
Dated: 12.03.2014 

JUDGMENT: (Per Honble Sri Justice M.S.K.Jaiswal)  
        The appellant  Yamsani Ravinder along with his father,
mother and three brothers were charge-sheeted by the Sub-
Divisional Police Officer, Karimnagar, in Cr.No.13 of 2007 of
Koheda P.S., alleging offences punishable under Sections 498-A,
302, 304-B and 201 of I.P.C. and Section 4 of the Dowry Prohibition
Act.  They were tried in S.C.No.129 of 2008 on the file of the
IV-Addl.Sessions Judge, Karimnagar, and by Judgment, dated  
23-11-2009, the appellant-A.1 was convicted for the offences
punishable under Sections 498-A, 302 and 201 of I.P.C. He was
sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for one year and a
fine of Rs.1,000/-, in default rigorous imprisonment for three
months for the offence under Section 498-A I.P.C., imprisonment
for life and a fine of Rs.3,000/-, in default rigorous imprisonment
for six months for the offence under Section 302 I.P.C., and three
years rigorous imprisonment and a fine of Rs.1,000/-, in default
rigorous imprisonment for three months for the offence under
Section 201 I.P.C.  All the sentences were directed to run
concurrently.  A.1 was acquitted of the charges under Section 304-
B of I.P.C. and Section 4 of the Dowry Prohibition Act.  A.2 to A.6
were acquitted of all the charges.  A.1 preferred this appeal
challenging his conviction and sentences.
2.      Facts in brief are as under:-
      Lavanya (hereinafter referred to as the deceased), the
daughter of the de facto complainant  Amirishetti Rukma Rao
(PW.1) was married to A.1 on 11-11-2000.  Substantial amount of
dowry, both in cash and kind, were said to have been given at the
time of the marriage and still A.1 used to make additional demands
for dowry, they were being met by the complaint, whereas the
parents and brothers of A.1 (A.2 to A.6) used to instigate A.1.
      On 28-1-2007, A.1 is said to have sent the deceased to her
parents house to attend the engagement ceremony of her younger  
sister and thereafter, the parents of the deceased requested A.1 to
send the deceased for making purchases in relation to the
marriage, but A.1 refused to send her and instead, beat the
deceased. 
      On 4-2-2007 at about 6.00 a.m., in the morning, the
deceased is stated to have informed her parents that A.1 had gone
to Karimnagar and her in-laws were not allowing her to go over to
her parents house.  On 5-2-2007, the deceased informed her
parents that A.1 beat her throughout the night.  On 6-2-2007 at
about 2.00 a.m., in the mid-night, A.1 rang up and informed the
parents that the deceased was not seen since the previous evening.
They rushed to Thangallapalli village at about 6.00 a.m., and
started searching for the deceased.  At about 11.00 a.m., on 6-2-
2007, they found the dead body of the deceased in the well of A.1.
      With the above allegations, the de facto complainant PW.1
filed a complaint Ex.P.1.  Crime was registered and investigation
was taken up.  The S.I. of Police, Koheda P.S. PW.11 immediately 
visited the scene of offence.  The Executive Magistrate P.W.9
visited the scene and conducted the inquest panchanama over the 
dead body of the deceased.  Post-mortem examination was  
conducted by a team of Doctors comprising of PW.10 and another. 
The cause of death was mentioned as cardio respiratory arrest due
to asphyxia caused by manual crushing of throat and smothering.
Further investigation was taken up by the Sub-Divisional Police
Officer (PW.12) and the statements of the witnesses were
recorded.  A.1 to A.6 were arrested and remanded to juridical
custody.  A.1 is said to have confessed that on 5-2-2007 at about
8.00 p.m., he throttled and smothered the deceased to death and
threw the dead body in the well.  Charge-sheet was filed alleging
that the accused have committed the crime and pleading that they
are liable to be punished.  Charges framed accordingly.
3.      The accused denied the allegations.  PWs.1 to 12 were
examined, Ex.P.1 to Ex.P.18 were filed and M.Os.1 to 3 were taken 
on record.  When examined under Section 313 Cr.P.C., the accused  
disputed the evidence on record.  The result of the case has been
mentioned at the threshold.
4.      Learned Counsel for A.1 submits that there are no direct
witnesses to the occurrence, and though the case rests on
circumstantial evidence, the circumstances relied upon by the
prosecution are not proved, much less they are sufficient to base
the conviction against A.1.  It is pleaded  that the highly discrepant
and interested testimony of the parents  PWs.1 and 2 is relied
upon by the learned trial Judge for convicting A.1 but that very
evidence has been disbelieved insofar as A.2 to A.6 are concerned.
It is also pleaded that the trial Court did not properly appreciate
the material on record and has erroneously drawn presumption
under Section 106 of the Evidence Act for holding the appellant
guilty.
5.       Learned Additional Public Prosecutor submits that the
evidence of the parents of the deceased viz., PWs.1 and 2 has
established that the deceased was being subjected to harassment 
demanding additional dowry and when that was not being met, 
they used to subject her to harassment and treating her with
cruelty.  It is further submitted that the evidence on record clearly
shows that the accused have refused to send the deceased to her
parents house as requested in connection with the marriage of her
younger sister and instead the husband  A.1 beat the deceased on
the previous night.  She contends that the evidence also shows that
on 5-2-007 the deceased was noticed by neighbours in pensive
mood and at about 2.00 a.m., on 6-2-2007, A.1 informed her
parents that the deceased is not to be seen.  According to her, the
circumstances that her dead body was found in the well of the
accused, which was at a distance of 50 yards from their house and
the medical evidence on record indicating that the death was due
to throttling and smothering; clearly show that it is A.1 who has
caused the death of the deceased and threw the dead body in the
well.  She argued that on the basis of such strong evidence, the
trial Court has found A.1 guilty of the charges and gave the benefit
of doubt to his parents and brothers.
6.      The point for consideration is as to whether the prosecution
has proved its case against A.1 beyond reasonable doubt so as to
sustain the conviction and sentence or whether the Judgment of
the trial Court deserves to be set aside, modified or varied?
7.      Point:-  A.1 and deceased were married on 11-11-2000.
They had two sons.  The deceased was the daughter of PWs.1 and   
2, who are residents of Pallepahad village, Thoguta Mandal of
Medak District.  The deceased, and A.1 and his parents were
residents of Thangallapalli village.  In connection with the
marriage of her younger sister, the deceased wanted to go to her
parents house for helping them in making the purchases.  That is
said to have been opposed by A.1 who demanded money to clear   
off his debts.  The nature of harassment, which is said to have
been caused to her, was informed by her to her parents through
telephone, both on 4-2-2007 and 5-2-2007.  The deceased went 
missing from the evening of 5-2-2007 and the dead body was found
in the well at about 11.00 a.m., on 6-2-2007.  It is alleged that A.1
killed the deceased and dumped the dead body in the well with the
instigation of the other accused.
8.      The prosecution examined the father and mother of the
deceased as PWs.1 and 2.  The neighbouring residents of the house 
of the accused are examined as PWs.3 and 4.  The previous 
landlord where A.1 and the deceased lived as tenants has been
examined as PW.5.  The evidence of these five witnesses is
material having direct bearing on the incident proper.
9.      Other evidence comprises of PWs.6 to 12, who are the 
photographer, scene of offence panchas, inquest panch, panch
witnesses for the alleged confession, the Medical Officer who
conducted the autopsy and the Investigating Officers.
10.     Firstly, the evidence of the independent witnesses viz.,
PWs.3, 4 and 5 may be seen.  PW.3 deposed that he was informed   
by his wife that the deceased is not being seen in her house and
she is being searched.  He further deposed that on the next day
morning the parents of the deceased came and he along with all
others searched for the deceased and the dead body was found in
the well, which was at a distance of 50 yards from the house of the
accused. 
11.     PW.4, another neighbouring resident, deposed that the
deceased and A.1 were living happily and about 10 or 15 days prior
to the death, the deceased came to their house, but did not inform
of any harassment.  He further deposed that next day morning
when he heard about the death of the deceased, went there and
noticed the same.
12.     PW.5 is another independent witness in whose house for 
sometime the deceased and A.1 lived together.  He deposed that 
A.1 and his wife lived happily and they were living as tenants in
the ground floor and the deceased did not inform them anything
about the harassment.  He claims that he came to know about the 
death of the deceased.
13.     The three independent witnesses, who are the persons 
residing in the immediate neighbourhood, are examined to throw
light on the harassment alleged to have been meted out by the
deceased in the hands of the accused.  Unfortunately, all the three
of them turned hostile and denied the case of the prosecution and
also resiled from their previous statements, which are marked as
Exs.P.2, P.3, P.4 and P.5.  In the cross-examination, they
categorically denied that they know about the harassment of the
deceased at the hands of the accused and deposing falsehood to 
help the accused.
14.     Then remains the evidence of PWs.1 and 2, who are the 
father and mother of the deceased.
15.     Insofar as the incident is concerned, PWs.1 and 2 have no
direct knowledge.  As earlier noticed, they were informed at about
2.00 a.m., on 06-02-2007 by none other than A.1 that the deceased
was found missing from the evening and that they are searching for
her.  Probably, this information might have been given by A.1 to
PWs.1 and 2 soliciting information as to whether their daughter-
deceased came to their house, more particularly, in view of the
fact that the deceased wanted to and her parents requested for
her presence on 05-02-2007 for making purchases of gold and
cloths for the ensuing marriage of their other daughter.  The
evidence of PWs.1 and 2 is with reference to the alleged
harassment by the accused prior to her death.  Since their
daughter died under suspicious circumstances, it is nothing but
natural for them to suspect the involvement of the accused.  In
order to rely upon the testimony of such witnesses, the sine quo
non is that it should be consistent, cogent and should accord with
the natural human conduct.
16.     Ex.P.1 is the complaint, which PW.1 lodged with the police
at about 12.00 noon on 06-02-2007.  After referring to the previous
demands of amount and it being paid to A.1, PW.1 stated as 
under:-
The said fact came to the knowledge of my wife and sons,
but under the unavoidable circumstances I convinced my
daughter to save her marital life.  When I asked my son-in-
law, he threatened me that he would commit suicide.  On one
occasion, when he stayed in our home for 15 days, he
harassed my daughter.  At that time, I gave an amount of
Rs.10,000/- to him to run a kirana shop.  On 28-01-2007, when
I asked, he sent my daughter on the engagement ceremony of  
my younger daughter.  Later, when I asked him to send my 
daughter for purchasing clothes, gold etc., he demanded to
clear off the debts under additional dowry amount, beat my
daughter and did not send her to my house.  My daughter
informed the matter to me over phone.  On 4-2-2007, while I
was intending to go and bring my daughter, at 6.00 a.m., my
daughter informed me over telephone that my son-in-law
went to Karimnagar and her parents-in-law and brothers-in-
law are not allowing her to go.  Again on 5-2-2007, she
informed me over telephone that my son-in-law beat her
throughout the night in the presence of all others.

17.     As against the above, the complainant-PW.1 deposed as  
under:-
All the accused are parents and brothers of A.1.  All of them
are living together in one house.  A.1 has spent the amounts
given by me and again harassed my daughter and thereby she  
came to my house and informed to me and my wife and   
children about the harassment.  Then I have consoled my
daughter and sent to her house.  Thereafter, A.1 came to my
house and stayed in my house and even at my house he   
harassed my daughter with a demand of additional dowry for
running kirana business on that I gave Rs.10,000/-.
Thereafter, at the time of engagement of the marriage of my
second daughter on 28-1-2007 on my request, A.1 sent my  
daughter Lavanya.  Thereafter again I have requested A.1 to
send Lavanya for the purpose of purchasing the clothes and
gold for the marriage of my second daughter.  And at that
time, A.1 did not send my daughter Lavanya and on enquiry
my daughter informed me on phone that A.1 did not allow her
to come to my house and he left to Karimnagar and his
parents also not permitting her to come to my house.

18.     In the cross-examination, PW.1 admitted that he did not
disclose about the said demands of A.1 to anybody and therefore
there were no panchayats.  Similarly, he also admits that he did
not approach the police prior to this incident.
19.     The mother of the deceased was examined as PW.2.  She has    
stated as under:-
All the accused are parents and brothers of A.1.  All of them
are living together in one house.  A.1 has spent the amounts
given by us and again harassed my daughter and thereby she 
came to our house and informed us about the harassment.  My  
daughter is in our house for six months and A.1 came to our
house and threatened us to commit suicide by consuming  
pesticide.  Therefore, have consoled our daughter and sent
with A.1.  Thereafter, A.1 came to my house and stayed and
even at that time he harassed our daughter with a demand of
additional dowry for running kirana business on that we gave
Rs.10,000/-.  Thereafter, at the time of engagement of the
marriage of my second daughter, A.1 sent my daughter 
Lavanya.

20.     What is noticed from the perusal of Ex.P.1 and the evidence
of PWs.1 and 2 is that basing on the said evidence it is difficult to
conclude that it is A.1, who is in any way responsible for the
unfortunate death of the deceased.  It is also gathered there from
that the relations between the two families, vis--vis, in between
A.1 and the deceased were not so strained for the reason that even
a week prior to the incident, A.1 and the deceased came over to
the house of PWs.1 and 2 and the deceased also participated in the
engagement ceremony of her sister on 28-01-2007.  If anything
serious was brewing in between the couple, it would have certainly
come to the knowledge of the people residing either in the village
of the accused or the prosecution witnesses.  Significantly, PWs.1
and 2 have two grown up sons.  Even they were not examined to 
speak about the nature of disputes between A.1 and the deceased. 
It is also noticed from the evidence that just few days prior to the
incident, A.1 came to the house of PWs.1 and 2 and stayed there
for about a fortnight and it is alleged that at that time when they
questioned A.1 about the harassment, A.1 threatened to commit 
suicide.  This threat of A.1 is difficult to be explained away.  If
really, A.1 subjected his wife to any cruel treatment and when the
parents of his wife questioned him, he would not have gone to the
extent of threatening that he will kill himself.  Something certainly
is there, which PWs.1 and 2 have suppressed.  As noticed from
Ex.P.1  complaint, A.1 is alleged to have harassed the deceased
even when they were staying in the house of PWs.1 and 2 and if
this is true, the neighbouring residents of the house of PWs.1 and 2
might have certainly come to know about it.  Significantly, none is
examined from the village of PWs.1 and 2.  On the other hand,
three independent witnesses were examined by the prosecution 
belonging to the village of the accused and all of them
categorically asserted that A.1 and the deceased were living
cordially and they have not heard or seen any acrimonious
relationship between them.
21.     In view of the above, from the perusal of the evidence of
PWs.1 and 2, it is difficult to hold that their evidence, in any way,
shows that it is A.1 who has caused the death of the deceased, or,
was, in any way, responsible for it.
22.     It may also be stated that when the scene of offence
panchanama is conducted by the Investigating officer in the
presence of PW.8 and another, nothing incriminating or suspicious
circumstances are noticed in or around the house, where the
deceased and A.1 were living.  If the allegation that it is A.1, who
killed the deceased and thereafter thrown the dead body in the
well, which is at a distance of 50 yards from the house, is true
certainly, there are bound to be some markings in or around the
house, but nothing of that sort is noticed.  As per the medical
evidence on record, the approximate time of the death of the
deceased is given as 24 to 36 hours prior to 04.00 p.m., on
06-02-2007.  It means that the deceased died in between
04.00 a.m. to 04.00 p.m. on 05-02-2007.  It is in the evidence of
PWs.1 and 2 that the deceased spoke to them over telephone in 
the morning of 05-02-2007.  Apparently, the deceased died during
the day time before 04.00 p.m. on 05-02-2007.  If any violent
incident takes places in the broad day light, it is bound to attract
the attention of the neighbouring residents.  The sketch prepared
(Ex.P.16) clearly shows that there are houses in the immediate
neighbourhood of A.1 and the deceased.  If the deceased was killed
before 04.00 p.m. on 05-02-2007, and thereafter the body was
taken into a well and thrown there, that would not have missed
the attention of several neighbouring residents.  The sketch clearly
shows that in between the house of the accused and the well,
where the body was found, there is a road and thereafter there
were houses of neighbours, namely, Anjaiah, Rajaiah and Sekhar.
The dead body would not have been carried from one place to the
other, without attracting the attention of the occupants of the
houses, more particularly, during day time, and leaving any traces
on the ground.
23.     The other circumstance relied upon by the prosecution is the
observations during the post-mortem examination.  The Doctor
(PW.10), who conducted the autopsy, deposed that he has found  
an injury on the lower limb and the face was congested
subcutaneous haemorrhage in the eye-balls.  PW.10 did not find
any external injuries on the neck or other parts of the body.  As
per the post-mortem report (Ex.P.17), the deceased was a well
built 28 years old woman, weighing 68 KGs., with a height of 161
cms.  The photographs (Ex.P.6 to Ex.P.11) also show that the
deceased was a well built person.  When such a person is violently
done to death, there are bound to be several injuries on her
person, but significantly, the Medical Officer did not find any
injury except an injury on the lower limb.  The Medical Officer
opined that the cause of death is due to smothering and throttling.
He, however, could not justify his opinion with any scientific
material or the physical appearance of the deceased.  If really the
Medical Officer suspected the death to be due to smothering and
throttling, he was required to conduct further tests, but the Doctor
admits that he did not send sternum to any chemical examination,
merely because they were clear cut signs on the neck of the
deceased.  On the basis of such evidence, it is not possible to hold
that it conclusively establishes that the death of the deceased was
due to smothering or throttling.
24.     As already stated, the medical evidence should corroborate
with the other surrounding circumstances and the evidence.  The
absence of even a single scratch injury on the body of the
deceased or any signs of violence at the place where the incident
is said to have taken place, makes it difficult to hold that it is the
accused, who has committed the murder of the deceased and   
thereafter thrown the dead body in the well by carrying it to a
distance of 50 yards, cutting across the road and several houses in
the broad day light.  The evidence on record, at best, raises
suspicion against the accused, but as is well-settled suspicion,
howsoever strong, cannot take the place of proof, and the benefit
thereof should go to the accused.
25.     The learned trial Judge has not appreciated these aspects in
proper perspective and has erroneously held that it is A.1, who has
committed the crime; while based on the same evidence, the 
learned trial Judge has acquitted A.2 to A.6 of all the charges.
When the same evidence was not believed against A.2 to A.6, the
same could not have been made use of against A.1, more  
particularly, when they are all charged with having killed the
deceased, thereby attracting the provisions of Sections 304-B and
302 of I.P.C. The point is accordingly answered.
26.     In the result, the Criminal Appeal is allowed.  The conviction
and sentence ordered in S.C.No.129 of 2008 on the file of the
IV-Additional Sessions Judge, Karimnagar, dated 23-11-2009,
against the appellant-A.1, are set aside.  The appellant-A.1 shall
be set at liberty forthwith, unless his detention is needed in any
other case.  The fine amount, if any, paid by the appellant-A.1
shall be refunded to him.
_________________   
L.Narasimha Reddy,J. 
______________  
M.S.K. Jaiswal,J.
Date: 12.03.2014
