
HON'BLE Dr. JUSTICE K.G. SHANKAR      

Crl. Petition Nos.13388 of 2013 AND BATCH  

18-06-2014 

Ch. Nagabhushnam.. Petitioner/A.1 
                                                        
The State of Andhra Pradesh,Represented by Public Prosecutor, High Court, 
Hyderabad,and 2 others... Respondents/ Complainants  

Counsel for the Petitioners:  Sri R. Srinivasa Rao

Counsel for Respondent:  Public Prosecutor for R.1 & R.2
                          Smt. N. Archana for R-3

<Gist:

>Head Note: 

? Cases referred:

1.AIR 1992 SC 604  
2.2013 (1) ALD Crl. 665 (AP)
3.2008 (2) ALT (Crl.) 220 (SC)

Date:  18.06.2014

Crl. Petition No.13388 of 2013:


HON'BLE Dr. JUSTICE K.G.SHANKAR       

Crl. Petition Nos.13388 and 9703 of 2013

COMMON ORDER:      
        
        These two Criminal Petitions are disposed of
through this common order.  The second accused in 
Crime No.76 of 2013 of Arvapalli Police Station, Nalgonda
District filed Crl. Petition No.9703 of 2003.  A.1 in the
same case filed Crl. Petition No.13318 of 2013.  Both the
petitioners seek for the quashment of the First
Information Report (FIR).  Hence, both the petitioners are
disposed of through this common order.
        
     2. The third respondent is the de facto
complainant. The second accused is his daughter. 
The first accused is the Village Revenue Officer working
in the office of the Mandal Revenue Officer, Arvapalli,
Nalgonda.  It is the case of the third respondent/de facto
complainant that A.2 created a settlement deed in her
favour for an extent of Ac.5.00 guntas of land in Survey
No.474, Vardhamanakota village, Arvapalli Mandal as if
the third respondent executed the settlement deed in
favour of the second accused on 13.12.1999.  It is the
case of Smt. N. Archana, learned counsel for the third
respondent that at the time of the marriage of the second
accused, there was a demand for dowry whereupon the  
third respondent agreed to give Ac.1.00 guntas of land in
Survey NO.474 in favour of the second accused.  She
pointed out that the third respondent owns Ac.15.00
guntas of land.  He has three children including the
second accused.  Her contention is that when the third
respondent was ready to execute the settlement deed for
Ac.1.00 guntas of land in favour of the second accused,
the second accused obtained settlement deed for Ac.5.00 
guntas of land misrepresenting to the third respondent
that the third respondent was executing a settlement
deed for Ac.1.00 guntas of land only.
        
     3. The learned counsel for the third respondent
submitted that the third respondent is 70 years old and
did not know the contents of the settlement deed before
he signed the same.  She submitted that the offences
under Sections 419, 420, 464, 465, 468 and 471 read
with Section 120 (B) of the Indian Penal Code prima facie
are made out against A.1 & A.2 and submitted that there
is no justification to seek for the quashment of the FIR.
        
     4. Sri R. Srinivasa Rao, learned counsel for the
accused submitted that the third respondent executed
the settlement deed dated 13.12.1999 in favour of his
daughter (A.2) and that A.2 has been in possession from
the date of the settlement deed.  He further pointed out
that the revenue records were mutated in the name of
A.2 in the year 2000.  He also submitted that A.2 later
sold parts of the land to third parties in the year 2000
and that no objection was raised either by the third
respondent or by any other person regarding the title of
A.2.
        
     5. The learned counsel for the third respondent,
on the other hand, submitted that when the revenue
records were to be mutated in the name of A.2, notice
was not issued to the third respondent calling for his
objections.  She further stated that she was not aware
about the alleged settlement deed for Ac.5.00 guntas of
land till the third respondent received summons from the
court of the Junior Civil Judge, Tungathurthy in
O.S.No.24 of 2012 which was laid by A.2 against the
third respondent as well as against the brothers of A.2
alleging that they were interfering with her possession
over the property covered by the gift deed.  The learned
counsel for the accused also submitted that A.2 initially
obtained ad-interim injunction from the trial Court and
that subsequently, a temporary injunction was granted in
favour of A.2 on merits.  It is the contention of the
learned counsel for the accused that the dispute is purely
of a civil nature and that the prosecution of the accused
is not sustainable.
        
     6. The learned counsel for the third respondent
placed reliance upon State of Haryana v. Ch. Bhajanlal
in support of her contention. The Supreme Court
observed that it would be justified for the Court to
exercise the powers u/s.482 Cr.P.C. if the allegations
made in the FIR or in the complaint do not prima facie
constitute an offence or make out a case against the
accused if they are taken at their face value and accepted
in their entirety. It is the contention of the learned
counsel for the third respondent that the allegations of
the complaint certainly constitute the offences alleged
against both the accused.
        
     7. The learned counsel for the petitioners placed
reliance upon Peddolla Narsimulu v. State of Andhra
Pradesh .  It was noticed by a learned single Judge of
this Court:
7.     The questions viz., whether the second
respondent can protect his possession or whether the
first accused entered into the land on the ground that
the second respondent did not acquire any valid right
to the property are the matters which have to be
decided by the civil Court.  Certainly in my view, the
dispute between the parties does not involve any
criminal offence requiring any investigation by the
police.  Keeping quiet for over a period of 14 years and
lodging a report with the police alleging commission of
offence of cheating against the accused, in my view is
abuse of process of law. In the facts and
circumstances of the case, I am of the considered view
that the petitioners/accused cannot be subjected to
any criminal prosecution and the parties have to work
out their remedies before a civil Court.  This dispute
undoubtedly is purely of civil in nature and resorting
to criminal prosecution in a case of this nature is
nothing but abuse of process of law and if it is allowed,
it will result in miscarriage of justice.

        8.      The learned counsel for the petitioners also
placed reliance upon Inder Mohan Goswami v. State of
Uttaranchal . In that case, it was noticed by the
Supreme Court as under: 
41.    Even if all the averments made in the FIR are
taken to be correct, the case for prosecution under
Sections 420 and 467 IPC is not made out against the
appellants.  To prevent abuse of the process and to
secure the ends of justice, it becomes imperative to
quash the FIR and any further proceedings emanating 
therefrom.
42.     The court must ensure that criminal prosecution
is not used as an instrument of harassment or for
seeking private vendetta or with an ulterior motive to
pressure the accused. On analysis of the
aforementioned cases, we are of the opinion that it is
neither possible nor desirable to lay down an inflexible
rule that would govern the exercise of inherent
jurisdiction.  Inherent jurisdiction of the High Courts
under section 482 Cr.P.C. though wide has to be
exercised sparingly, carefully and with caution and
only when it is justified by the tests specifically laid
down in the Statute itself and in the aforementioned
cases.  In view of the settled legal position, the
impugned judgment cannot be sustained.         

        9.      It is the contention of the learned counsel for
the accused that the dispute is a civil dispute and that
O.S.No.24 of 2012 on the file of the Junior Civil Judge,
Tungathurthy is pending adjudication whereunder the
rival claims would be considered.  He submitted that
prima facie case is not made out against the accused for
rejecting the application.
        
     10.        Be it noted that the allegations against the
accused are that A.2 created forged documents and that
A.1 effected mutation in connivance with A.2 without
following the Rules.  In the absence of contrary evidence,
the allegations certainly would constitute offences.  One
of the fundamental tests to determine whether a prima
facie case is made out or not is to consider whether a
case would be made out in the absence of contrary
evidence, if the allegations are accepted as true.
As rightly submitted by the learned counsel for the third
respondent, if the allegations made by the third
respondent are accepted, they would certainly constitute
an offence. Added to it, the case is still under
investigation. At this stage, I do not consider it
appropriate to thwart the investigation by quashing the
FIR.  I consider that the request of the accused to quash
the FIR deserves to be rejected.
     11.        As submitted by the learned counsel for the
accused, A.1 is a government servant and A.2 is a lady.
The dispute undoubtedly has civil flavour, although
criminal elements are also found in the case.
I, therefore, consider that it would be appropriate to
direct the police not to arrest the accused pending
investigation.
        12.     Accordingly, these Criminal Petitions are
disposed of granting liberty to police to proceed with the
investigation in Crime No.76 of 2013 of Arvapalli Police
Station, Nalgonda subject to the condition that police
shall not effect the arrest of A.1 & A.2 in connection with
this case till the investigation is completed.
Miscellaneous Petitions, if any pending in this Criminal
Petition, shall stand closed.
_____________________________     
Dr. JUSTICE K.G. SHANKAR     
Date: 18.06.2014
