
HONOURABLE SRI JUSTICE C.PRAVEEN KUMAR            

Crl.P. NO. 3726 OF 2014 

10-4-2014 

1.Mirza Jawed Ahmed Baig and another ..Petitioner 

State of A.P., represented by its Public Prosecutor, A.P. High Court, Hyderabad
and another...Respondents 

Counsel for the petitioners:   Sri Mohd. Muzaffer Ullah Khan

Counsel for the first respondent: Public Prosecutor
Counsel for the second respondent: None appeared 

<Gist:

>Head Note  

1. 2013 (1) ALD (Crl) 814 (SC)

THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE C.PRAVEEN KUMAR           
Crl.P  No.3726/2014 

ORAL ORDER:    
               This Criminal Petition is filed by A-2 and A-3 under Section 482
Cr.P.C., seeking quashing of proceedings in PRC No.50/2013 on the file of
Additional Judicial First Class Magistrate, Nizamabad.  A charge sheet
came to be filed against the petitioners and another for an offence
punishable under section 304-B IPC.
               The allegations in the charge sheet are as under: The marriage
of Miraj Fatima (deceased) with A-1 took place three years prior to the date
of incident. At the time of marriage, the parents of Miraj Fatima gave Rs.1
lakh cash, 3 tolas gold, 25 tolas silver ornaments worth Rs. 30,000/-,
furniture worth Rs.1 lakhs and cooking utensils costing Rs.40,000/- as
dowry. Both of them lived happily till the birth of first female child.
Thereafter, A-1 started harassing Miraj Fatima (deceased) mentally and
physically demanding her to get additional amount of Rs.1 lakhs from her
parents. After the birth of second female child, A-2 and A-3 instigated A-1
to harass Miraj Fatima to get additional dowry from her parents. It is
specifically alleged that all the three accused tried their level best to take
12
tolas of gold ornaments  but were not successful. The accused never
allowed  Mehraj Fatima (deceased) to visit her parents and did not even
allow her to speak on phone.  On 20-11-2010 L.W.4 received a phone call
from Reshma, who is sister-in-law of Mehraj Fatima, informing  them that
Mehraj Fatima received  burn injuries and was shifted to Government
Hospital, Nizamabad. On receipt of said intimation, the informant along
with L.Ws.3 and 5 rushed to the hospital and found their daughter with
burns. On enquiry, the injured is alleged to have revealed that  A-1
assaulted  and abused her, while A-2 and A-3 poured petrol and set her on
fire. So doing, the accused warned her not to disclose about the incident to
others, failing which they threatened to harass her children. In view of the
threat given by the  accused, the injured did not inform the  manner in
which the incident took place either to the Police or to the Magistrates who
recorded dying declarations.  On coming to know about the manner in
which the incident took place, the FIR was altered from Sec.174 Cr.P.C., to
Section 304-B IPC. 
                The learned counsel for the petitioners/A-2 and A-3  submits
that even accepting the  allegations in the complaint to be true, no offence
is made out against the petitioners who are nephew and the sister-in-law of
the deceased. He would further submit that the basis for implicating   the
petitioners is the dying declaration alleged to have been recorded on 7-1-11,
which is false and invented for the purpose of this case. Relying upon the
earlier two dying declarations of the deceased, he submits that continuation
of proceedings against the petitioners would be an abuse of process of law.
                On the  other hand, the learned Additional Public Prosecutor
opposed the application contending that  when there are more than one
dying declaration,  each dying declaration has to be separately assessed
and evaluated on its own merit and the truthfulness of the dying
declarations has to be decided during the course of trial. In view of the
same, she submits that inherent power under section 482 Cr.P.C., cannot
be invoked  to stifle a legitimate prosecution.
                       Section 32 of the Evidence Act is admittedly an exception
to
the general rule of exclusion to the hearsay evidence and the statements of
a person, written or verbal, of relevant facts, after his death are admissible
in evidence if they refer to the cause of his death or to any circumstances of
the transaction which resulted in his death. To attract the provisions of
Section 32, the prosecution is required to prove that the statement was
made by a person who is dead or who cannot be found or whose attendance  
cannot be procured without an amount of delay or expense or he is
incapable of giving evidence and that such statement had been made under
any of the circumstances specified in sub-sections (1) to (8) of Section 32 of
the Act.
                The Apex Court in ASHABAI V. STATE OF MAHARASHTRA          
while dealing with a case of  multiple dying declarations held as under:

It is clear from the above provision that the statement made by the deceased
by way of a declaration is admissible in evidence under Section 32(1) of the
Evidence Act. It is not in dispute that her statement relates to the cause of
her
death. In that event, it qualifies the criteria mentioned in Section 32(1) of
the
Evidence Act. There is no particular form or procedure prescribed for recording
a
dying declaration nor it is required to be recorded only by a Magistrate. As a
general rule, it is advisable to get the evidence of the declarant certified
from a
doctor. In appropriate cases, the satisfaction of the person recording the
statement regarding the state of mind of the deceased would also be sufficient
to hold that the deceased was in a position to make a statement. It is settled
law
that if the prosecution solely depends on the dying declaration, the normal rule
is that the courts must exercise due care and caution to ensure genuineness of
the dying declaration, keeping in mind that the accused had no opportunity to
test the veracity of the statement of the deceased by cross-examination. As
rightly observed by the High Court, the law does not insist upon the
corroboration of dying declaration before it can be accepted. The insistence of
corroboration to a dying declaration is only a rule of prudence. When the Court
is
satisfied that the dying declaration is voluntary, not tainted by tutoring or
animosity, and is not a product of the imagination of the declarant, in that
event, there is no impediment in convicting the accused on the basis of such
dying declaration. When there are multiple dying declarations, each dying
declaration has to be separately assessed and evaluated and assess 
independently on its own merit as to its evidentiary value and one cannot be
rejected because of certain variation in the other.

                Keeping in view the principles laid down by the Apex Court
with regard to a case where there are more than one dying declaration, I
shall now deal with the case on hand.
                The first dying declaration was recorded by II Additional
Judicial Magistrate of First Class, Nizamabad on 20-11-2011 at 11-40 PM..
In the said dying declaration, the deceased stated that on 20-11-2011 at
about 10 PM while the deceased was cooking, stove got burst resulting in
her clothes catching fire and thereafter the body got burnt.
The first accused who was in bathroom came to the spot and thereafter she
was shifted to the Government Hospital, Nizamabad.  Later, the statement
of the injured was recorded by SI of Police, II Town Police Station on
21-10-2010, wherein she is alleged to have reiterated what has been stated
by her before the Magistrate at Nizamabad.  Taking into consideration the
nature of injuries sustained by the deceased, Doctors advised  the relatives
of the injured to shift the injured to Osmania General Hospital, Hyderabad.
One Sri K. Suri Krishna, I Metropolitan Magistrate, Hyderabad,  was
requisitioned to record the statement of the injured on 21-11-2011 at 5-50
PM at Osmania General Hospital, Hyderabad.  After being satisfied with
regard to the mental condition of the deceased, the I Metropolitan
Magistrate, Hyderabad,  recorded the statement, wherein she  stated that
A-1 abused her for not cooking properly  and in view of the said
admonishment, she committed suicide by pouring kerosene  and setting  
herself to fire. On hearing the cries, A-1 came to the spot, poured water,
extinguished the flames, brought her to the Government Hospital,
Nizamabad and from there she was brought to Hyderabad.  The witnesses  
who were examined by the police during the course of investigation stated
that on receiving information about the incident they rushed to the
hospital, where the deceased informed them about the manner in which she 
received injuries in the hands of the accused. She is alleged to have stated
that due to threat given to her children by the accused, she deposed
differently before the police and the Magistrates by Smt. Afrani Begum, who
is the mother of the deceased stated that on the date of incident, after
receiving information, she proceeded to the hospital, where the deceased is
alleged to have told  her that these two petitioners poured petrol  and set
fire  with a warning that if she discloses about the incident to others they
would kill her children.  Similar version was given by Md. Kaleemuddin,
who is the brother of the deceased  and one Md. Ghouse who is  nephew of 
the deceased.  The above three witnesses  stated that the deceased gave
different versions before the police and the Magistrate due to threat from
the accused. 
                       From the above, it is clear that different versions of
the
incident have come forward during the course of investigation. The first
version was receipt of burn injuries due to burst of stove at 10 PM. The
second statement of the deceased recorded by the investigating officer at
10-30 PM revealed that she sustained injuries due to burst of kerosene
stove. The third  version before the Magistrate at Hyderabad  was she
herself poured kerosene and set herself on fire and  the fourth version in
the form of oral dying declaration to the family members of the deceased to
the effect that these two petitioners poured kerosene and set fire to the
deceased apart from threatening the deceased not to reveal about the
incident to others.
                     As seen from the  above, the Apex Court in Ashabais case
(1
supra)  categorically held that where there are multiple dying declarations,
each dying declaration has to be assessed separately and evaluated on  its
own merit as to its evidentiary value and one cannot be rejected because of
certain variation in the other.
                In view of the judgment of the Apex Court referred to above,
and having regard to the material available on record, this court is of the
view that the inherent power under section 482 Cr.P.C., cannot be invoked
to stifle a legitimate prosecution. Truthfulness  or evidentiary value of each
dying declaration has to be assessed during the course of trial. At this
stage, it cannot be said that the  charge sheet is bereft of basic facts
constituting  an offence punishable under section 304-B IPC.
                The Criminal Petition is accordingly dismissed. Miscellaneous
applications, if any, shall stand closed.
-----------------------------------
C.PRAVEEN KUMAR, J.     
Date:10-4-2014
