
HONOURABLE Dr. JUSTICE B.SIVA SANKARA RAO           

Crl.RC No.1818 of 2014 

07-11-2014 
        
Bhumpaka Praveen Kumar...Revision Petitioner  

The State of Telangana Rep. by the Public Prosecutor, High Court at
Hyderabad...Respondent  

Counsel for Appellant: Sri M.Achutha Reddy 
        
Counsel for Respondent : Public Prosecutor

<GIST: 

>HEAD NOTE:    

? Cases referred
1.      2014 (1) ALD Crl 634 (SC)
2.      2003 (2) ALD Crl 355 (AP)
3.      2003 (1) ALD Crl 498 (SC)
4.      (2000) 3 SCC 693 
5.      AIR 1956 SC 575  
6.      AIR 1954 SC 724  
7.      2005 (1) ALD Crl 65 (SC)
8.      (2000) 7 SCC 224 
9.      2013 (3) ALT (Crl) 339 SC
10.     2007 (1) ALT (Crl) 61 (SC)
11.     2008 (2) ALT (Crl) 445 (SC)


THE HONOURABLE Dr.JUSTICE B.SIVA SANKARA RAO            

CRIMINAL REVISION CASE No.1818 of 2014      

ORDER:          
                This Criminal Revision Case is filed under Sections 397  (2) and
401 Cr.P.C, by the petitioner/ accused of C.C No.30 of 2011 on the file
of the Judicial First Class Magistrate, Bodhan, Nizamabad District.

                2.    Heard the Learned Counsel for the Petitioner, the Learned
Additional Public Prosecutor for the Respondent-State and perused
the material placed on record.

      3.        It is in fact the police filed charge sheet dated 29.01.2011
after completion of investigation against the accused from the report
of the victim/ de facto complainant based on the crime registered as
FIR No.106 of 2010 dated 04.05.2010 for the offences under Sections
420 and 493 IPC, from the averments that there was a love affair
between the de facto complainant and petitioner/ accused since 1st
year intermediate in Vijetha Junior College, Bodhan from the year
2006.   He promised to the de facto complainant to marry her alone
and none else, there from both decided to marry and they also went
for Mancherial and stayed for three days and the accused was also
asked the parents of the victim to give consent for marrying her.
However in saying he has contacted his parents for performing the
marriage with the victim for which they rejected and there from to
avoid delay, both decided to go somewhere and get marriage.
Accordingly on 14.03.2010 they went to temple of goddess Durga at
Ramakrishna Beach, Visakhapatnam and got married from the   
accused tied the tali around neck of the victim in so declaring and
thereafter they stayed in a rented room as husband and wife and
joined to work in cell point at Visakhapatnam and stayed there for 1 
month and lead conjugal life, that later they came back and taken a
rented premises at Indrapur near to the house of her sister and
brother-in-law where he stated that he would met his parents for
convincing them and return back.  However he failed to return and
for her telephone calls replied stating that as if he does not know her
and never married her.   Under the guise of love affair and pretence
of marriage he deceived her and enjoyed her sexually.   Therefrom
she lodged report with police to take action and it is pursuant to it the
crime was registered and investigated and the final report was filed
against the accused in the form of Charge sheet under Section 173
Cr.P.C for the offences under Sections 420 and 493 IPC and the same 
was taken cognizance by the learned Magistrate. It is after
appearance of the accused and after hearing the prosecution and
the accused while framing charges, the learned Magistrate passed
the impugned order dated 05.08.2014 by accepting the prosecution
contention through the learned public prosecutor that the offence
attracts the definition of clause 4 of Section 375 IPC by virtue of the so
called consent obtained by deceiving  and misrepresenting the victim
which is not a consent in the eye of law under Section 90 of IPC to say
the said offence is punishable under Section 376 IPC and not mere
Section 420 IPC and also by placing reliance on the expression of the
Apex Court in State of UP vs. Naushad .   Thereby as the offence under
Section 376 IPC is triable by Court of Sessions, passed the impugned
order for committing the case under Section 209 Cr.P.C.
      4.        In fact Section 323 Cr.P.C enables the Magistrate to so to
do.  Section 323 Cr.P.C reads as follows:
323. Proceedure when, after commencement of inquiry or 
trial, Magistrate finds case should be committed:  If, in any
inquiry into an offence or a trial before a Magistrate, it
appears to him at any stage of the proceedings before
signing the judgment that the case is one which ought to
be tried by the Court of Session, he shall commit it to that
Court under the provisions herein before contained [and
thereupon the provisions of Chapter XVIII shall apply to
the commitment so made].  
        5 (a).       Counsel for the revision petitioner/ accused in
impugning said order of the Magistrate contends from the revision
grounds that the order is erroneous outcome without proper
appreciation of the material on record including the statements of the
witnesses from out of the entire prosecution material and the learned
Magistrate has gravely erred in holding the alleged occurrence
attracts clause 4 of Section 375 IPC to constitute the offence under
Section 376 IPC, even there is another penal provision under which the
accused was charged and cognizance taken for the offence under 
Section 493 IPC i.e., triable by Magistrate apart from the alleged
offence under Section 420 IPC, the ratio laid down in the above
expression has no application to the present case.   Hence to set
aside the same. 
             5 (b).   Whereas, it is the contention of the learned public
prosecutor that the learned Magistrate is right in his observation also
within scope of Section 323 Cr.P.C and in passing the order in
committing the case to the Court of Sessions under Section 209 Cr.P.C,
that there is no illegality or impropriety that for this Court while sitting in
revision against the impugned order, there is nothing to interfere and
hence to dismiss the revision.   Perused the material on record.
        6.      Now the points that arise for consideration is
1).     Whether the impugned order of the learned Magistrate of
the case requires trial by Court of Sessions for offence under
Section 376 IPC also attracts, is untenable and it requires
interference by this Court and if so with what observations by
sitting in revision?
      2).       What result?
7.Point No.1:
           The facts supra available from the impugned order of the
Magistrate filed by the revision petitioner does not require repetition.
7 (a).   Section 90 IPC reads as follows:
Consent known to be given under fear or misconception: that
a consent is not such a consent as it intended by any section of
this Code, if the consent is given by a person under fear of
injury, or under a misconception of fact, and if the person
doing the act knows, or has reason to believe, that the consent
was given in consequence of such fear or misconception; or
Consent of insane persons: if the consent is given by a person,
who from unsoundness of mind, or intoxication, is unable to
understand the nature and consequence of that to which he
gives his consent or
Consent of child: unless the contrary appears from the context,
if the consent is given by a person who is under twelve years of
age.
        Section 375 IPC reads that:
A man is said to commit rape who, except in the case
hereinafter excepted, has sexual intercourse with a
woman under circumstances falling under any of the six
following descriptions:
1)      =============    
2)      =============    
3)      =============    
4)      With her consent, when the man knows that he is not her
husband, and that her consent is given because she
believes that he is another man to whom she is or
believes herself to be lawfully married.
5)      =============    
6)      =============    
   The exception provided no doubt in Section 375 speaks
sexual intercourse by a man with his own wife, the wife not
being under fifteen years of age, is not rape.
        8.      Here it is important to say, it is not the case of the
accused that at Visakhapatnam in the temple of Goddess Durga, he  
has not married her by tying of Tali.   It is the case of the victim that
having both went to Visakhapatnam to get marriage, as earlier taken
her to Mancherial where they stayed for three days to marry and not
materialized; at Visakhapatnam at Ramakrishna Beach in the temple 
of Goddess Durga he tied tali around her neck in declaring as
marriage and so declared as married.   If that is the case, once they
are husband and wife exception to Section 375 referred (supra) that
applies however that is not the case of the accused.   As it is also the
case of the victim that having so declared and having lead marital
life by enjoying her sexually by staying in a rented premise by working
in cell point at Visakhapatnam for some time, thereafter he brought
her back to Nizamabad District where they reached to Indira Nagar
and taken a rented room and left to his parents by pretended to
come back to take her by convincing his parents and later failed to
return and for her phone calls by responding as if he does not know
her and did not marry.   From the very report it speaks there is no real
intention on his part while tying tali of marrying her but for deceived
her by so pretending in enjoying her sexually.   It is there her permission
in sexual intercourse from he tied tali in make believing that he
married her but in reality he deceived her by saying never married her
after enjoying some period sexually.   The so called consent by her in
the sexual intercourse is thus from his said deception by cheating and
under the misconception as husband from he tied tali in the presence
of Goddess Durga.  When such is the case it not only attracts Section
420 but also Section 376 and 493 IPC.    Section 493 speak that every
man who by deceit causes any woman who is not lawfully married to 
him to believe that she is lawfully married to him and to cohabit or
have sexual intercourse with her in that belief, he shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend
to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
        9.      Now it is the contention of the counsel for the petitioner
that once Section 493 attracts of their physical sexual enjoyment after
he tied tali at the temple of Goddess Durga, it attracts at best Section
493 but not Section 376 IPC as the so called sexual enjoyment is after
the alleged marriage and again attracting of Section 376 does not
arise.   In fact no charges framed in this case so far and the case is not
even shown as committed but passed the order to commit and such  
competency for committal is under Section 323 Cr.P.C referred supra.
        10.     Before discussing further, coming to the propositions on
the scope of Section 375 explanation 4 and 376 and 420/ 417 IPC read
with Section 493 concerned, what has placed reliance mainly by the
counsel for revision petitioner is of this Court Single Judge expression in
Surapathi Laxmana Rao vs. State of A.P  where it was observed that
the consent given by prosecutrix to sexual intercourse with the person
with whom she is in deep love  on a promise that he would marry her
on a later date cannot be said to be given under a misconception of
fact.
      11.       The facts in Surapathi Laxmana Raos case (supra) were
the accused is an employee in Lipi Enterprises, Isukatota,
Visakhapatnam and was residing as a neighbour to the victim at
Isukatota, Visakhapatnam and he used to visit and inform her that he
fe ll in love with her and she also reciprocated and they started loving
each other.  She started cohabiting with the accused and while
continuing, after some time she got pregnancy, he got aborted by
promised her to marry.   However, his parents demanded for dowry or
money and even conceded to comply with by the parents of the 
victim, the parents of the accused arranged his marriage with another
girl for more dowry and it was even through elders wanted to settle,
failed.  Thereby, the victim laid the complaint that was registered as
FIR No.130 of 1998 under Sections 417, 493, 420, 423 and 506 IPC and 
Section 3 & 4 of D.P Act and police filed charge sheet that was taken
cognizance and there also FSL report received by medical
examination of the victim which shows difficult to point out whether
victim was assaulted or not;   though no adverse evidence to suggest
against the potency of accused.  After charge sheet filed before the
learned Magistrate, he has taken cognizance of the offence in CC
No.250 of 1999 and after framing charges under Sections 417, 323, 506
IPC and Section 4 of Dowry Prohibition Act, the accused faced trial
and the case was ended in conviction for the offences punishable
under Section 417 IPC and by acquitting on other charges for other
offences and confirmed by Court of Sessions in Crl.A. No.13 of 2001
and when matter moved in revision before the High Court, it was
raised regarding sustainability of the conviction under Section 417 IPC
in seeking to set aside that conviction.  The revision Court in that
regard referred the Apex Courts expression in Uday vs State of
Karnataka   of 417 IPC attracts in such event from the consent of the
victim taken by inducing sexual intercourse with promise to marry and
subsequent refusal is nothing but cheating under Section 415 IPC and
there is intentional deception to induce the person so deceived to do
or omit to do anything which he would not do or omit if he were not so
deceived, and which act or omission causes or is likely to cause
damage or harm to that person in body, mind, reputation or property,
is said to cheat and in G.V. Rao vs. L.H.V Prasad and others   it was
held that intention and deception pre supposes the existence of a
dominant motive of the person making the inducement. However, the 
inducement must be dishonest or fraudulent or it should be intentional
and it was held in Jaswantrai Manilal Akhaney vs. State of Bombay
that guilty intention is an essential ingredient of the offence of
cheating and to secure conviction of a person for the offence of
cheating, mens rea on the part of that person must be established
and the intention to deceive should be in existence at the time when
the inducement was offered as also laid down in Mahadeo Prasad vs 
State of West Bengal   and in Uday (supra), the Apex Court held that
the consensus of judicial opinion is in favour of the view that the
consent given by the prosecutrix to sexual intercourse with a person
with whom she is deeply in love on a promise that he would marry her
on a later date, cannot be said to be given under a misconception of
fact.   A false promise is not a fact within the meaning of the Code.
But there is no strait jacket formula for determining whether consent
given by the prosecutrix to sexual intercourse is voluntary or given
under a misconception of fact and the Court must in each case
consider the evidence before it and the surrounding circumstances,
before reaching a conclusion; because each case has its own
peculiar facts which may have a bearing on the question whether the
consent was voluntary, or was given under a misconception of fact.
        12.     In a case of this nature two conditions must be fulfilled for
the application of Section 90 IPC as it must be shown that the consent
was given under a misconception of fact and also it must be proved
that the person who obtained the consent knew, or had reason to
believe that the consent was given in consequence of such
misconception.     It is referring the said propositions in the factual
matrix the revision was allowed setting aside the conviction judgment
of the Sessions Judge by the single Judge of this Court in Surapathi
Laxmana Raos case (surpa).   In fact the principle laid down in Udays
case (surpa) it was held with reference to Section 90 IPC that consent
was shown to be given as a misconception of fact and the person
who obtained consent knew or had reason to believe that consent
was given in consequence of such misconception and once Section  
90 IPC requires the same attracts, there is no consent in the eye of law,
when such is the case it is outcome of cheating under the guise of
promise to marry.
        13.     Here in the present case it is important to note that the
accused and the victim who loved with each other and agreed to
marry and he has taken her to Macherial to marry and it was not
fructified and again both went to Visakhapatnam there he tied tali
around her neck before Goddess Durga, at Ramakrishna Beach by   
make believe her that he married her and there from they stayed for
some time by working in cell point in a rented room as man and wife
and had sexual intercourse for which she consented under a
misconception of the fact of he is her husband.    He having married
her knows that he had no mind to marry and the tali tied is to have
sexual intercourse, from that deception it is to say there is no consent
in the eye of law under Section 90 IPC and as per Section 493 IPC
referred supra he had committed rape with inducement by make 
believing that the marriage was performed before Goddess Durga at
Ramakrishna Beach is a lawful marriage.   It is one thing and as per
explanation under Section 375 clause 4 the sexual intercourse with
consent from the accused knows he is not her husband and that her 
consent is given because she believes that he is another man to
whom she is or believes herself to be lawfully married.    The Apex
Court in a subsequent expression in Deelip Singh Vs. State of Bihar
held by referring to Sections 375 and 90 IPC that it could be a breach
of promise to marry rather than false promise to marry and there is
nothing on record to indicate that she was incapable of
understanding the nature and  implication of the act of the accused
for which she consented to.  It is established that from the very
inception the man never really intended to marry her and the promise
was a mere hoax  and for that it is in trial by screening of the offence
carefully with reference to Past, contemporaneous and subsequent
conduct which are relevant to appreciate on facts.   In that facts also
prosecutrix had taken a conscious decision to participate in the sexual
act only on being impressed by the accuseds promise to marry her
but accuseds promise was not false from its inception with the
intention to seduce her to sexual act and thereby held consequently
of Section 375 IPC not established and observed that accused
committed breach of promise for which he would be liable for
damages also under civil law.    The Apex Court also referred the
earlier expression in Udays case (srupa), State of Himachal Pradesh vs.
Mango ram  and several decisions of various High Courts.   The
conclusions arrived on is after trial from the final judgment and not
while framing charges or before framing charges in seeking for
discharge equally in Deelip Singhs case (supra), the observations
(supra) are categorically from both the cases that each case
depends on its own facts to be ascertained from the evidence on
record after fully dressed trial.
      14.       Even in Mango rams case (supra) it was at para No.13
categorically stated that consent for the purpose of Section 375
requires voluntary participation not only after the exercise of
intelligence based on the knowledge of the significance and merely
quality of degree but after having full exercise the choice between
the resistance and assent.   Whether there was a consent or not, is to
be ascertained only on full dressed trial of all relevant facts and
circumstances?    It was on facts held that there was resistance by the
prosecutrix and there was no voluntary participation and thereby the
case comes within the purview under Section 375 (1) IPC.   It is to say
Deelip Singhs case is not considered under Section 375(2) IPC and
Mangorams case is a case considered under Section 375 (1) IPC. 
      15.       In a latter expression of the Apex Court in Deepak Gulati
vs. State of Haryana  it was held referring to Sections 375, 376 and 417
read with Section 90 IPC and Section 114-A of Evidence Act that
consent obtained on a false promise of marriage and when physical
relationship is pursuant to such consent and if prosecutrix was under
misconception of fact that accused would marry her, submits herself
to lust of accused, such fraudulent act cannot be consensual so far as
offence of accused is concerned.   In the event the promise of
accused not false, not been made with sole intent to seduce
prosecutrix to indulge in sexual act(s), such act(s) would not amount
to rape as laid down in Udays case (supra).   It was observed that
when prosecutrix claimed that she did not give her consent, this Court
shall presume under Section 114-A of Evidence Act.   Section 114-A of
Evidence Act amended by Act 43 of 1993 with effect from 25.12.1983
speaks that:
      Presumption as to absence of consent in certain
prosecutions for rape: In a prosecution for rape under
clause (a) or clause (b) or clause (c) or clause (d) or
clause (e)  or clause (g) of sub-section (2) of Section 376
of the Indian Penal Code, (45 of 1860) where sexual
intercourse by the accused is proved and the question is
whether it was without the consent of the woman alleged
to have been raped and she states in her evidence
before the Court that she did not consent, the Court shall
presume that she did not consent.
        From the above, as per Section 114-A, the presumption as to
absence of consent in certain prosecutions for rape under Clause (a)
to (e) and (g) of Section 376 (2) IPC, the Court shall presume that she
did not consent.   It is important to note that in Deepak  Gulatis case
(supra) the Apex Court categorically observed referring to Deelips
case (supra) that the first part of Section 90 IPC envisages giving of
consent by victim under fear of injury or misconception of fact.
Whereas Second part envisages accused had knowledge or reason    
to believe  that the consent of victim was in consequence of such
deception or inducement or misconception and requirements of both
to be satisfied cumulatively as first part is from the point of view of
victim, while second part is from that of accused.    It was observed
further in para No.18 that, the consent may be express or implied,
coerced or misguided, obtained willingly or through deceit.    Consent
is an act of reason, accompanied by deliberation, the mind weighing,
as in a balance, the good and evil on each side.   Mere breach of
promise is distinct from not fulfilling a false promise.   The Court should
examine whether false promise of marriage preceded, whether 
consent involved, was given after wholly understanding the nature
and consequences of sexual indulgence.  An accused can be  
convicted for rape only if the court reaches a conclusion that the
intention of the accused was mala fide, and that he had clandestine
motives.    The Apex Court also referred in this regard besides Udays
case (supra) and Deelip Singhs case (supra) other expressions in
Yedla Srinivasa rao vs. State of A.P  and Pradeep Kumar Verma vs.
State of Bihar  at para No.16 in particular all mainly placed reliance
on Udays case and Deelip Singhs case.  At para No.17, it was
observed that Rape is the most morally and physically reprehensible
crime in a society, as it is an assult on the body, mind and privacy of
the victim.   While a murderer destroys the physical frame of the victim,
a rapist degrades and defiles the soul of a helpless female.  Rape
reduces a woman to an animal, as it shakes the very core of her life.
By no means can a rape victim be called an accomplice.   Rape 
leaves a permanent scar on the life of the victim, and therefore a
rape victim is placed on a higher pedestal than an injured witness.
Rape is a crime against the entire society and violates the human
rights of the victim.  Being the most hated crime, rape tantamounts to
a serious blow to the supreme honour of a woman, and offends both,
her esteem and dignity.   It causes psychological and physical harm to
the victim, leaving upon her indelible marks.   It is also a case after full
dressed trial in considering the scope when the matter came in
appeal.   The subsequent expression of Apex Court in Naushads case 
(supra) referred in its passing is appeal against the conviction
judgment after trial.    The earlier expressions in Deelip Singhs case,
Yedla Srinivass case (supra) referred by upholding the conviction
judgment of the trial Court by set aside the first appellate courts
reversal and acquittal judgment.
      16.       There it was observed that when accused had sexual
intercourse by false assurance of marriage and after she became
pregnant having refused to marry seeks consent obtained under
misconception of fact defined under Section 90 IPC; thereby, the
accused is guilty of rape as defined under Section  375 IPC clause 4
punishable under Section 376 IPC.   From reading of the above
expressions, it clearly speaks that it is only after trial as each case
depends on own facts, whether the alleged act/ acts tantamount to
acts of rape are to be decided.   When such is the case, the order
passed by the learned Magistrate no way suffers illegality or
impropriety for this Court while sitting in revision to interfere.
      Accordingly, point No.1 is answered.      

Point No.2:

                17.     In the result the revision petition is dismissed.

                18.     Needless to say the observations herein or of the learned
Magistrate in taking decision to committing the case to the Court of
Sessions under Section 209 Cr.P.C, no way influence the trial Court
either in considering all the material afresh for framing of charges
either separately or alternatively or otherwise as per the facts or in the
ultimate trial of the case for its findings.

__________________________    
Dr. B.SIVA SANKARA RAO J,     
7th November, 2014
