
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE T. SUNIL CHOWDARY          

CRL.P.No.8993 OF 2011   

22-08-2014 

Edara Sambasiva Prasad & 4 Others...PETITIONERS     

The State Through SHO Mangalagiri Rural P S Guntur District, Rep. by its Public
ProsecutorHigh Court of Judicature at Hyderabad And another...RESPONDENTS     

Counsel for Petitioners : Ch. Masthan Naidu

Counsel for Respondent No.1: Additional Public Prosecutor
Counsel for Respondent No.2: Sri M. Chalapathi Rao 

<GIST: 

>HEAD NOTE:    


? Cases referred

  1995 Supp (3) SCC 438 
2 2002 (1) ALT (Crl.) 470 (A.P)
3 (2002) 5 SCC 371 
4 (20029) 1 SCC 554 
5 2010 AIR SCW 5101   
6 AIR 2011 SC 1238  
7 (2010) 1 SCC 707 
8 (2004) 13 SCC 129 
9 (1994) 1 SCC 73 
10 (2007) 10 SCC 797 
11 (2010) 10 SCC 337 
12 (2009) 16 SCC 605 
13 (2001) 9 SCC 618 
14 AIR 2000 SC 754  
15 (2010) 10 SCC 673 
16 2011 (3) ALT (Crl.) 109 (SC)
17 2014 (1) ALT (Crl.) 479 (SC)
18 2013 (3) SCC 330 
19 AIR 1991 SC 1260  
20 AIR 1987 SC 877  
21 (1977) 4 SCC 551 
22 (2011) 12 SCC 437 


THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE T. SUNIL CHOWDARY          
CRIMINAL PETITION No.8993 of 2011    

ORDER:  
1       This petition is filed under section 482 Cr.P.C to quash the
proceedings in S.C.No.225 of 2011 on the file of Additional
Assistant Sessions Judge, Mangalagiri.
2       Sri Ch.Masthan Naidu, the leaned counsel for the petitioners
submitted that the criminal proceedings against the petitioners are
liable to be quashed for the following reasons:
i.      The allegations made in the charge sheet do not satisfy
the basic ingredients of Section 107 and 306 IPC,
ii.     The petitioners were falsely implicated in this case by the
de-facto complainant with a malafide intention, and
iii.    There is no nexus between the alleged incident of uttering
the words by the petitioners and suicide committed by the
deceased. 
3       Per contra, Sri M. Chalapathi Rao, the learned counsel for
the second respondent would submit that as the allegations made
in the charge sheet constitute the offences alleged to have been
committed by the petitioners, this is not a fit case to quash the
proceedings against the petitioners by invoking the inherent
jurisdiction under Section 482 Cr.P.C.
4       Before adverting to the factual aspects of the case, I feel it apt
to refer to the case law cited by both the counsel.   The learned
counsel for the petitioners relied on the following decisions to
impress upon the Court that the alleged act committed by the
petitioners would not attract the basic ingredients of Section 306
IPC.
i.      Swamy Prahaladdas Vs. State of M.P. and another  wherein  
the Honble apex Court observed that the words which are casual
in nature and which are often employed in the heat of moment
between quarrelling people will not attract the provisions of Section
306 IPC.
ii.     V.Shankaraiah Vs. State of A.P  wherein this Court at para
No.7 held as under:
                Since there is no averment in the charge sheet, or
material on record, to show that petitioner either induced the
deceased to commit suicide or aided the suicide of the
deceased, he is not liable to be charge-sheeted for an offence
under Section 306 IPC.  Therefore, P.R.C.No.72 of 2001 on the
file of the Court of Judicial First Class Magistrate, (East and
North) Ranga Reddy District, against the petitioner, who is
shown as A-3 therein, is quashed.
iii.    Sanju Alias Sanjay Singh Sengar Vs. State of M.P  wherein the
Honble apex Court observed that accused cannot be convicted 
under Section 306 IPC if the suicide was not proximate to the
quarrel.
iv.     Sonti Rama Krishna Vs. Sonti Shanti Sree and Another 
wherein it was held that it is fairly well settled that words uttered
in a fit of anger or emotion without any intention cannot be termed
as instigation.
v.      Madan Mohan Singh Vs. State of Gujarat and Anr  wherein the 
Honble apex Court at para No.8 held as under:
                .In spite of our best efforts and microscopic examination
of the suicide note and the FIR, all that we find is that the suicide note
is a rhetoric document in the nature of a departmental complaint. It also
suggests some mental imbalance on the part of the deceased which he  
himself describes as depression. In the so-called suicide note, it cannot
be said that the accused ever intended that the driver under him should
commit suicide or should end his life and did anything in that behalf.
Even if it is accepted that the accused changed the duty of the driver or
that the accused asked him not to take the keys of the car and to keep
the keys of the car in the office itself, it does not mean that the accused
intended or knew that the driver should commit suicide because of this.
In order to bring out an offence under Section 306, IPC specific
abetment as contemplated by Section 107, IPC on the part of the
accused with an intention to bring out the suicide of the concerned
person as a result of that abetment is required. The intention of the
accused to aid or to instigate or to abet the deceased to commit suicide
is a must for this particular offence under Section 306, IPC. We are of
the clear opinion that there is no question of there being any material for
offence under Section 306, IPC either in the FIR or in the so-called
suicide note.
vi.     M. Mohan Vs. State Represented by the Deputy   
Superintendent of Police  wherein the Honble apex Court held at
Para Nos.50 and 51 as under:    
50.     Undoubtedly, the deceased had died because of hanging. The 
deceased was undoubtedly hyper-sensitive to ordinary petulance,
discord and differences which happen in our day-to-day life. In a joint
family, instances of this kind are not very uncommon. Human
sensitivity of each individual differs from person to person. Each
individual has his own idea of self-esteem and self-respect. Different
people behave differently in the same situation. It is unfortunate that
such an episode of suicide had taken place in the family. But the
question remains to be answered is whether the appellants can be
connected with that unfortunate incident in any manner?
51.     On a careful perusal of the entire material on record and the
law, which has been declared by this Court, we can safely arrive at the
conclusion that the appellants are not even remotely connected with the
offence under Section 306 of the I.P.C.. It may be relevant to mention
that criminal proceedings against husband of the deceased Anandraj (A-
1) and Easwari (A-3) are pending adjudication.
5       Per contra, the learned counsel for the second respondent
relied on the following decisions:
i.      Amalendu Pal Alias Jhantu Vs. State of West Bengal  wherein 
the Honble apex Court held at para Nos.10 as under:
10      The legal position as regards Sections 306 IPC which is long
settled was recently reiterated by this Court in the case of Randhir
Singh v. State of Punjab  as follows in paras 12 and 13:
12. Abetment involves a mental process of instigating a
person or intentionally aiding that person in doing of a thing.
In cases of conspiracy also it would involve that mental
process of entering into conspiracy for the doing of that
thing. More active role which can be described as instigating
or aiding the doing of a thing is required before a person can
be said to be abetting the commission of offence under
Section 306 IPC.
13. In State of W.B. v. Orilal Jaiswal  this Court has
observed that the courts should be extremely careful in
assessing the facts and circumstances of each case and the 
evidence adduced in the trial for the purpose of finding
whether the cruelty meted out to the victim had in fact
induced her to end the life by committing suicide. If it
transpires to the court that a victim committing suicide was
hypersensitive to ordinary petulance, discord and differences
in domestic life quite common to the society to which the
victim belonged and such petulance, discord and differences
were not expected to induce a similarly circumstanced
individual in a given society to commit suicide, the
conscience of the court should not be satisfied for basing a
finding that the accused charged of abetting the offence of
suicide should be found guilty.
ii.     Kishori Lal Vs. State of M.P  wherein the Honble apex
Court held at para No.6 as under:
6. Section 107 IPC defines abetment of a thing. The offence of abetment
is a separate and distinct offence provided in the Act as an offence. A
person, abets the doing of a thing when (1) he instigates any person to
do that thing; or (2) engages with one or more other persons in any
conspiracy for the doing of that thing; or (3) intentionally aids, by act or
illegal omission, the doing of that thing. These things are essential to
complete abetment as a crime. The word "instigate" literally means to
provoke, incite, urge on or bring about by persuasion to do any thing.
The abetment may be by instigation, conspiracy or intentional aid, as
provided in the three clauses of Section 107.  Section 109 provides that
if the act abetted is committed in consequence of abetment and there is
no provision for the punishment of such abetment, then the offender is
to be punished with the punishment provided for the original offence.
'Abetted' in Section 109 means the specific offence abetted. Therefore,
the offence for the abetment of which a person is charged with the
abetment is normally linked with the proved offence
iii.    State of Haryana Vs. Surinder Kumar  wherein the Honble
apex Court held at Para No.4 as under:
        4. On the basis of the facts and circumstances disclosed by the police
statement, the trial Court framed charge against the respondent for the
offence punishable under Section 306 IPC. The respondent challenged
framing of the charge by filing a revision petition in the High Court.  It
was allowed by the High Court on the ground that the suicide was
committed 20 days after he was accused of stealing 10 gm of gold.  In
our opinion, the High Court was not justified in quashing the charge at
that stage holding that the suicide was not as a result of abetment by
the respondent.  Whether it was so or not will have to be decided on the
basis of the evidence which the prosecution may present before the
Court.
iv.     Chitresh Kumar Chopta Vs. State (Government of NCT of  
Delhi)  wherein the apex Court held at para Nos.14 to 19 as under:
                14.     Therefore, the question for consideration is whether
the allegations levelled against the appellant in the FIR and the
material collected during the course of investigations, would attract
any one of the ingredients of Section 107 IPC?
                15.     As per clause firstly in the said Section, a person can
be said to have abetted in doing of a thing, who "instigates" any
person to do that thing. The word "instigate" is not defined in the IPC.
The meaning of the said word was considered by this Court in
Ramesh Kumar Vs. State of Chhattisgarh . 
       16.      Speaking for the three-Judge Bench, R.C. Lahoti, J. (as
His Lordship then was) said that instigation is to goad, urge forward,
provoke, incite or encourage to do "an act". To satisfy the requirement
of "instigation", though it is not necessary that actual words must be
used to that effect or what constitutes "instigation" must necessarily
and specifically be suggestive of the consequence. Yet a reasonable
certainty to incite the consequence must be capable of being spelt out.
Where the accused had, by his acts or omission or by a continued
course of conduct, created such circumstances that the deceased was 
left with no other option except to commit suicide, in which case, an
"instigation" may have to be inferred. A word uttered in a fit of anger
or emotion without intending the consequences to actually follow,
cannot be said to be instigation.
       17.      Thus, to constitute "instigation", a person who
instigates another has to provoke, incite, urge or encourage doing of
an act by the other by "goading" or "urging forward". The dictionary
meaning of the word "goad" is "a thing that stimulates someone into
action: provoke to action or reaction" (See: Concise Oxford English
Dictionary); "to keep irritating or annoying somebody until he reacts"
(See: Oxford Advanced Learner's Dictionary - 7th Edition).
       18.      Similarly, "urge" means to advise or try hard to
persuade somebody to do something or to make a person to move   
more quickly and or in a particular direction, especially by pushing or
forcing such person. Therefore, a person who instigates another has
to "goad" or "urge forward" the latter with intention to provoke, incite
or encourage the doing of an act by the latter.
       19.      As observed in Ramesh Kumar's case (14 supra), where  
the accused by his acts or by a continued course of conduct creates
such circumstances that the deceased was left with no other option
except to commit suicide, an "instigation" may be inferred. In other
words, in order to prove that the accused abetted commission of
suicide by a person, it has to be established that:
       (i) the accused kept on irritating or annoying the deceased by
words, deeds or wilful omission or conduct which may even be a wilful
silence until the deceased reacted or pushed or forced the deceased by
his deeds, words or wilful omission or conduct to make the deceased
move forward more quickly in a forward direction; and
       (ii) that the accused had the intention to provoke, urge or
encourage the deceased to commit suicide while acting in the manner
noted above. Undoubtedly, presence of mens rea is the necessary 
concomitant of instigation.
6       The learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that this
Court can quash the criminal proceedings by exercising inherent
jurisdiction under Section 482 Cr.P.C to prevent the abuse of
process of the court.  To substantiate the arguments, he has drawn
my attention to the following decisions:
i.      G.Sagar Suri and another Vs. State of U.P  wherein the
Honble apex Court at para No.8 held as under:
                Jurisdiction under Section 482 of the Code has to be exercised
with a great care. In exercise of its jurisdiction High Court is not to
examine the matter superficially. It is to be seen if a matter, which is
essentially of civil nature, has been given a cloak of criminal offence.
Criminal proceedings are not a short cut of other remedies available in
law. Before issuing process a criminal court has to exercise a great deal
of caution. For the accused it is a serious matter. This Court has laid
certain principles on the basis of which High Court is to exercise its
jurisdiction under Section 482 of the Code, Jurisdiction- under this
Section has to be exercised to prevent abuse of the process of any court
or otherwise to secure the ends of justice.

ii.     Manoj Mahavir Prasad Khaitan Vs. Ram Gopal Poddar and    
Another  wherein the Honble apex Court held at para No.12 as
under:
        We reiterate that when the criminal Court looks into the complaint, it
has to do so with the open mind. True it is that that is not the stage for
finding out the truth or otherwise in the allegations; but where the allegations
themselves are so absurd that no reasonable man would accept the same, the 
High Court could not have thrown its arms in the air and expressed its
inability to do anything in the matter. Section 482 Cr.P.C. is a guarantee
against injustice. The High Court is invested with the tremendous powers
thereunder to pass any order in the interest of justice. Therefore, this would
have been a proper case for the High Court to look into the allegations with
the openness and then to decide whether to pass any order in the interests of
justice. In our opinion, this was a case where the High Court ought to have
used its powers under Section 482 Cr.P.C.

7       The learned counsel for the second respondent has drawn 
my attention to the following decisions in support of his contention
that this is not a fit case to quash the proceedings:
i.      Padal Venkata Rama Reddy @ Ramu Vs. Kovvuri     
Satyanarayana Reddy and others  wherein the Honble apex Court  
held thus:
                In a proceeding instituted on a complaint, exercise of inherent
powers to quash the proceedings is called for only in a case in which
complaint does not disclose any offence or is frivolous, vexatious or
oppressive. There is no need to analyse each and every aspect
meticulously before the trial to find out whether the case would end in
conviction or acquittal. The complaint has to be read as a whole. The
statement of witnesses made on oath to be verified in full and materials
put forth in the chargesheet ought to be taken note of as a whole before
arriving any conclusion. It is the material concluded during the
investigation and evidence led in court which decides the fate of
the accused persons. 
ii.     Umesh Kumar Vs. State of Andhra Pradesh  wherein the   
Honble apex Court at para Nos.13 to 15 held as under:
13. In Rajiv Thapar v Madan Lal Kapoor  this Court while dealing
with the issue held as follows:
Based on the factors canvassed in the foregoing paragraphs, we would
delineate the following steps to determine the veracity of a prayer for
quashing, raised by an accused by invoking the power vested in the High
Court under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure:
(i) Step one, whether the material relied upon by the accused is sound,
reasonable, and indubitable, i.e., the material is of sterling and
impeccable quality?
(ii) Step two, whether the material relied upon by the accused, would
rule out the assertions contained in the charges levelled against the
accused, i.e., the material is sufficient to reject and overrule the factual
assertions contained in the complaint, i.e., the material is such, as
would persuade a reasonable person to dismiss and condemn the  
factual basis of the accusations as false.
(iii) Step three, whether the material relied upon by the accused, has not
been refuted by the prosecution/complainant; and/or the material is
such, that it cannot be justifiably refuted by the
prosecution/complainant? 
(iv)  Step four, whether proceeding with the trial would result in an
abuse of process of the court, and would not serve the ends of justice?
14.     In State of Bihar v. P.P. Sharma & Anr , this Court dealt with an
issue of whether an application under Section 482 Cr.P.C. for quashing the
charge sheet should be entertained before cognizance is taken by a
criminal court and held as under:-
Quashing the charge-sheet even before cognizance is taken by a criminal
Court amounts to killing a still born child. Till the criminal Court takes
cognizance of the offence there is no criminal proceedings pending. I am not
allowing the appeals on the ground alternative remedies provided by the
Code as a bar. It may be relevant in an appropriate case. My view is that
entertaining the writ petitions against charge-sheet and considering the
matter on merit on the guise of prima facie evidence to stand on accused for
trial amounts to pre-trial of a criminal trial. It is not to suggest that
under no circumstances a writ petition should be entertained.. The charge-
sheet and the evidence placed in support thereof form the base to take or
refuse to take cognizance by the competent Court. It is not the case that no
offence has been made out in the charge sheets and the First Information
Report.
15. The issue of malafides looses its significance if there is a substance in
the
allegation made in complaint moved with malice.
        In Sheo Nandan Paswan v. State of Bihar & Ors  this Court held
as under:
It is a well-established proposition of law that a criminal prosecution, if
otherwise justifiable and based upon adequate evidence does not become 
vitiated on account of mala fides or political vendetta of the first informant
or complainant.

8       The following uncontroverted facts can be culled out from the
record. On 06.03.2010, the second respondent/de-facto
complainant submitted a complaint to the Station House Officer,
Mangalagiri Rural Police Station, who in turn, registered a case in
Cr.No.31 of 2010 for the offence under Section 306 r/w 34 IPC
against the petitioners.  After completion of investigation, the
investigating officer laid charge sheet against the petitioners for the
offence under Section 306 r/w 34 IPC.  The learned Additional
Junior Civil Judge, Mangalagiri, after satisfying himself, prima
facie, with the material available on record, has taken cognizance
of the offence under section 306 r/w 34 IPC against the petitioners
and numbered the charge sheet as PRC No.71 of 2010 and   
committed the case to the Sessions division, Guntur as
contemplated under section 209 Cr.P.C.  The learned District
Judge, Guntur has taken the case on file and numbered it as
S.C.No.225 of 2011 and made over the same to the Assistant 
Sessions Judge Court, Mangalagiri for trial and disposal.
9       Record reveals that the second respondent has one daughter 
and one son.  The marriage of the daughter of the second
respondent by name Bhargavi was performed with the first
petitioner on 24.08.2008 as per Hindu rites and caste custom at
Pedda Vadlapudi. Immediately after the marriage, Bhargavi joined
with the first petitioner to lead marital life.   The record further
reveals that within a short period after the marriage, the first
petitioner went to Sharjah on securing job. On 23.10.2008,
Bhargavi went to Sharjah and there she conceived. Thereafter she
came back to India on 08.03.2009 and gave birth to a male child
on 31.07.2009.  On 30.08.2009 the first petitioner came to India
and visited the house of the second respondent to see his son.
Again the first petitioner went to Abudabi on getting a new job.  On
04.03.2010 the wife of the second respondent by name 
Kanyakumari @ Jyothi (hereinafter referred to as the deceased)
attempted to commit suicide by hanging to ceiling fan in their
house.   Immediately she was shifted to NRI hospital at Mangalagiri
for treatment, where she died on 06.03.2010 while undergoing
treatment.
10      The root cause for facing the criminal proceedings by the
petitioners herein is the death of the deceased.  The accusation
made against the petitioners revolves around three important
aspects viz., instigation, proximity of time and nexus between the
alleged act of the petitioners and death of the deceased.
11      In order to proceed against a person under section 306 IPC,
the prosecution should, prima facie, satisfy the ingredients of
Section 306 IPC as well as Section 107 IPC.  It is needless to
mention that section 107 IPC is not an independent section.  In
order to understand the intrinsic meaning of the word abetment
used in Section 306 IPC, one has to fall back on section 107 IPC,
which is integral part of Section 306 IPC.  Therefore, reading of
Section 306 IPC in dexto pose with section 107 IPC is inevitable to
arrive at a prima facie conclusion or final conclusion basing upon
the stage of the proceedings.
12      Section 482 Cr.P.C gives ample scope for interpretation by
the accused in one way and the prosecution in another way.  The
underlying object of section 482 Cr.P.C is to safeguard the personal
liberty of the accused, however, not at the cost of the version of the
prosecution.   The Honble apex Court in catena of cases
categorically held that though the inherent jurisdiction of this
Court under Section 482 Cr.P.C is so wide, but the same should be
exercised with great care, caution and circumspection.  The court
while exercising the inherent jurisdiction under section 482 Cr.P.C
should always keep in mind that it has to act as an umpire to
safeguard the interest of the accused person from malicious
prosecution as well as the interest of the victims.  It is a settled
principle of law that the criminal proceedings start with lodging of
complaint and end with conviction or acquittal of the accused.
The accused person can knock the doors of this Court with a
request to safeguard his interest by invoking inherent jurisdiction
conferred on this Court under Section 482 Cr.P.C. at any stage i.e.
from the date of registration of the crime till completion of trial.  It
should be remembered that Section 482 Cr.P.C. can be used as a  
shield to safeguard the personal liberty of an individual and also to
prevent the abuse of process of the Court, but not as a sword to
stifle the legitimate prosecution.
13      The allegations made in the complaint form bedrock to the
criminal proceedings.  The allegations made in the complaint must
prima facie satisfy the basic ingredients of the offences alleged to
have been committed by the accused.  
14      Let me consider the allegations made in the charge sheet in
the light of the above legal principles.  The learned counsel for the
petitioners submitted that nobody knows what happened from 
04.03.2010 to 06.03.2010, which ultimately casts cloud on the
prosecution version.  The deceased attempted to commit suicide by
hanging to ceiling fan at about 10.30 PM on 04.03.2010 and she
died on 06.03.2010 at about 8.30 AM after undergoing treatment
for 34 hours in NRI hospital at Mangalagiri.   The learned counsel
for the petitioners submitted that this aspect itself is sufficient to
quash the proceedings against the petitioners. As rightly pointed
out by the learned counsel for the second respondent, the family
members might have waited with fond hope that the deceased 
would survive under any circumstances.  The learned counsel for
the second respondent submitted that the family members of the
deceased might be of the view that if they inform the incident to
police, there is every possibility to register a criminal case against
the deceased for the offence under Section 309 IPC.  The
submission made by the learned counsel for the second respondent 
may not be legally acceptable, but the reasons assigned may be
logically correct. The principle laid down in Surender Kumar case
prima facie dispels the purported cloud caste on the prosecution
version.
15      As per the allegations made in the complaint, second
respondent gave Rs.20.00 lakhs cash and gold ornaments as dowry  
to the first petitioner at the time of marriage of his daughter
Bhargavi.  It is further alleged that the petitioners herein started
demanding an amount of Rs.8.00 lakhs as additional dowry for
which the second respondent expressed his inability.  As per the
allegations made in the charge sheet, the petitioners herein refused
to take back Bhargavi and her son to Tenali unless the second
respondent pays an amount of Rs.8.00 lakhs as additional dowry.
It is not in dispute that the first petitioner came to India and
visited the house of the second respondent on 30.08.2009.  As per
the allegations made in the charge sheet, when Bhargavi informed
the first petitioner about the demand of dowry made by the other
petitioners, his reply was to follow the instructions of his family
members.  It is further alleged that again on 01.03.2010, the
petitioners have visited the house of the second respondent and
demanded additional dowry of Rs.8.00 lakhs and incidentally
expressed their inner feeling that they wont get the additional
dowry unless the deceased die.  As per the allegations made in the
charge sheet, the petitioners 2 to 4 openly expressed that they will
perform second marriage to the first petitioner if the second
respondent fails to pay an amount of Rs.8.00 lakhs as additional
dowry.
16      The learned counsel for the petitioners submitted that the
words alleged to have been uttered by the petitioners would not
prima facie attract Section 107 IPC.  Without establishing the
ingredients of Section 107 IPC and in this set of facts, forcing the
petitioners to face rigour of trial would amount to abuse of process
of law and it is nothing short of infringement of the personal liberty
of an individual as enshrined under Article 21 of the Constitution
of India.  The Court has to take into consideration the factual
aspect from the starting point to end point.  If the Court considers
one aspect in isolation of the other, it amounts to miscarriage of
justice.  The principle of securing the ends of justice is equally
applicable to both the alleged perpetrator of the crime as well as
the victim of the alleged offence.
17      Be that as it may, the seed of ill-feelings sowed in the minds
of both parties in the month of October 2009 and culminated into
the death of the deceased in the month of March 2010.  No two
individuals may have same intellectual faculty.  No two individuals
will swallow and digest the adverse situation in identical passion or
manner.  The overall personality of an individual depends upon
numerous factors like experience of the childhood, socio economic
conditions of the family and other attending circumstances.  An
easy going person may not take every minute issue to the heart or
mind. A person with some sort of sensitiveness may react in
different manner to that of easy going person even for a small
thing.  A person with hypertension, depression or such other
psychological problem may react quickly even on trivial issues.
The various decisions cited by the learned counsel clearly reveal
that the Court has to take into consideration the background of the
individual in order to ascertain whether a set of words uttered by
opposite party will instigate such individual to resort to the
extreme step of committing suicide.
18      Whether the alleged words uttered by the petitioners
instigated the deceased to commit suicide has to be considered
from different perspectives in order to prevent miscarriage of
justice.  Disturbance in the family life of daughter may certainly
influence the mind of a mother more particularly in case of only
daughter.  Inability on the part of the parents of a bride to satisfy
the financial requirements of the family members of the bridegroom
is not a one time problem so as to control the mind.   As per the
allegations made in the complaint, immediately before the incident,
the deceased shared her feelings with her own brother and
thereafter committed suicide.  Deciding of the root cause for the
death of the deceased while exercising inherent power under
Section 482 Cr.P.C. is nothing but conducting of pre-trial before
the regular trial. If the stand of the accused improbablises the
stand of the prosecution, in all probability, then there may be some
justification.  The material on which the petitioners are placing
reliance to quash the proceedings is not of a sterling and
impeachable quality.  Whether the deceased committed suicide due  
to the instigation or abetment committed by the petitioners is
purely a question of fact. Likewise the proximity of time will play a
vital role in cases of this nature. It is premature to express any
view about the mental faculty of the deceased. Whether the alleged
uttering of words by the petitioner will fall within the ambit of
abetment as contemplated under Section 306 IPC and instigation 
as postulated under Section 107 IPC has to be decided at the time
of full fledged trial only basing on the oral and documentary
evidence available on record.  Deciding of the same at this point of
time basing on the allegations made in the charge sheet and
Section 161 Cr.P.C statements of witness may be premature. 
19      It is an admitted fact that the first petitioner was not in India
at the time of the death of the deceased or even at the time of the
alleged incident.  But the material placed before the Court, prima
facie, reveals that he was very much aware what transpired in
Tenali and Pedda Vadlapudi.  In such circumstances any view 
expressed by this Court about the alleged role of the first petitioner
may cause prejudice either way.
20      The learned counsel for the petitioners advanced arguments
in such a manner that the material placed before this Court is
sufficient to decide the fate of the case without going for trial.  If
the argument of the learned counsel for the petitioners is accepted,
no triable issues will be involved except deciding the matter purely
on legalities, which will fall within the purview of Section 482
Cr.P.C.  The argument advanced by the learned counsel for the
petitioners is very easy to swallow but highly difficult to digest it for
the simple reason that numerous questions of facts are involved.
As per the allegations made in the complaint the petitioners herein
have persistently pestered the second respondent and his wife for
additional dowry.
21      In Madhu Limaye Vs. State of Maharashtra  the Honble 
Supreme Court held as under: 
                At the outset the following principles may be
noticed in relation to the exercise of inherent power of
the High Court, which have been followed ordinarily
and generally, almost invariably, barring a few
exceptions.

1.      That the power is not to be resorted to if there is a
specific provision in the Code for the redress of the
grievance of the aggrieved party;
2.      That it should be exercised very sparingly to prevent
abuse of process of any Court or otherwise to secure
the ends of justice;
3.      That it should not be exercised as against the express
bar of law engrafted in any other provision of the
Code.
22      In Padal Venkata Rama Reddy @ Ramu Vs. Kovvuri    
Satyanarayana Reddy and others  the apex Court observed as  
follows:
   13. It is well settled that the inherent powers under
Section 482 can be exercised only when no other 
remedy is available to the litigant and not in a
situation where a specific remedy is provided by the
statute. It cannot be used if it is inconsistent with
specific provisions provided under the Code (vide
Kavita v. State {2000 Cri LJ 315 (Del)} and B.S. Joshi v.
State of Haryana {(2003) 4 SCC 675}. If an effective
alternative remedy is available, the High Court will not
exercise its powers under this section, specially when
the applicant may not have availed of that remedy.

23      Having regard to the facts and circumstances of the case and
also the principle enunciated in the cases cited supra, I am of the
view that this is not a fit case to quash the proceedings at this
stage.
24      The learned counsel for the petitioners submitted that the
petitioners are facing much difficulty in attending the Court on
each and every adjournment.  He further submitted that number of
matters are pending before various courts.  A perusal of the record
reveals that maintenance case and dowry harassment case filed by 
Bhargavi and divorce OP filed by the first petitioner are pending
before various courts.
25      In that view of the matter, I am inclined to dispense with the
presence of the petitioners 2 to 4 before the trial Court on each and
every adjournment except on the days when their presence is
specifically required.
26      With the above observations, this Criminal Petition is
dismissed.  As a sequel, miscellaneous applications, if any
pending, shall stand closed.  However, the trial Court is hereby
directed to proceed with the trial of the case in accordance with law
and not being influenced by any of the observations made by this
Court.
_________________________    
T. SUNIL CHOWDARY, J.    
Date: 22.08.2014
