
HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE L.NARASIMHA REDDY AND THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE S. RAVI KUMAR                  

CRL.A.NO.1614 OF 2009    

05-03-2014 

SHAIK SHAFI AHMED ....APPELLANT/ACCUSED          

THE STATE OF  A.P., Rep. by Public Prosecutor, High cOURT Of A.P.,    
Hyderabad...RESPONDENT/COMPLAINANT/         

Counsel for the Petitioner:Sri M.A.Khadeer

Counsel for the Respondent:Public Prosecutor 

<Gist:

>Head Note: 

?cIATATIONS:  

CRIMINAL APPEAL No. 1614 of 2009    


JUDGMENT: (per the Hon'ble Sri Justice L.Narasimha Reddy)       


        A1 to A4 were tried by the Court of the V Additional Metropolitan Sessions
Judge, Mahila Court, Hyderabad in S.C.No.38 of 2009 for causing the death of
Afsari Begum, wife of A1.  After conducting full-fledged trial, the learned
Trial Judge acquitted A2 to A4 through its judgment, dated 21.10.2009.  A1 was
convicted for the offence punishable under Section 302 I.P.C., and was imposed
the punishment of imprisonment for life.  Fine of Rs.500/-, in default, to
undergo simple imprisonment for one month, was also imposed.  A1 was acquitted  
of the charges referable to Section 498-A I.P.C. and Sections 3 and 4 of the
Dowry Prohibition Act. This appeal is filed by A1, feeling aggrieved by the
conviction and sentence, handed out to him.
        The case presented by the prosecution was that the deceased, who is the
second daughter of P.W.1, was married to A1 on 24.11.2002 and two children were 
born out of the wedlock.  It was alleged that the accused was harassing the
deceased in various forms, particularly in the context of transfer of a plot of
200 square yards in his name.  A1 is also said to have got issued a notice to
the father of the deceased narrating the strained relations between him and the
deceased and when P.W.1 and her husband went to the Office of the Advocate, who  
issued notice, A1 and the deceased came there and stated that the problems have 
since been resolved.
        P.W.1, the mother of the deceased, is said to have received the intimation
in the night of 20.10.2008 to the effect that her daughter was admitted in Owasi
Hospital with serious burn injuries and she went there and saw A1, and in spite
of her questioning, A1 remained silent about the reason for the injuries.  After
the deceased was shifted to another ward, P.W.1 is said to have interacted with
her and that the deceased told her that all the accused poured kerosene upon
her, and set her on fire.
        After the deceased was admitted into the hospital with serious burn
injuries, Crime No.222 of 2008 was registered by Santosh Nagar Police Station.
The Inspector of Police, P.W.14, sent a requisition to the Jurisdictional
Magistrate.  Since he was doubtful about the survival of the deceased till the
arrival of the Magistrate, P.W.14 recorded a dying-declaration, marked as Ex.P12
at 11.00 p.m.  Half an hour thereafter, the Jurisdictional Magistrate, P.W.13,
came to the Hospital and recorded the statement, Ex.P10.  Five days thereafter,
the deceased died.  The provision of law in the FIR was altered.  On the basis
of the dying-declarations and other facts noticed during the investigation,
P.W.14 filed a charge sheet. The trial Court framed as many as five charges
against all the accused.
        The prosecution examined P.Ws.1 to 14 and marked Exs.P1 to P16. M.Os.1 to    
3 were also taken on record.  The nature of disposal given by the trial Court
has already been indicated in the preceding paragraphs.
        Smt.Gayathri Reddy, learned counsel for A1 submits that though there are
two dying-declarations on record, both are at variance with each other and
having acquitted A2 to A4 on noticing the serious discrepancy, the trial Court
thought it fit to convict A1.  She contends that the result of the discrepancy
between Exs.P10 and P12 would be the same vis--vis all the accused, since there
are no differentiating factors.  Learned counsel further submits that P.W.2, the
juvenile witness, who is said to have witnessed the incident, has categorically
admitted that he has been tutored not only by P.W.1 and her family members, but
also by the Additional Public Prosecutor.  Learned counsel further submits that
the reason mentioned in Ex.P10 for A1, to have poured kerosene and to set her on
fire is, purchase of a book without his knowledge, whereas a totally different
reason was cited in Ex.P12.  She contends that P.W.1 was not at all consistent
as to what she heard from the deceased, soon after she reached the hospital.
        Learned Public Prosecutor, on the other hand, submits that the two dying-
declarations are consistent as to the cause of the death and the minor
discrepancies about the acts that preceded the incident are of no consequence.
She contends that the trial Court has weighed the oral and documentary evidence
from the correct perspective and has arrived at just and proper conclusion.  It
is pleaded that the objective approach on the part of the trial Court is evident
from the fact that A2 to A3 were acquitted on finding that their names did not
figure in Ex.P10 and there does not exist any basis for extending the same
benefit to A1, since his name was specifically mentioned in it.
The deceased received serious burn injuries in the night of 20.10.2008.  It was
alleged that A1 sent his two minor sons to Namaz, and when himself, and the
deceased alone were in the house, he picked up quarrel in the context of
transferring the plot in his favour.  It was further alleged that when the
deceased was not agreeable for that, he poured kerosene upon her and set her on
fire.  If this allegation is proved, the conviction ordered against A1, can
certainly be upheld.
Though the prosecution sought to project PW.2, the minor son of A1 and deceased, 
it is too difficult to accent his evidence.  The reason is that even by the date
of examination in the Court, he was just boy of five years of age, and he stated
in the cross examination that, the police asked him to tell in the Court what
they told him.  In addition to that, the Additional Public Prosecutor is also
said to have informed him as to what he must depose in the Court.  Those two
admissions are sufficient to discard his evidence.  The boy was so innocent,
that he sated that the deceased was coming out of the house with flames, A1 was
present there, but he did not give him chocolates.  It is difficult to conclude
that a boy of that understanding would be in a position to properly analyse the
state of affairs around him.
Even if the evidence of PW2 is omitted from consideration, there are two dying
declarations recorded from the deceased, namely, Exs.P10 and P12.  The concerned  
police official gave a requisition-Ex.P11, to the jurisdictional Magistrate, to
record dying declaration.  The learned counsel for the A1 sought to rely upon a
sentence, occurring in Ex.P11, which reads:
" .....one patient by name Smt Afsari, W/o Mohd Shafi Ahmed, age 28 years, Occ. 
House hold, r/o H.No.17-1-250/5/A, M.B.Huts, Santhoshnagar, Hyderabad poured  
kerosene on herself and set fire at about 7.45p.m. today i.e., on 20-10-2008 at
her residence due to domestic problems....."

This, no doubt would give indication, that the deceased poured kerosene on
herself due to the domestic problems.  However, the same cannot be treated as
conclusive.  At the most, it may be the understanding of the person, who gave
the requisition.
By the time, the PW.13 reached the hospital, PW.14-the Inspector of Police,
recorded the statement of the deceased, and it is marked as Ex.P12.  The
relevant portion of Ex.P12 reads as under:
"....I am residing at Santhosh nagar MB Hat along with my husband Shaik Shafi
Ahmed and 2 male children Faraez & Farhana.  I married Sk.Shafi Ahmed on  
24.11.2002. Since my marriage my husband Sk.Shafi Ahmed my mother in law, sister   
in law Mehraej Begum used to harass me for each and every issue.  Since 3 days 
he is harassing and beating me.  Yesterday i.e., on 19.10.2008 evening on the
guise of taking me to hospital he taken me to an advocate office and insisted me
to sign on some papers.  Today i.e., on 20.10.2008 evening at about 7.45p.m. my
husband came picked up quarrel for my father's plot and when I denied he poured
kerosene on my body and set fire to me with match stick.  I cried but no one
came to my rescue.  I request you to take action on my husband and his mother 
and sister Mehraej......"

Within half an hour, PW.13 reached and recorded Ex.P10, another Dying 
Declaration.  The translated version of that reads as under:
        "...On 20.10.2008, myself living at home, in the night hours about
8.00p.m., at the time of cooking on gas stove.  In the meantime my husband came 
and put the kerosene on me, and fire a match stick on the kerosene, due to this
the flame of fire touched to my body and my body burnt out, I bought a book,
then my husband said why you bought the book without my permission?  That the  
BOOK IS BEE BEE SAGHAT BOOK (Holy Story of Bi Bi Fatima) to clear all the    
troubles, if you read the story and give Fateha to her name)  However, I got a
plot in favour of me i.e., admeasuring 200 sq yds after my marriage, my husband
always abused to me in the vulgar and filthy language, she is giving answer
slowly for sometime, thereafter she is giving answer, due to the unbearable
pains.  Hence stopped to record the DD...."

From a perusal of the two dying declarations extracted above, it is evident that
there are serious variations between them.  In Ex.P12, the deceased named all
the four accused as the persons, as those who harassed her and alleged that A1
poured kerosene upon her.  The reason mentioned therein, is that A1 quarrelled
with her about a plot.  She did not speak about the presence of her son-PW.2,
who is said to have seen her coming out of the house with flames.  In contrast,
she did not name A2 to A4 in Ex.P10.  The reason attributed to the A1 for
setting her on fire, is that she purchased a book without his permission.  In
Ex.P-12 itself, it is mentioned that the condition of the deceased was
deteriorating to such an extent, that she stopped giving any further answers.
It was elicited from PW.13, that he did not follow prescribed procedure in the
context of recording the Dying Declaration, Ex.P10 is not clear, as to whether
the deceased was giving answers in Urdu or Telugu.  PW.13 recorded the statement 
in Telugu, though certain English sentences were incorporated.   The requirement
in law that the contents of the dying declaration, must be explained to the
person from whom, it is recorded, and signature of the person must be taken as a
token of approval, are not complied with; obviously because, the deceased was
not responding to any quarries, after sometime.
The dying declaration certainly has its own value particularly, when there is no
eye witness to an occurrence.  However, if there are more declarations than one,
and they are at variance with each other, the Court is required to be cautious
in accepting them in entirety.  It has certainly to look into the corroboration
from other evidence.
PW.1 is said to have interacted with the deceased in the hospital.  It was A1,
who admitted the deceased in the hospital.  If he was the person, who set the
deceased on fire after pouring kerosene, one does not expect him to rush her to
the hospital.
In her chief examination, PW.1 stated as under :
"....When I made enquiries with A1 as to how she received these burn injuries,
A1 did not tell anything.  By the time, I went to the hospital, Police recorded
the statement of the deceased.  The police examined me and recorded my  
statement.  The deceased was alived for 5 days, in the same hospital...."

        The deceased was alive for about five days, and during that period, PW.1
is said to have interacted with her.  However, this witness is not clear as to
what exactly was informed to her by the deceased.  She stated that :
        "....I asked the deceased as to how she received burn injuries.  She
informed me that while she was cooking food, somebody came from her back side,  
poured kerosene on her and set fire on her.  The witness again sated that the
deceased informed her that A1 might have poured kerosene and set fire to her.
Again the witness sated that the deceased informed me that all the accused
poured kerosene and set fire to her....."

        If in the chief examination itself, PW.1, the prime witness presented as
many as three different versions about what is said to have been revealed to her
by the deceased, one just cannot have a clear picture on the basis of the
evidence of such a witness.  If the conflicting versions flowing from Ex.P10 and
Ex.P12, are viewed together with the uncertain and contradictory version of
PW.1, the inescapable conclusion is that, the prosecution failed to prove that
it was the accused, that poured kerosene on the deceased, and set her on fire.
        Extensive suggestions were made to PW.1, and other witnesses, to the 
effect that the deceased had a grievance against her parents on account of the
fact that:
(a) the marriage of her younger sister was performed earlier in point of time,
without performing her marriage;
(b) all the three daughters of her parents were conferred benefits of one kind,
or the other, but she was neglected;
Though the suggestions so made cannot be said to have been proved, they cannot 
be ignored altogether.
Hence, we are of the view that the reasons that prompted the trial Court to
acquit A2 to A4, would certainly weigh vis--vis A1 also, and the conflicting
versions presented by PW.1, even in the chief examination would weaken the case 
of the prosecution against the, left over accused.
In the result, the Criminal Appeal is allowed. The conviction and sentence
ordered in S.C.No.38 of 2009 on the file of the V Additional Metropolitan
Sessions judge, Mahila Court, Hyderabad, dated 21.10.2009, against the
appellant-A1, are set aside.  The appellant-A1 shall be set at liberty
forthwith, unless his detention is needed in any other case.  The fine amount,
if any, paid by the appellant-A1 shall be refunded to him.
The miscellaneous petition filed in this appeal shall also stand closed.
__________________________    
L.NARASIMHA REDDY, J     
_____________________    
S.RAVI KUMAR,J   
Date: 05.03.2014
