
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE RAMESH RANGANATHAN             

WRIT PETITION NO.34137 of 2013    

24-04-2014 

G.B.C.Raj Gopal.Petitioner     

The Government of A.P. rep., by the Principal Secretary, Home Department,
Secretariat Buildings, Secretariat, Hyderabad, A.P. and six others..Respondents

Counsel for the petitioner: Mr. Mohd. Shafiuddin

Counsel for respondents: Government Pleader for Home; 
            Sri M. Karunasagar;
            Sri R. Raghunandan, Senior Counsel for P. Shreyas Reddy;
            Sri D. Srinivas.
<GIST:  

>HEAD NOTE:    

?Citations:

1)      (2014) 2 SCC 1 
2)      1992 Supp (1) SCC 335  
3)      (2013) Cri.L.J. 776 (SC)
4)      AIR 1964 SC 221  
5)      AIR 1955 SC 196  
6)      AIR 1959 SC 707  
7)      1982 Cri.L.J 1557 (Kerala HC FB)
8)      1976 Cri.L.J 1825 (All HC-Lucknow Bench) 
9)      (2010) 7 SCC 667 
10)     (1994) 4 SCC 260 
11)     2002(2) AnW.R. 582 = 2002(2) ALD (Crl). 706 (A.P).
12)     AIR 1997 SC 610  
13)       (2005) 3 SCC 647 
14)       Judgment in W.P.No.523 of 2014 dated 21.01.2014  
15)       2004(4) ALT 175
16)     Judgment in W.P. No.13391 of 2006 dated 14.07.2006  


THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE RAMESH RANGANATHAN             

WRIT PETITION No.34137 OF 2013    

ORDER:  
      The action of respondents 3 and 4, in calling and
pressurizing the petitioner to subscribe his signature to the already
prepared documents without disclosing the contents thereof; in
threatening to implicate him in criminal cases if he failed to do so;
and in forcing him to yield to the illegal demands of the 5th
respondent giving up his right, title share and interest in the
devolved properties; is questioned in this Writ Petition as being
arbitrary and illegal. The petitioner and the fifth respondent are
siblings.  The Deputy Commissioner of Police, West Zone,
Hyderabad is the 3rd respondent, and the Inspector of Police,
Sanjeeva Reddy Nagar P.S. is the 4th respondent.  The 3rd
respondent is arrayed as respondent No.6 eo-nominee, and the 4th
respondent is arrayed as respondent No.7 eo-nominee. They shall,
hereinafter, be referred to as respondents 3 and 4 respectively.

2.      The petitioner, a software engineer and a green card holder,
claims to have come to Hyderabad from the U.S.A. on 11.09.2013. 
It is his case that his sister (the 5th respondent),who was staying in
Malakpet, had approached S.R. Nagar police station claiming to be
a resident of Ameerpet; Sri Ajit Kumar, the Sub-Inspector of Police,
S.R. Nagar police station had called him over the telephone at 1.00
p.m. on 14.11.2013, and had asked him to come to the police
station; the 4th respondent-Inspector of Police did not show him
the complaint lodged by the 5th respondent or divulge its contents;
he was taken in a police jeep, from S.R. Nagar police station, to the
office of the DCP - West Zone at A.C. Guards; he was directed to
make himself available again, at the office of the Deputy
Commissioner of Police, West Zone, on 19.11.2013 at 2.45 pm; 
when he went there on 19.11.2013, the 3rd respondent informed
him that a complaint was lodged against him by the 5th respondent
with the S.R. Nagar police station; it was not necessary to disclose
the contents of the complaint to him, and he should effect a
settlement and divide the properties with his sister i.e., the 5th
respondent; he informed the 3rd respondent that neither had he
committed any offence nor were there any questionable
antecedents against him, except the alleged complaint said to have
been lodged by the 5th respondent with the S.R. Nagar police
station; he could not be asked to make himself available at the
office of the 3rd respondent more so for division of properties,
between him and the 5th respondent, which  was a civil dispute in
which the police had no right to interfere; the 5th respondent, who
was present in the office of the 3rd respondent, started demanding
that he give up his right, interest and share in certain flats and
other properties; when he declined, the 3rd respondent asked him
to affix his signature on prepared documents and stamp papers;
when he demanded to know its contents, the 3rd respondent 
sternly instructed him to obey orders and do as he was told,
otherwise criminal cases would be instituted preventing him from
leaving the country to proceed back to the USA; he was subjected
to various pressures and turmoils at the hands of the 5th
respondent, and her henchmen; as he had offered resistance, the
5th respondent was surreptitiously putting the office of the 3rd
respondent to use, meting out threats of implicating him in false
criminal cases, in the event he refused to yield to her illegal
demands that he give up his share and entitlement in the devolved
properties; the 3rd respondent had asked him to leave his office
and return at 11.00 am on 23.11.2013 after making up his mind
on signing the documents that would be produced on that day; he
was asked not to divulge these events to any one outside the office;
he did not bring these facts to the notice of higher police
authorities fearing a back lash from the 3rd respondent; and the
action of respondents 3 and 4 is illegal and unauthorised, and has
resulted in violation of his fundamental rights.

3.      This Writ Petition was filed in the High Court Registry on
26.11.2013 after a copy thereof was served on the office of the
Government Pleader in the High Court.  The Writ Petition was
listed before this Court on 28.11.2013 and, in view of the serious
allegations made against a senior officer in the cadre of Deputy
Commissioner of Police, the matter was directed to be listed the
next day i.e., 29.11.2013 to enable the Learned Government
Pleader for Home to obtain instructions.  On 29.11.2013, the
Learned Government Pleader for Home placed before this Court the
records including a copy of FIR No.936 of 2013 dated 27.11.2013
registered with the S.R. Nagar police station, against the petitioner,
for offences under Sections 323, 506 and 509 IPC.  Section 323
IPC relates to voluntarily causing hurt and is a non-cognizable
offence.  Section 506 IPC, which relates to criminal intimidation, is
also a non-cognizable offence.  Section 509 IPC relates to an
offence of insulting the modesty of any woman etc, and is a
cognizable offence.

4.      In its proceedings dated 29.11.2013, this Court noted that
the records placed before it contained a copy of the complaint given
by the 5th respondent which did not bear any date, but contained
an endorsement of having been received on 27.11.2013 at 22.00
hours.  This Court was, prima facie, of the view that, when the Writ
Petition was filed on 26.11.2013, the petitioner could not have
visualized that a complaint would be lodged against him by his
sister on the next day i.e., 27.11.2013 at 22.00 hours that too at
S.R. Nagar police station against whose officials he had levelled
grave and serious allegations in the Writ affidavit; it defied reason
that the 5th respondent should give a complaint late at night at
22.00 hours on 27.11.2013 for an incident which allegedly took
place more than a fortnight prior thereto on 10.11.2013, if it were
for reasons other than the Writ Petition having been filed before
this Court; prima facie, it appeared that a concocted complaint was
hurriedly registered on the night of 27.11.2013 as the Writ Petition
was to be listed before this Court on 28.11.2013; if, as was sought
to be made out by the 4th respondent, such an incident had taken
place on 10.11.2013 no efforts were made by respondents  3 and 4
to ascertain why the 5th respondent chose to remain silent for more
than a fortnight; and if, on the other hand, an oral complaint was
made by the 5th respondent on 10.11.2013, it should have been
reduced into writing under Section 154 Cr.P.C immediately
thereafter.

5.      The 2nd respondent was directed to cause an enquiry into the
incident and submit a report to this Court by 02.12.2013;
forthwith transfer investigation of the complaint from S.R. Nagar
police station; entrust investigation to any other police officer, not
subordinate to the 3rd respondent; and consider whether
respondents 3 and 4 should be permitted to remain in active duty
pending further enquiry.  Interim stay was granted. The records,
relating to FIR No.936 of 2013, were called for from the III
Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Nampally, to whom the
said FIR had been forwarded by the SR Nagar police station and
the records, placed before it, were directed to be kept in a sealed
cover with the High Court Registry.
6.      In compliance with the order of this Court dated 29.11.2013,
the 2nd respondent-Commissioner of Police had an enquiry caused  
by the Joint Commissioner of Police.  In his enquiry report dated
05.12.2013, the Joint Commissioner of Police has observed that
the 5th respondent is a widow and an orphan surviving on rents
received from the Flats left behind by her deceased parents at Jaya
Residency, Malakpet, Hyderabad; the petitioner, her brother and
sole sibling, lives in the USA; since the death of their father in the
year, 2000 they have been unable to reach an understanding over
sharing of properties left behind by their deceased parents; they
had involved others in their quarrel, with the petitioners brother-
in-law on his side and Sri Ramanjaneyulu on the side of the 5th
respondent; having gained no positive result the 5th respondent, to
save her family reputation and avoid lodging a police case against
her brother, had approached the 3rd respondent seeking his
counselling; she had, subsequently, made 3 to 4 visits to the office
of the Deputy Commissioner of Police, West Zone; the 3rd
respondent had arranged counselling, for both the parties, atleast
on two occasions; no amicable solution could, however, be reached
as the petitioner disappeared from the office of the DCP West Zone;
the 5th respondent changed her mind, and decided to lodge a
formal complaint in S.R. Nagar police station on 27.11.2013
mentioning the attack on her at S.R. Nagar Signals on 10.11.2013
at 22.00 hours; on the basis of this complaint, Cr. No.936 of 2013
was registered at S.R. Nagar Police Station on 27.11.2013 at 20.00
hours; on receipt of the letter of the Government Pleader for Home
dated 29.11.2013, communicating the order of this Court, the case
was transferred to CCS, Hyderabad on 30.11.2013, before any 
tangible progress was made in investigation by the S.R.Nagar P.S;
on receipt of a fax message from the Commissioner of Police,
Hyderabad on 30.11.2013, the case was re-registered in Central
Crime Station as Cr. No.181 of 2013 under the same sections of
law, and investigation is in progress.

7.      In its order dated 11.12.2013, this Court noted that the
records of the Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate disclosed
that the complaint was received in his Court at 4.00 p.m., on
28.11.2013 after this Court, by its proceedings dated 28.11.2013,
had granted time to the Learned Government Pleader to obtain
instructions, and had posted the matter for hearing on
29.11.2013; and the FIR Index Register disclosed the possibility of
FIR No.936 of 2013 being ante-dated.  As it was, prima facie, of the
view that a false criminal case was manufactured only because the
petitioner chose to invoke its jurisdiction, this Court called for a
report from the 1st respondent as to what action needed to be
taken against respondents 3 and 4 for their highhanded and illegal
acts of resorting to settlement of private civil disputes.
Respondents 3 and 4 were impleaded as respondents 6 and 7 eo-  
nominee. 
8.      In his report to this Court, the first respondent-Principal
Secretary, Home stated that, pursuant to the instructions issued
by Government vide Memo No.37993/PSC/A3/13, dt.23.12.2013    
for an enquiry by a Committee, which was constituted for
monitoring and enquiry into complaints on Police interference in
Civil disputes and recommend action on erring Police personnel,
the Director General of Police, by his letter dated 31.12.2013, had
furnished the report of the said enquiry committee which disclosed
that the parties in W.P.No.34137 of 2013 were examined and their
statements recorded, except that of the petitioner as he had
returned to the USA.  The Committee was of the view that there
was inordinate delay in dispatch of the FIR in Cr.No.936/2013 to
the Court; the FIR was received in the court at 4.00 PM on
28.11.2013; on perusal of DSR of West Zone for 27.11.2013, which
was received by all committee members on 28.11.2013 before 6.00 
AM, Cr.No.936 of 2013 found mention, thereby establishing that
Cr.No.936 of 2013 was registered on 27.11.2013 at 22.00 hours;
the Committee perused the petition of R-5 dated 13.11.2013, and
had noticed that there had been an attempt to change the place of
residence of the petitioner from Jaya Residency to Jaya Nagar by
striking off the word residency in telugu and adding the word
nagar in telugu; their enquiries further revealed that there is no
Jaya Nagar in Ameerpet area; the Committee found fault with the
endorsement CI, SR Nagar  Call both the parties and do
justice to the deserved  of the DCP, West Zone upon the petition
of R-5, dated 13.11.2013; it also faulted the DCP, West Zone for
not registering a case in immediate response to the petition of R-5
and, instead, calling the Writ Petitioner repeatedly to his office to
sort out the dispute; when the Committee examined Smt.Rena  
Chowdary R-5 and Anjaneyulu who was said to be in her company   
at the time of the purported incident on 10.11.2013 in S.R.Nagar
PS limits, they strongly and firmly took the same stand that the
incident of 10.11.2013 did take place; the matter is under
investigation by the ACP, CCS; since the report of the Committee
established the fault of the DCP, West Zone, the Home
Department, while agreeing with the same, had forwarded the said
report, vide proceedings dated 01.01.2014, to the General
Administration (SC.D) Department which deals with the subject
matter of initiating suitable disciplinary action against IPS officers;
and no overt act or negligence has been established by the
committee in its findings against Respondent No.4, the CI.

9.      In his counter-affidavit the 2nd respondent has stated that,
in compliance with the order of this Court dated 29.11.2013, he
had instructed the Joint Commissioner to conduct a detailed
enquiry into the matter and submit a report; the case in Cr.
No.936 of 2013, on the file of the SR Nagar Police Station, was
transferred on the evening of 05.12.2013 to the Central Crime
Station, Hyderabad for investigation; CCS, Hyderabad is a separate
unit, and is not subordinate to the 3rd respondent; on its transfer,
the case has been re-registered as Cr. No.182 of 2013, and
investigation has been taken up; the Joint Commissioner of Police,
Hyderabad is an officer in the cadre of a Deputy Inspector General
of Police, higher in rank than the Deputy Commissioner; he had
conducted a detailed enquiry and submitted a report on
05.12.2013; as per the instructions issued by the Government,
vide memo No.37993/PSC/A3 dated 23.12.2013, a committee was     
constituted to enquire whether police officials had interfered in
civil disputes; the said committee consisted of the Commissioner of
Police, the Additional Commissioner of Police (Law & order) and the
Additional Commissioner of Police (Crimes and SIT).  Daily
situation reports (DSR) are prepared by police stations in all five
zones of Hyderabad; the DSR contains crime reports, law and order
issues, FIRs, VIP movements etc; the concerned DCPs have to  
consolidate the DSR every day with the information received from
the police stations and submit the same, (both the soft and the
hard copy), to the Commissioner of Police and other officials by
6.00 AM; the DSR, prepared in the office of the DCP West Zone
dated 27.11.2013, was received by the 2nd respondent on 
28.11.2013 in the morning itself; this procedure of DSR facilitated
him and other higher officials to monitor the day to day affairs in
all police stations in the twin cities; the DSR of West Zone for
27.11.2013, which was received before 6.00 A.M. on 28.11.2013,
records Cr. No.936 of 2013; and this establishes that Cr. No.936 of
2013 was registered on 27.11.2013 itself.  The 2nd respondent
faults not only the endorsement of the 3rd respondent dated
13.11.2013, as CI, SR Nagar call to both parties and do justice to the
deserved, but also his failure to register the case immediately in
response to the petition of the 5th respondent and in calling the
petitioner to his office to sort out the dispute.  He submits that
there was no evidence to show that the 3rd respondent had
pressurised the petitioner to come forward to sign on prepared
documents; no overt act or negligence was established by the
committee in its findings against the fourth respondent; and many
a time, he had issued oral and general instructions to all Station
House Officers/Assistant Commissioners of Police in Hyderabad 
City not to interfere in civil disputes and, if any deviation was
noticed, disciplinary action would be taken against the concerned
individuals.

10.     Elaborate submissions were made by Sri Mohd. Shafiuddin,  
Learned Counsel for the petitioner; the Learned Government
Pleader for Home appearing on behalf of respondents 1 and 2, Sri
R. Raghunandan, Learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of 
the 3rd respondent, Sri Damalapati Srinivas, Learned Counsel for
the 4th respondent and Sri M. Karunasagar, Learned Counsel for
the 5th respondent.  It is convenient to examine the contentions,
put forth by Counsel on either side, under different heads.
I. ROLE OF RESPONDENTS 3 AND 4 IN CALLING THE         
     PETITIONER TO THE S.R. NAGAR POLICE STATION, AND         
     THE OFFICE OF THE DCP, WEST ZONE, WITHOUT EVEN           
     REGISTERING THE COMPLAINT, OF THE FIFTH       
     RESPONDENT, UNDER SECTION 154 CRPC:         

11.     Sri R. Raghunandan, Learned Senior Counsel appearing on  
behalf of respondent No.3, would fairly state that respondent No.5
had met the 3rd respondent at his office on 13th November, 2013;
the endorsement made on her complaint, to the Circle Inspector of
Police S.R. Nagar police station on 13.11.2013, was by the 3rd
respondent; the Sub-Inspector of Police, S.R. Nagar police station
was instructed by the 3rd respondent to bring the petitioner to his
office on 14th November; and the petitioner was asked to be present
in the office of the 3rd respondent both on 14th and 19th November,
2013. Learned Senior Counsel would, however, contend that the
3rd respondent did not force the petitioner to settle the matter with
the fifth respondent, or sign any papers; he had only sought to
resolve family disputes, which is permissible in terms of para
120.6 of the judgment of the Supreme Court in Lalita Kumari v.
Govt. of U.P. ; the memo issued by the Director General of Police
on 25.11.2013 shows that the 3rd respondent was required to
undertake family counselling; and the petitioner has filed the
present Writ Petition only to stall further proceedings against him.
12.     Sri M. Karunasagar, Learned Counsel for the fifth
respondent, would paint the petitioner in poor light.  He submits
that the petitioner was exploiting his widowed sister and had tried
every trick in the book to deprive her of her rightful share of her
property; not only did he threaten to kill her if she did not yield to
his illegal demands, but he had also assaulted her physically on
10th November, 2013; despite the shabby treatment meted out to 
her by her brother (the petitioner), the fifth respondent wanted an
amicable solution to their inter-se property disputes; and she did
not initially wish to lodge a criminal complaint against him as that
would tarnish their family reputation.

13.     In his counter-affidavit the 3rd respondent submits that the
5th respondent met him at his office on 13.11.2013, and
complained that her brother (the writ petitioner) along with his
brother-in-law had assaulted her on 10.11.2013 in S.R. Nagar
area, when she was coming back from the house of her relatives in
the company of her cousin; she had also stated that this assault
was a part of the ongoing fight over her fathers property in which
she had a rightful share; she was highly agitated and feared for her
physical safety; despite the petitioners behaviour towards her, she
was not interested in lodging a formal criminal complaint, as the
accused was her brother; he had informed her that the proper
course would be to approach the concerned SHO i.e., SHO,  
Sanjeevaeddynagar police station, and had endorsed the same on 
the written representation given by her to him; he had also
informed the 4th respondent, and had asked him to look into the
matter; the 5th respondent again came to his office on 14.11.2013
and complained that the 4th respondent was not taking any
interest in her case, and had insisted that he should look into the
matter, failing which she apprehended further physical assault; as
the 5th respondent feared for her safety on the one hand, and was
not willing to move forward and invoke the criminal law process on
the other, he had directed the 4th respondent to locate the
petitioner and inform him that he would like to meet him to verify
facts before any further process was initiated; thereafter at his
office on the same day, when the 5th respondent was also present,
he had enquired about the matter with the petitioner who
requested for time to set out his side of the case; the petitioner had
insisted that he had not assaulted his sister, and had not deprived
her of any part of the property; he stated that he would come back
on 19.11.2013 with his relatives who would be able to attest to
these facts; the 5th respondent informed that she would also be
present on 19.11.2013; the petitioner and the 5th respondent came
to his office on 19.11.2013; their maternal uncle also accompanied
the 5th respondent; the petitioner also brought one of his friends;
in the meeting, the petitioners uncle tried to counsel the petitioner
and had asked him to amicably resolve issues; as these issues
were getting more complicated, he had requested all the parties to
leave his room as other visitors were waiting to meet him; the
petitioner left his office premises thereafter, and the matter ended
there; the 5th respondent continued to meet him, and had asked
him to intervene in the matter, as she apprehended further trouble
and physical danger both to her and her minor daughter; when the
5th respondent met him at his office on 27.11.2013, he instructed
the 4th respondent to register a formal complaint, and investigate
further into the matter; the 5th respondent had, thereafter,
approached the 4th respondent on 27.11.2013 at 8.00 PM;  he had 
not instructed any subordinate officer, including the 4th
respondent, to take forcible action or to forcibly bring the petitioner
to his office; he had sought to verify facts before commencing the
procedure prescribed under the Cr.P.C; he neither directed the
petitioner to settle his property disputes nor did he pressurize him
to sign documents or transfer his rights in his fathers property in
favour of the 5th respondent; his only concern was the physical
safety of the 5th respondent; he never called the petitioner to his
office after  19.11.2013; the 5th respondent kept coming to his
office seeking protection as she felt that she was still under
physical threat; he had again instructed the 4th respondent to
formally register the complaint, and take up investigation; and the
petitioner had filed the Writ Petition only to ensure that his earlier
actions, including the assault on his sister, does not result in
criminal investigation.

14.     In his additional counter-affidavit filed before this Court the
3rd respondent submits that he had interacted with the petitioner
and the 5th respondent only to ascertain facts, and give a quietus
to the issue arising out of the conduct of the petitioner with the 5th
respondent; he had neither pressurized the petitioner to sign on
any prepared documents nor had he threatened to involve him in
criminal cases, if he failed to do so; he did not instruct the SR
Nagar Police Station, or the Sub-Inspector of Police, to bring the
petitioner and his sister in a police jeep by force; what he had
instructed was to send them to his office; even as per the
statement of the petitioner, before the Joint Commissioner on
01.12.2013, the Inspector had asked him to accompany SI Ajay 
Kumar in the police jeep to his office; he had called the petitioner
and the 5th respondent in good faith, and with the bonafide
intention of preventing any untoward incident; and he had treated
it as a family dispute, and not a civil dispute.

15.     In his counter-affidavit the fourth respondent states that the
3rd respondent had called him over phone and had informed him
that he was sending the 5th respondent along with an endorsed
complaint against her brother; the 3rd respondent, while directing
him not to register the complaint since it related to a dispute
between a brother and sister, had instructed him to produce both
parties before him at his office; the 5th respondent was sent to SR
Nagar police station, by the 3rd respondent on 13.11.2013, with his
endorsement on her telugu complaint as CI SR Nagar please call both
parties and do the justice deserved; the complaint showed that there
was a property dispute between the 5th respondent and the
petitioner; the complainant alleged that she had been threatened
by her brother, and his brother-in-law; she had requested him to
take action against them; after going through the contents of the
complaint, he had advised the 5th respondent to approach the
competent Civil Court as the allegations in the complaint were civil
in nature; in the morning hours of 14.11.2013, he received a
phone call from the 3rd respondent instructing him to call and
produce the petitioner before him, as he wanted to counsel both of
them in his office; he informed the 3rd respondent that there was
no such locality called Jayanagar in the limits of S.R. Nagar police
station, at which the alleged incident is said to have taken place;
even then the 3rd respondent had asked him to summon and  
produce the petitioner before him for counselling; in obedience to
the directions of the 3rd respondent he had entrusted the task of
contacting the petitioner to Sri D. Ajay Kumar, S.I. of police, and
had asked him to produce both the parties before the 3rd
respondent; he had simply obeyed the instructions of his superior
officer in the fear of facing his wrath; the S.I. of Police had
contacted the petitioner over his mobile on 14.11.2013 at 1.00
p.m; he had asked the petitioner to come to the police station as he
was summoned by the 3rd respondent to be present before him, as  
his sister had given a complaint making allegations against him; at
5.00 p.m. the petitioner and his brother-in-law came to the police
station; in accordance with the instructions of the 3rd respondent,
the petitioner was taken to the office of the DCP, West Zone by the
Sub-Inspector of Police Sri D. Ajaykumar; he has no knowledge of
what transpired thereafter in the office of the 3rd respondent; again
on 27.11.2013 the 3rd respondent instructed him over phone to
register a case on the complaint of the 5th respondent; he was not
present in the police station when the 5th respondent approached
at 8.00 p.m; and Sri M. Seetaramulu, S.I. of Police, had registered
Crime No.936 of 2013 under Sections 323, 506 and 509 IPC. 

16.     In her counter-affidavit the fifth respondent submits that on
10.11.2013 at about 10.00 PM, when she was returning from 
Kukatpally after crossing SR Nagar traffic signals, the petitioner
and his brother-in-law had stopped their vehicle; the petitioners
brother-in-law slapped her, and her brother beat her black and
blue; when she cried, they left the scene of the offence quickly;
they also demanded that she sign on documents relinquishing her
share of the property; on 13.11.2013 morning, she and Sri
Ramanjaneyulu went to the 3rd respondent; she submitted a 
petition regarding the attack on her and the threat to her life from
the petitioner and his brother-in-law over property disputes; she
had requested the 3rd respondent to elicit the nature of the offence,
instead of registering the complaint against his brother; as the
disputes related to properties, and to ensure that the police did not
interfere in civil disputes, she had requested that the petitioner be
called, counselled and restrained from threatening her regarding
the property; the 3rd respondent had endorsed the complaint to the
4th respondent; on 14.11.2013, the 4th respondent had sent both of
them to the 3rd respondent where they were counselled by the 3rd
respondent; the 3rd respondent had only advised both of them to
settle their family disputes; there was no threat or coercion by the
3rd respondent; though he was busy in attending to people visiting
his office, the meeting was held in his office room; since the
dispute was not resolved, they had both requested the 3rd
respondent to give them time upto 19.11.2013, and had promised 
to visit his office again; her maternal uncle had come to Hyderabad
at her request, and had visited the office of the 3rd respondent
along with her and Sri Ramanjaneyulu on 19.11.2013; the
petitioner was also present in the office of the 3rd respondent along
with Sri Venkat Reddy; as the 3rd respondent was busy with official
work, he did not devote much time; he only asked the petitioner
not to threaten her; the 3rd respondent had asked all of them to
leave his chambers as he had to attend to some more 
complainants waiting outside; after coming out of the chambers of
the 3rd respondent, the petitioner had again threatened  her with
direconsequences, and had stated that he would file cases against
the police officers who were supporting her; the petitioners
intention in filing the Writ Petition is only to ensure that no police
officer helped her against his criminal acts; she and her minor
daughter have a threat to their lives at the hands of the petitioner;
the petitioner has the active support of a sitting MLA; though she
had approached the MLA, and had narrated the injustice done to
her, nothing had happened; and this itself showed that the
petitioner, by hook or crook, was seeking to deprive her of her
valuable and legal property rights.

17.     From the counter-affidavit of the 4th respondent it is evident
that the 3rd respondent had asked him not to register the
complaint of the 5th respondent which he had endorsed on
13.11.2013, and to produce both the petitioner and the 5th
respondent before him; in the morning of 14th November, 2013 he
received a phone call from the 3rd respondent instructing him to
produce the petitioner before him for counselling; he had asked the
Sub-Inspector Sri D. Ajay Kumar to produce both parties before
the 3rd respondent; the Sub-Inspector had called the petitioner
over mobile and asked him to come to the police station; when the
petitioner and his brother-in-law came to the police station at 5.00
P.M. on 14.11.2013 in his car, he was taken by the Sub-Inspector,
to the office of the 3rd respondent, in a police jeep. In his
statement, before the Joint Commissioner of Police on 01.12.2013
at 03.30 P.M, the petitioner stated that on 19.11.2013 he received
a call on his phone number 8096102190 from the office of the
D.C.P., West Zone and, in response thereto, he had gone over to
the office of the 3rd respondent at 2.45 P.M where he was detained
till 9.30 P.M.  The counter-affidavit of the 2nd respondent, and the
enquiry report of the Joint Commissioner, show that the petitioner
was counselled, in the office of the D.C.P., West Zone, by the 3rd
respondent both on 14th and 19th November, 2013 without even 
registering the complaint of the 5th respondent containing the
endorsement of the 3rd respondent dated 13.11.2013. 

18.     The question which necessitates examination is whether the
petitioner could have been, orally and forcibly, summoned to his
office by the 3rd respondent even before registration of the
complaint under Section 154 CrPC.  The first information report is
either given in writing or is reduced to writing.  The Code
contemplates two kinds of FIRs: the duly signed FIR under Section
154(1) is by the informant to the officer concerned at the police
station. The second kind of FIR is one which is registered by the
police officer himself on the basis of information received, or other
than by way of an informant [Section 157(1)]. This information
must also be duly recorded, and a copy should be sent to the
Magistrate forthwith. (Lalita Kumari1).  The sine qua non for
recording an FIR is that there must be an information, and that
information must disclose a cognizable offence. If information
disclosing a cognizable offence, satisfying the requirements of
Section 154(1) Cr.P.C, is laid before him, the police officer has no
option but to enter the substance thereof in the prescribed form
i.e., to register a case on the basis of such information. (State of
Haryana v. Bhajan Lal ). In registering an FIR the consent, or
otherwise, of the complainant is irrelevant. For cognizable
offences a duty is cast upon the police to register an FIR, and
conduct investigation.  The legislative intent of Section 154(1) CrPC
is to ensure that the information, relating to the commission of a
cognizable offence, is promptly registered and investigated in
accordance with law. (Lalita Kumari1).   The context in which the
word shall appears in Section 154(1) CrPC, the object for which it
has been used and the consequences that will follow from the
infringement of the direction to register FIRs, show that the word
shall, used in Section 154(1), is mandatory in character.
Section 154(1) of the Code places an unequivocal duty upon the
police officer, in charge of a police station, to register an FIR on
receipt of information that a cognizable offence has been
committed, and does not confer any discretion on him to embark
upon a preliminary inquiry prior to the registration of the FIR.
(Lalita Kumari1; Anju Chaudhary v. State of Uttar Pradesh ;
State of Uttar Pradesh v. Bhagwant Kishore Joshi ).
19.     The requirement of Section 154 Cr.P.C is only that the report
must disclose the commission of a cognizable offence, and that is
sufficient to set the investigating machinery in motion. The
intention of the legislature, by the insertion of sub-section (3) of
Section 154, is to ensure that no information of the commission of
a cognizable offence is ignored or is not acted upon.  The obligation
to register an FIR has inherent advantages. (a) It is the first step to
access to justice for a victim; (b) It upholds the rule of law in as
much as the ordinary person brings forth the commission of a
cognizable crime to the knowledge of the State; (c) It also facilitates
swift investigation and sometimes even prevention of the crime. In
both cases, it only effectuates the regime of law; and (d) It leads to
less manipulation in criminal cases and lessens incidents of
antedated FIR or deliberately delayed FIR.  The object sought to
be achieved by registering the earliest information as an FIR is,
inter alia, two fold: one, that the criminal process is set into motion
and is well documented from the very start; and second, that the
earliest information, received in relation to the commission of a
cognizable offence, is recorded so that there cannot be any
embellishment, etc. later.  The FIR is registered in a book called
the FIR book or the FIR register.  A copy of each FIR is sent to the
superior officers and to the concerned Judicial Magistrate. The
signature of the complainant is obtained in the FIR book as and
when a complaint is given at the police station.  As each FIR has a
unique annual number, it is possible for supervisory police officers
and the courts, wherever necessary, to exercise strict control and
keep track of registration of FIRs.  The underpinnings of
compulsory registration of the FIR is not only to ensure
transparency in the criminal justice-delivery system but also to
ensure judicial oversight. Section 157(1) deploys the word
forthwith. Any information received under Section 154(1), or
otherwise, has to be promptly informed, in the form of a report, to
the Magistrate.  The commission of a cognizable offence is not only
brought to the knowledge of the investigating agency but also to
the subordinate judiciary. (Lalita Kumari1).
20.     The 3rd respondent has acted amiss in directing the 4th
respondent not to register an FIR, on the information furnished in
the representation submitted by the 5th respondent on 13.11.2013,
on the specious plea that she had requested that the complaint not
be registered but the petitioner be counselled, instead, at the S.R.
Nagar police station or the office of the 3rd respondent.
Registration of an FIR under Section 154(1) Cr.P.C. is not at the
choice of the complainant.  Once information, either oral or
written, regarding commission of a cognizable offence is brought to
the notice of the police officer, he has no option but to register the
FIR forthwith. The police officer cannot avoid his duty of registering
the offence if a cognizable offence is disclosed. Action must be
taken against the erring officer who does not register the FIR if
information received by him discloses the commission of a
cognizable offence. (Lalita Kumari1).
II. INVESTIGATION OF A COGNIZABLE OFFENCE CAN BE           
     UNDERTAKEN ONLY AFTER THE COMPLAINT IS          
     REGISTERED UNDER SECTION 154(1) CRPC:       
21.     Is the exercise of power by the 3rd respondent, in forcing the
petitioner to appear before him at his office on 14th and 19th
November, 2013, referable to his powers of investigation under
Sections 156 and 157 Cr.P.C?  Commencement of investigation by  
a police officer is subject to two conditions, firstly the police officer
should have reason to suspect the commission of a cognizable 
offence as required by Section 157(1), and secondly the police
officer should subjectively satisfy himself that there is sufficient
ground for entering on an investigation even before he starts the
investigation.  Clause (b) of the proviso to Section 157(1) Cr.P.C.
postulates that the police officer shall draw his satisfaction only on
the material placed before him at that stage, namely, the FIR
together with the documents, if any, enclosed therewith, before he
enters on an investigation. (Bhajan Lal2).  Under Chapter XII of the
CrPC, investigation consists generally of the following steps: (1)
proceeding to the spot, (2) ascertainment of the facts and
circumstances of the case, (3) discovery and arrest of the
suspected offender, (4) collection of evidence relating to the
commission of the offence which may consist of (a) the examination
of various persons (including the accused) and the reduction of
their statements into writing, if the officer thinks fit, (b) the search
of places or seizure of things considered necessary for the
investigation and to be produced at the trial, and (5) formation of
the opinion as to whether, on the material collected, there is a case
to place the accused before a Magistrate for trial. (H. N. Rishbud
and Inder Singh v. The State of Delhi ; State of M.P. v.
Mubarak Ali ; Bhagwant Kishore Joshi4; Augustine v. State ;
Krishna Lal Gulati v. The State ).
22.     As the main object of investigation is to bring home the
offence to the offender, the essential duties of an Investigating
Officer, apart from arresting the offender, is to collect all material
necessary for establishing the accusation against the offender.
(Bhagwant Kishore Joshi4). Conducting an investigation into an
offence, after registration of the FIR under Section 154 CrPC, is the
procedure established by law.  The right of the accused, under
Article 21 of the Constitution, is protected if the FIR is registered
first, and the investigation is then conducted in accordance with
law. (Lalita Kumari1).

23.     A police station is defined, under Section 2(s) CrPC, to
mean any post or place declared, generally or specially by the State
Government, to be a police station, and includes any local area
specified by the State Government in this behalf.  Section 36
Cr.P.C. enables Police officers, superior in rank to an officer in
charge of a police station, to exercise the same powers, throughout
the local area to which they are appointed, as may be exercised by
such officer within the limits of his Station.  Section 154(3) enables
a person aggrieved, by a refusal on the part of an officer in-charge
of the police station to record the information under Section
154(1), to send the substance of such information to the
Superintendent of Police who is empowered either to investigate
himself, or direct an investigation to be made by any police officer
subordinate to him, if the complaint discloses the commission of a
cognizable offence. Even in cases where a cognizable offence has
been committed, an investigation can be caused only after the
complaint is registered under Section 154(1) Cr.P.C.  After
registration of the complaint under Section 154(1) CrPC, and
during the course of investigation under Section 156 CrPC, a police
officer is empowered under Section 41-A CrPC to ask the accused 
to appear before him by way of a notice/order in writing.  In the
case on hand the complaint of the 5th respondent dated
13.11.2014 was not even registered despite which the 3rd
respondent directed the 4th respondent over telephone on
14.11.2013 to send the petitioner to his office, which directions the
4th respondent promptly complied by sending the petitioner, along
with the Sub-Inspector of Police Sri Ajay Kumar, in a police jeep to
the office of the 3rd respondent.
24.     Without the complaint, given by the 5th respondent on
13.11.2014, being registered under Section 154(1) Cr.P.C the 3rd
respondent could not have investigated, or to have caused an
investigation, regarding the commission of cognizable offences.
Even if he was satisfied that the complaint given by the 5th
respondent on 13.11.2013 disclosed the commission of a 
cognizable offence, the 3rd respondent was statutorily obligated to
have first directed that the complaint be registered under Section
154(1) Cr.P.C and only then to have caused investigation during
the course of which, if need be, he could have issue a written
notice to the petitioner, under Section 41-A Cr.P.C, to appear
before him.  An oral direction by a police officer, to the accused or
a witness, to appear before him does not have statutory sanction
either under Section 41-A or Section 160 CrPC.  As registration of
an FIR under Section 154(1) Cr.P.C. precedes investigation under
Sections 156 and 157 Cr.P.C, the 3rd respondent cannot fall back
on the powers of investigation, conferred on a police officer under
the Code, to justify his illegal act of calling the petitioner to his
office on 14th and 19th November, 2013 as the FIR was registered
more than a week thereafter on 27.11.2013.


III. PRELIMINARY ENQUIRY BEFORE REGISTRATION OF THE           
     FIR:
25.     Sri R. Raghunandan, Learned Senior Counsel appearing on  
behalf of the 3rd respondent, would submit that it is only after the
judgment of the Supreme Court, in Lalita Kumari1, has the law,
regarding registration of complaints for cognizable offences,
become clear; prior thereto, it was in doubt whether or not such a
complaint could be registered without a preliminary enquiry; and
even in the judgment of the Supreme Court, in Lalita Kumari1, a
preliminary enquiry is permissible in family disputes.
26.     It is necessary, therefore, to examine whether a preliminary
enquiry can be conducted before registration of the FIR, and
whether the Counselling exercise undertaken by the 3rd
respondent on 14th and 19th November, 2013 partakes the 
character of a preliminary enquiry.  In Lalita Kumari1, the
learned Additional Solicitor General Mr. Sidharth Luthra pointed
out to the Supreme Court that throughout the country, in
matrimonial, commercial, medical negligence and corruption
related offences, there exist provisions for conducting an inquiry
or a preliminary inquiry by the police, without/before registering
an FIR under Section 154 CrPC. He relied on various police rules,
prevailing in the States of Punjab, Rajasthan, U.P., Madhya
Pradesh, Kolkata, Bombay, etc., for conducting an inquiry before
registering an FIR, to contend that a preliminary inquiry, before
registration of an FIR, should be held permissible; the power to
carry out an inquiry or a preliminary inquiry by the police, which
precedes registration of an FIR, will eliminate misuse of the
process, as registration of FIR serves as an impediment against a
person for various important activities like applying for a job or a
passport, etc.  (para 20 of SCC).

27.     It is in this context that the Supreme Court, in Lalitha
Kumari1, observed that there were instances where the power of
the police to register an FIR, and initiate an investigation thereinto,
were misused where a cognizable offence was not made out from  
the contents of the complaint;  Section 498-A of the Penal Code,
1860 (in short IPC) was being misused, and a large number of
frivolous reports were being lodged; the anguish expressed by the
Supreme Court,  in Preeti Gupta v. State of Jharkhand , had
resulted in the 243rd Report of the Law Commission of India which
was submitted on 30.08.2012; the Law Commission, in its report,
concluded that, though the offence under Section 498-A could be
made compoundable, the extent of misuse was not established by  
 empirical data and, thus, could not be a ground to denude the
provision of its efficacy (para 35 and 36 of SCC); although Section
154 CrPC postulated mandatory registration of FIRs on receipt of
all cognizable offences, yet, there may be instances where a
preliminary inquiry may be required owing to a change in the
genesis and novelty of crimes with the passage of time, one such
instance was of allegations regarding medical negligence of doctors;
it would be unfair and inequitable to prosecute a medical
professional only on the basis of the allegations in the complaint
(para 115 of SCC); while ensuring and protecting the rights of the
accused and the complainant, the preliminary inquiry should be
time-bound and, in any case, should not exceed 7 days; and the
fact of such delay, and the causes of it, must be reflected in the
General Diary entry (para 120.7 of SCC).  (Lalita Kumari1).
28.     Reference to the terms preliminary inquiry and inquiry
under Sections 159, 202 and 340 of the Code, is to a judicial
exercise by the Court, and not by the police. The term inquiry,
under Section 2(g) of the Code, is relatable to a judicial act and not
to the steps taken by the police which are either investigation
after the stage of Section 154 CrPC or a preliminary inquiry prior
to the registration of an FIR.  Other considerations are not relevant
at the stage of registration of the FIR such as, whether the
information is falsely given, whether the information is genuine,
whether the information is credible, etc. These are issues that have
to be verified during investigation of the FIR. At the stage of
registration of the FIR, all that is required to be considered is
whether the information given, ex facie, discloses the commission
of a cognizable offence. If, after investigation, the information given
is found to be false, there is always an option to prosecute the
complainant for filing a false FIR. (Lalita Kumari1).
29.     Reliance placed by Sri R. Raghunandan, Learned Senior 
Counsel on Para 120.6 of the judgment of the Supreme Court, in
Lalita Kumari1, to contend that the 3rd respondent had the power
to cause a preliminary enquiry regarding the family disputes
between the petitioner and his sister-the fifth respondent, and call
the petitioner to the police station in the course of such
preliminary enquiry, is misplaced. In Para 120.6 of the judgment,
in Lalita Kumari1, the Supreme Court observed:
   120.6. As to what type and in which cases preliminary inquiry
is to be conducted will depend on the facts and circumstances of
each case. The category of cases in which preliminary inquiry may
be made are as under: 
   (a) Matrimonial disputes/family disputes
   (b) Commercial offences
   (c) Medical negligence cases
   (d) Corruption cases
   (e) Cases where there is abnormal delay/laches in initiating
criminal prosecution, for example, over 3 months delay in
reporting the matter without satisfactorily explaining the
reasons for delay.
The aforesaid are only illustrations and not exhaustive of all
conditions which may warrant preliminary inquiry.

30.     Reference to matrimonial disputes/family disputes, in Para
120.6 of the judgment of the Supreme Court in Lalita Kumari1, is
only that a preliminary enquiry may be made thereinto, and not
that a police officer can resort to counselling and settlement of
civil or property disputes, that too in a police station, forcing one
or both the parties to appear before him thereat.  The observations
of the Supreme Court, in Lalitha Kumari1, that a preliminary
enquiry could be conducted in matrimonial disputes/family
disputes, were in the context of false and frivolous complaints
being made under Sections 498 and 498-A IPC, the Dowry  
Prohibition Act and in the light of the judgment of the Supreme
Court in Preeti Gupta9. Even in such cases a preliminary enquiry
can be caused only to ascertain whether or not the complaint
discloses the commission of a cognizable offence; and not to verify
the veracity or otherwise of the information received. (Lalita
Kumari1).  In any event the premises/precincts of a police station
cannot be converted into a counselling centre for resolution of
such disputes.
31.     The preliminary enquiry which can be made, in relation to
matrimonial disputes/family disputes, is not to verify the veracity
or otherwise of the information received, but only to ascertain
whether the information reveals any cognizable offence (Para 120.5
of SCC).  While information, which discloses the commission of a
cognizable offence, is required to be mandatorily registered as an
FIR under Section 154 CrPC, and no preliminary enquiry is
permissible in such a situation (Para 120.1 of SCC), if the
information received does not disclose a cognizable offence but
indicates the necessity for an enquiry, a preliminary enquiry may
be conducted only to ascertain whether a cognizable offence is
disclosed or not. If the inquiry discloses the commission of a
cognizable offence, the FIR must be registered. (120.2 of SCC).
32.     Unlike an investigation, into the commission of a
cognizable offence, which can only be initiated after the complaint
is registered under Section 154(1) CrPC, a preliminary enquiry is
to be caused prior to the registration of the FIR.  If the accused, in
the complaint registered as an FIR, can be summoned by the 
investigating officer, during the course of investigation, only by way
of a written notice under Section 41-A Cr.P.C, it does not stand to
reason that a person, against whom an FIR has not even been 
registered, can be orally and forcibly summoned to the Police
Station or to the office of a Senior police officer. Under the guise of
a preliminary enquiry, no person can be deprived of his liberty,
and compelled to appear at a police station on the oral directions of
a police officer without even the complaint being registered, and an
investigation commenced, in accordance with the provisions of the
CrPC. 


IV. DO THE A.P. POLICE MANUAL AND THE CIRCULAR          
       MEMOS ISSUED BY HIS SUPERIORS EMPOWER THE            
       THIRD RESPONDENT TO CONDUCT COUNSELLING          
       SESSIONS IN HIS OFFICE?  

33.     In his counter-affidavit, the 3rd respondent submits that the
role of police officers in civil disputes, involving some amount of
criminality, has been considered by the office of the Director
General of Police; circulars and memorandums  have been issued, 
in relation to these issues, from time to time; the A.P. Police
Manual also prescribes guidelines relating to the exercise of power
vested in police officials in the discharge of their duties; Sections
36 and 149 Cr.P.C. prescribe certain duties, and functional roles
on police officers; in all the stated circulars and memos, as well as
the police manual, instructions have been given to police officials
not to shy away from acting on these issues when criminality is
also involved; Order 322-1 specifically instructs police officials not
to  shirk their responsibility of protecting persons against injury or
trespass, particularly when people complain of threats to their
physical safety; the Circular issued by the Director General of
Police dated 04.08.2012 also instructs police officials to take
preventive action as stipulated under Order 322-1 of the A.P.
Police Manual; his endeavour was only to ascertain the true and
correct facts, in what appeared to be a family dispute, before any
criminal investigation was initiated; and he had only conducted
himself in accordance with the A.P. Police Manual, and the
instructions issued by the higher authorities from time to time.
Reliance is placed by the 3rd respondent on Standing Order
No.322-I of Vol.I of the A.P. Police Manual; the circular memos of
the Director General of Police dated 04.08.2012, 17.08.2012,
19.09.2012, 28.12.2012 and 31.12.2012; the memo issued to his 
office by the Director General of Police dated 25.11.2013 informing
him of the poor performance in family counselling centres in
June, 2013; the memo of the Additional Director General of Police
dated 02.02.2013; the minutes of the review meeting held by the
Additional Director General of Police (Co-ordination) on
23.05.2013; the memo dated 06.04.2002 issued by the  
Commissioner of Police regarding registration of cases under
Sections 498, 498-A and the Dowry Prohibition Act; and the other
memos of the Commissioner of Police dated 28.11.2011,  
05.02.2013 and 09.01.2014. 
34.     It is necessary, therefore, to refer to the aforesaid memos
and Police Standing Orders, albeit in brief.  By the circular memo
dated 04.08.2012, the Director General of Police informed the
Superintendents of Police that police officers had abdicated their
responsibility in all civil disputes, even with ingredients of
criminality, on the pretext of instructions from the Chief Office,
Hyderabad, and the directions of the High Court of A.P restricting
police from interference with civil disputes; police officers had
wrongly interpreted the directions of the High Court, and the
instructions of the Chief Office; they had left such issues to be
dealt with by musclemen and anti-social elements; Section 149
Cr.P.C. enjoined upon the Police to intervene in all matters where
there was apprehension of the commission of a cognisable offence;
Standing Order 322(1)  made it abundantly clear that Police
Officers could not shirk their responsibility of protecting persons
against injury or trespass; Standing Order 322(1)  sub-clauses A,
B, C and D laid down modalities for police action in all civil
disputes; the Chief Office had merely directed unscrupulous police
officers to refrain from adjudicating upon the determination of
property rights for pecuniary gains; and this was also true of
criminal offences, besides civil disputes.  All the Superintendents
and Commissioners of Police were directed to instruct all police
officers, subordinate to them, to take legal action by registering
cases; and take preventive action etc., as stipulated under
Standing Order No.322(1) of Vol.1 of the A.P. Police Manual, in all
civil disputes with an element of criminality, warranting police
intervention.  The Regional Inspector Generals of Police and the
Range DIGs were directed to ensure compliance of these 
instructions to prevent inaction, on the part of the police, being
taken undue advantage of by the land mafia, goondas and hired
criminals; ensure that no complaints, of police omission and
inaction, are reported where action as per law is required; and all
police officers should be disabused of the notion that civil
disputes were outside their purview, and they were not entitled to
take action.
35.     In his circular memo dated 17.08.2012, the Director General
of Police called upon the Superintendents of Police/Commissioners
of Police to focus on certain issues for better delivery of services to
the people, and to further improve their image. Among the issues,
on which focus was required to be placed, included all civil
disputes having an element of criminality which were required to
be dealt with as per Standing Order No.322(1) of Volume I - Part I
of the A.P. Police Manual. In his circular memo dated 19.12.2012,
the Director General of Police referred to the problems, regarding
access to police, being a recurring complaint.  The
Superintendents/Commissioners of Police were informed that a 
common grievances day should be observed on Monday in all 
districts; they must stay at headquarters/police stations on
Monday, except in an emergency that too with the permission of
the immediate senior officers; they should make entries of all such
complaints in the complaint register, and take necessary action;
and send a consolidated report, every month, in the proforma
enclosed. By his memo dated 28.12.2012, the Director General of
Police directed the Commissioners/Superintendents of Police to
implement certain people friendly measures such as free
registration of cases, holding a common grievances day each
Monday, action in civil disputes etc.  By his circular memo dated
31.12.2012, the Director General of Police issued instructions
regarding the people friendly measures taken by police
headquarters.  All Superintendents of Police/Commissioners of
Police were required to conduct a review and, among the measures 
they were directed to take, included grievance redressal within a
specified time frame.  All Senior Superintendents and
Commissioners of Police were requested to effectively implement
these measures to make the police a people friendly organisation.
36.     By his Memo dated 02.02.2013, the Additional Director
General of Police (Co-ordination) requested all Commissioners of
Police to nominate their representatives for the meeting to be held
on 12.02.2013 in his chambers to review the status of
implementation of the instructions issued, through various
circulars, by the DGP.  All officers were directed to come prepared
on several issues including the functioning of family counselling
centres.  On the issue of grievance redressal, the Additional
Director General of Police (Co-ordination), in the review meeting
held on 23.05.2013, observed that receipt of grievance petitions in
Hyderabad City was poor; pendency of petitions in South Zone of
Hyderabad City was high, and the Central Zone was low; all
officers should improve receipt of petitions from people, dispose
them of within fifteen days and, in exceptional cases, within two
months; Hyderabad city had done badly in this item of work (ie.,
grievance redressal) as compared to other Commissionerates in the
State; the Commissioners of Police at Vijayawada and 
Visakhapatnam should establish family counselling centres
immediately; and these Centres should be run with eight highly
qualified persons such as doctors, psychologists, retired Judges,
retired Police Officers, academicians, NGOs etc., including Women
Social Workers; functioning of family counselling centres should
be regularly monitored by the Deputy Commissioners of Police;
they should maintain a register with particulars of how many
cases were received, how many were disposed of, and how many   
are pending, with reasons; if need be legal action should be
initiated; issues, which were not sorted out, must be sent back to
the Police Stations for registration of cases; and there was no need
for serving Police Officers/men to involve themselves in the
counselling session.  All Commissioners of Police were advised to
submit a list of members, in the Centres, in the next review
meeting; maintain records of family counselling centres properly;
and to contact the district authorities, dealing with the mission for
elimination of urban poverty, for funds to run these family
counselling centres.
37.     In his memo dated 06.04.2002 the Commissioner of Police, 
after referring to the judgment of the Supreme Court of India in
Joginder Kumar v. The State of UP , informed all SHOs,
Divisional ACPs, Additional, Joint and Deputy Commissioners of
Police that, with a view to avoid adverse criticism, miscarriage of
justice and arbitrary deprivation of liberty of an individual, no
person (either woman, man or child), should henceforth be
arrested in any case registered under Sections 498 or 498-A IPC or
the Dowry Prohibition Act without obtaining prior written
permission from the concerned Deputy Commissioners of Police  
supervising investigation of the case; the concerned Inspector of
Police should send a detailed report for this purpose, duly
enclosing the CD file and all relevant documents, clearly placing on
record the evidence available against each accused, to the
concerned Deputy Commissioners of Police who should properly  
examine the complicity of each accused, and accord written
permission to effect his/her arrest; and these instructions should
be scrupulously followed. By his memo dated 28.11.2011, the
Commissioner of Police, Hyderabad instructed Station House 
Officers to take cognizance of each complaint; they could transfer
cases, to the concerned police station, if it did not pertain to their
jurisdiction; nobody could drive away a complainant on the point
of jurisdiction; the petitioners should not be harassed under any
circumstances; and, if any such incident came to their notice,
disciplinary action should be initiated against the concerned
Station House Officers.  By his memo dated 05.02.2013, the
Commissioner of Police informed all Deputy Commissioners, Joint 
Commissioners and Additional Commissioners of the need to go  
through circulars personally, and ensure strict implementation of
all the guidelines by their subordinate officers.  By his memo dated
09.01.2014, the Commissioner of Police clarified that when
petitioners approach superior officers to explain their grievance,
and the facts of the whole story of the petition are not known to the
superior officers and endorsements are made for necessary action,
the entire facts and circumstances of the case should be examined
and action taken only as per the facts and law; if required a report
should be sent, regarding the facts, to the superior officer
concerned who made the endorsement; action should not be taken  
which is arbitrary, one sided, or not as per law; any contravention
of these instructions would be viewed seriously; and disciplinary
action would be taken against the concerned.
38.     The circular memos of the Director General of Police dated
04.08.2012 and 17.08.2012, asking police officers not to shirk
their responsibilities in civil disputes with an element of
criminality, must be read in the light of Standing Order 322-1 of
the A.P. Police Manual.  Standing Order No.322-1, which deals
with problems arising out of Civil Disputes  Duties of Police, reads
as under:
       Many persons approach the police for protection on account of threats
to their safety due to disputes relating to property.  Several complaints are
also
presented in writing.  A good number of complaints pertain to forcible
dispossession or possession of properties by use of violence or by hired
goondas, 
or relate to matters providing religious ramifications leading to communal
disturbances or where habitual land grabbers or criminal syndicates are
involved etc.  There are also cases wherein a group of people, when they face an
immediate threat, approach the police for relief.  While the police should not
interfere into the disputes, which are purely of civil nature, they cannot
shirk their responsibility of protecting persons against injury or trespass
particularly when the people complained against are powerful or hired
goondas.  The following instructions are, therefore, issued for the guidance of
the police officers.
A.      Orders of the civil court should be implemented and all assistance
should be provided to the Civil Court officials as mentioned in order
321.
B.      If any civil dispute is likely to give rise to an imminent breach of
peace or disturbance of public order, the police officer shall take
recourse to Sections 144 to 148 Cr.P.C. as the case may be 
(Chapter 38, Volume  II).
C.      As per Section 149 CrPC every Police Officer may interpose for the
purpose of preventing and shall, to the best of his ability, prevent
the commission of any cognizable offence.  In application of this
provision, police officers shall be guided by instructions given by
superior officer of the rank of SP/DCP/CP/DGP.
D.      In dealing with these cases the SHO should make a 
contemporaneous record of every action that he takes in the
general diary and in the connected file.               (emphasis supplied)

39.     Sections 144 to 148 CrPC, as referred to in Part B of
Standing Order 322-I, relate to the powers of a Magistrate to issue
orders in urgent cases of nuisance or apprehended danger (Section
144); powers of a District Magistrate to prohibit carrying arms in a
procession or a mass drill or a mass training with arms (Section
144-A); powers of an Executive Magistrate where disputes
concerning land or water is likely to cause breach of peace (Section
145); powers of a Magistrate to attach the subject of dispute and to
appoint a receiver (Section 146); powers of an Executive Magistrate
in a dispute concerning right of use of land or water (Section 147);
and the powers of a District Magistrate to conduct a local enquiry
(Section 148).
40.     Chapter XI Cr.P.C contains provisions dealing with
preventive action by the police. Section 149 enables every police
officer to interpose for the purpose of preventing, and to prevent,
the commission of any cognizable offence. Section 151 CrPC allows 
a police officer to arrest a person, even before the commission of a
cognizable offence, in order to prevent the commission of that
offence, if it cannot be prevented otherwise. Such preventive
arrests are valid for 24 hours. (Lalita Kumari1; S. Masthan Saheb
v. P.S.R. Anjaneyulu ).  The conditions under which a police
officer may arrest a person, without an order from a Magistrate
and without a warrant, have been laid down in Section 151 CrPC.
He can do so only if he has come to know of a design of the person
concerned to commit any cognizable offence. A further condition
for the exercise of such power, which must also be fulfilled, is that
the arrest should be made only if it appears to the police officer
concerned that the commission of the offence cannot be otherwise
prevented. The section, therefore, expressly lays down the
requirements for the exercise of the power to arrest without an
order from a Magistrate and without a warrant. If these conditions
are not fulfilled and a person is arrested under Section 151 CrPC,
the arresting authority may be exposed to proceedings under the
law. Sub-section (2) lays down the rule that normally a person so
arrested shall be detained in custody not for a period exceeding 24
hours. It, therefore, follows that in the absence of anything else, on
expiry of 24 hours, he must be released. Section 151 CrPC itself
makes provision for the circumstances in which an arrest can be
made under that Section and also places a limitation on the period
for which a person so arrested may be detained. The guidelines are
inbuilt in the provision itself. These statutory guidelines read with
the requirements laid down by this Court in Joginder Kumar10
and D.K. Basu v. State of W.B.  provide an assurance that the
power shall not be abused and, in case of abuse, the authority
concerned shall be adequately punished. (Ahmed Noormohmed    
Bhatti v. State of Gujarat ).  It would be prudent for a police
officer in the interest of protection of the constitutional rights of a
citizen and, perhaps in his own interest, that no arrest is made
without arriving at a reasonable satisfaction, after some
investigation, regarding the genuineness and the bonafides of a
complaint, a reasonable belief both as to the person's complicity
and of the need to effect arrest. Denying a person his liberty is a
serious matter. Except in heinous offences, an arrest must be
avoided.  It would do if a police officer issues notice to the person
to attend the Police Station, and not leave the Station without
permission. (Joginder Kumar10).  The Police Officer, carrying out
the arrest of the arrestee, should prepare a memo of arrest at the
time of arrest.  Such a memo should be attested by atleast one
witness, counter-signed by the arrestee and should contain the
time and date of the arrest.  An entry must be made in the diary,
at the place of detention, regarding the arrest of the person which
should also disclose the name of the person who has been 
informed of the arrest and copies of all documents, including the
memo of arrest, should be sent to the Magistrate for his record.
(D.K.Basu12). If a police officer misuses his power of arrest, he can
be tried and punished under Section 166 IPC. (Lalita Kumari1).

41.     Even in a civil dispute with an element of criminality, such
as in the case of personal injury or trespass, police officers are
entitled only to take action against the criminal element of the civil
dispute, and not interfere with the civil dispute itself.  For
instance, if the personal injury in a civil dispute attracts the
ingredients of Section 354 IPC, and trespass in a civil dispute
attracts the provisions of Sections 447 and 448 IPC, then the
information or the complaint received must be registered under
Section 154(1) Cr.P.C, as they are cognizable offences, and an
investigation should only be caused thereafter.  Section
41(1)(a)&(b) CrPC enable a police officer to arrest, without an order
from a Magistrate and without warrant, any person who has either
committed or is alleged or is suspected to have committed a
cognizable offence.  This power is not to be exercised for the mere
asking. Section 41 Cr.P.C. requires a police officer, before arresting
any person, to be satisfied that such an arrest is necessary in
terms of clauses (a) to (e) of Section 41(1)(b)(ii) Cr.P.C.  It also
requires him to record, while making such arrest, his reasons
therefor in writing.  (Sambangi Dhanunjaya Naidu. v. The State
of A.P. rep. by its Principal Secretary, Home Department ).
Even in civil disputes with an element of criminality, while the
police officer can exercise his powers under Section 41 and 41-A
CrPC during the course of investigation, he cannot adjudicate or
resolve property/civil disputes.  The power conferred, on
respondents 3 and 4, was only to take action in respect of the
allegations of the 5th respondent of a threat to her life from her
brother as stated in her complaint dated 13.11.2013; or her being
assaulted and intimidated by her brother and his brother-in-law as
stated in her complaint dated 27.11.2013; and not to forcibly
resolve the property disputes between the petitioner and the 5th
respondent.
42.     In his statement, made before the Joint Commissioner of
Police on 01.12.2013, the 3rd respondent admitted that he had
endorsed the complaint, which the 5th respondent gave to him on
13.11.2013, to the 4th respondent and had asked him to call both
the parties and do justice; on 14.11.2013 the Inspector of Police,
Sanjeeva Reddy Nagar P.S., had sent both the parties to his office
where he had counselled them, but still the family matter was not
settled; then both the parties sought further time, and decided to
visit his office again on 19.11.2013; on 19.11.2013, even though
both the parties arrived at his office and received counselling, they
still could not resolve their serious differences.  In his endeavour to
justify  his illegal acts of summoning the petitioner to his office,
and in counselling him to resolve his property disputes with the
fifth respondent, the 3rd respondent places reliance on Standing
Order 322-1 of the A.P. Police Manual, and the circular memos of
the Director General of Police regarding family counselling
centres.  The 3rd respondent sought to give an impression that the
steps taken by him, in seeking to resolve the property disputes
between the petitioner and the 5th respondent at his office on 14th
and 19th November, 2013, is a family Counselling exercise.
43.     On being asked why a memo dated 25.11.2013 was issued to    
the Deputy Commissioner, West Zone, regarding poor performance  
in family counselling centres in June, 2013,  Learned
Government Pleader for Home placed before this Court a copy of
the Circular memo dated 21.02.2013 regarding establishment of
family counselling centres in all Districts.  By the said circular
memo dated 21.02.2013, the Director General of Police informed
all Commissioners/Superintendents of Police that the need of the
hour was to establish a family counselling centre, at a centrally
located place in the district, to provide easy access to the common
people to solve their family issues; the family counselling centres
should be constituted with experts from different fields, like
representatives from Women & Child Welfare department, 
Municipal Corporation, retired Judges, NGOs, social activists,
academics, retired police officers, Women organizations etc; and
police officers should only have an advisory role as experts in such
counselling centres, in addition to providing them logistics.  All
Commissioners and Superintendents of Police were directed to 
establish family counselling centres in the district/towns with
immediate effect.
44.     The circular memo dated 21.02.2013, issued by the Director
General of Police, confers only an advisory role on serving police
officers besides providing logistical support to the experts in these
family counselling centres.  These family counselling centres
were required to be established at a centrally located place
involving experts in different fields including retired judges, social
workers, retired police officers etc.  On a reading of the circular
memo dated 21.02.2013 it is clear that police stations are not
meant to be treated as family counselling centres, and serving
police officers should not resort to family counselling, much less
at their office or at a police station. The minutes, of the review
meeting held on 23.05.2013, records the clarification of the
Additional Director General of Police (Co-ordination) that there was
no need for serving police officers to involve themselves in
counselling sessions. It is evident, therefore, that not only has the
3rd respondent acted illegally and highhandedly in forcing the
petitioner to come to the S.R.Nagar police station, and then in a
police jeep to his office, but he has also sought to mislead this
court that the counselling sessions at his office, on 14th and 19th
November, 2013, has the sanction of the A.P. Police Manual 
Standing Orders and the circular memos referred to
hereinabove.
V. THE POLICE RECORDS DO NOT CONTAIN ANY ENTRY             
      REGARDING THE COUNSELLING SESSIONS CONDUCTED             
      BY THE 3RD RESPONDENT AT HIS OFFICE ON 14TH AND          
      19TH NOVEMBER, 2013:   

45.     Principles of democracy and liberty demand a regular and
efficient check on police powers. One way of keeping check is by
documenting every action of theirs. A police station is required to
maintain several records including the Case Diary under Section
172 CrPC; a General Diary under Section 44 of the Police Act,
etc. which help in documenting every information collected, the
spot visited and all other actions and activities of police officers.
Under the CrPC, all actions of the police are written and
documented. For example, in the case of arrest under Section
41(1)(b) of the Code, the arrest memo along with the grounds
should be, mandatorily, in writing; under  Section  55 CrPC, if an
officer is deputed to make an arrest, then the superior officer
should write down and record the offence, etc. for which the
person is to be arrested; under Section 91 CrPC, a written order
has to be passed, by the officer concerned, to seek documents;
under Section 160 of the Code, a written notice has to be issued to
the witness so that he can be called for recording of his/her
statement; a  seizure memo/panchnama has to be drawn for every  
article seized. (Lalita Kumari1); and, under Section 41-A(1), the
police officer shall, in all cases where the arrest of a person is not
required under Section 41(1), issue a notice directing the person,
against whom a complaint of having committed a cognizable 
offence has been made, to appear before him.
46.     The term General Diary (also called as Station Diary or
Daily Diary in some States) is maintained not under Section 154
of the Code, but under Section 44 of the Police Act, 1861 in the
States to which it applies, or under the respective provisions of the
Police Act(s) applicable to a State or under the Police Manual of a
State, as the case may be. (Lalita Kumari1).  The General Diary is
a record of all important transactions/events taking place in a
police station, including departure and arrival of police staff,
handing over or taking over of charge, arrest of a person, details of
law and order duties, visit of senior officers, etc. In addition the
gist of the FIR, or its substance, is also mentioned simultaneously
in the General Diary since registration of FIR also happens to be
an important event in the police station.   (Lalita Kumari1).
47.     A copy of the General Diary is not sent to the Judicial
Magistrate, having jurisdiction over the police station, though its
copy is sent to a superior police officer.  It is not possible to keep a
strict control of each and every FIR recorded in the General Diary
by superior police officers, and/or court, in view of several other
details being mentioned therein. There is no requirement of
obtaining the signature of the complainant in the General Diary.
What is recorded in the General Diary cannot be considered to be
the fulfilment of, or compliance with, the requirement of Section
154 CrPC regarding registration of the FIR. However, since the
General Diary/Station Diary/Daily Diary is the record of all
information received in a police station, all information relating to
cognizable offences, whether resulting in registration of the FIR or
leading to an inquiry, must be mandatorily and meticulously
reflected in the said diary, and the decision to conduct a
preliminary inquiry must also be reflected therein. (Lalita
Kumari1).

48.     The General Diary Register of S.R. Nagar Police Station, from
20.09.2013 till 30.11.2013, has been placed before this Court.  The
G.D. entry, dated 27.11.2013 at 20.00 hours, records receipt of
FIR No.936 of 2013, for offences under Sections 323, 506 and 509
IPC, and reads as under:-
       At this time received a complaint from Smt.Reena Choudary W/o.late
Ranjith Kumar, age 34 years, Occ: House wife, R/o.Flat No.203, Jaya Residency, 
Asmangadh, New Malakpet, Hyderabad in which she states that on 10.11.2013   
at about 22.00 hours, while she along with DVS Ramanjaneyulu were returning
from Kukatpally, when they reached at SR Nagar, in the mean time, her brother
Garikapati Binod Chand Raj Gopal and his brother-in-law forcibly stopped their
vehicle and they threatened her with dire consequence by slapping her.  When
she shouted they sped away from the spot.  Later she mentioned that her
brother promised to give her share of property and after the death of her father
he failed to do so by keeping property documents with him and she was been
threatened by her brother and his associates when she asked about her share in
the  property. Registered a case in Cr.No.936/13 U/s.323, 506, 509 IPC and
took up investigation.         

49.     Curiously the General Diary Register makes no mention of
either the representation submitted by the 5th respondent to the 3rd
respondent on 13.11.2013, or to the petitioner being brought to
the S.R. Nagar police station on 14.11.2013 or his being taken
from there in a police jeep to the office of the 3rd respondent.  No
record also appears to have been maintained regarding the
Counselling Sessions (which the petitioner was forced to
participate) held, at the office of the DCP, West Zone, by the 3rd
respondent on 14th and 19th November, 2014.   But for the
intervention of this Court, the counselling sessions at the office of
the DCP, West Zone on 14th and 19th November, 2013 would have   
gone unnoticed and unchecked.  



VI. POWER OF ADJUDICATION OF CIVIL/PROPERTY          
        DISPUTES IS CONFERRED ONLY ON THE JUDICIARY         
        AND NOT ON POLICE OFFICERS:    

50.     Maintenance of peace and public order, prevention of crime
and investigation of cognizable offences are functions which Police
Officers are, statutorily, obligated to discharge.  While Section
154(1) Cr.P.C confers power, and casts a duty, on the police officer
to register a cognizable offence, Section 155 Cr. P.C. enables a
police officer to make an entry in the appropriate register,
regarding information relating to a non-cognizable offence.  He
cannot investigate a non-cognizable offence without the order of
the Magistrate. As a necessary corollary, any attempt by a police
officer to investigate a complaint, which does not contain
allegations of the commission of a cognizable offence, without
permission from the Magistrate would violate Section 155(2) Cr.
P.C and is, ex facie, illegal.  There is no presumption in law that
every rift in human relations would lead to a civil dispute, and a
civil dispute is likely to result in clashes resulting in offences
against the human body. A Police Officer would not be justified in
saying that he/she is examining a complaint which, ex facie, has
the trappings of a civil dispute. (S. Masthan Saheb11).  Even if a
civil dispute has a criminal element, which falls within the ambit of
a cognizable offence, with the potential of a law and order
problem posing threat to the society at large, a Police Officer can
take up investigation only after registering the complaint under
Section 154 Cr.P.C. (Lakshmi @ Lakshmamma v. Commissioner      
of Police ).
51.     The function of resolving civil disputes is entrusted to the
judiciary. Police officers lack jurisdiction to interfere in
civil/property disputes between two citizens.  Even in criminal
case, their role is limited to the registration of complaints and
causing investigation.  The power to adjudge whether or not an
accused is guilty of having committed a criminal offence, and to
convict and sentence him therefor, is vested exclusively in the
judicial branch of the State.  Judicial power cannot be exercised by
agencies outside the judicial orbit and, where there is no legislative
foundation for exercise of judicial power by a forum, it has no legal
capacity to entertain requests for adjudication.  Judicial power is a
facet of sovereign power and can be conferred only by a Statute or
by a Statutory instrument.  It cannot be assumed suo motu.  No
authority may exercise adjudicatory powers absent a conferment of
such powers by Statutory instruments.   The coercive power of
the State may not be employed to adjudicate disputes. (M/s.
Janathaeem Industries Ltd., rep., by its Public Relations
Officer M.S. Ganesan, Vijayawada. v. The District Collector,
Krishna district at Vijayawada ).
52.     While the inordinate delay, in resolution of civil disputes
before Civil Courts of competent jurisdiction, is undoubtedly a
cause of concern that does not justify Police Officers exercising
powers, conferred exclusively of the judicial branch of the State, to
adjudicate civil disputes.  While the need to strengthen judicial
institutions, and to reduce the inordinate delay in disposal of Civil
Suits, cannot be over-emphasised, the highhanded acts of police
officers in seeking to resolve civil disputes, that too in the precincts
of a police station, must also be sternly dealt with.  Just as Courts
would not undertake investigation of criminal offences, as these
are matters in the exclusive realm of the investigating agency, the
powers conferred and the duties cast upon Police Officers, under
the Criminal Procedure Code, is only to register complaints
regarding cognizable offences and investigate thereinto; and not
adjudicate even criminal cases, much less resort to settlement of
civil disputes.
53.     Police officers should not usurp, or even seem to usurp,
judicial functions of adjudication or to summon and force persons
to resolve their inter-se civil disputes in a particular manner under
the guise of family counselling.  In the present case the 3rd
respondent has, in effect, donned the robes of a judge in
adjudicating property disputes between the petitioner and the 5th
respondent.

VII. CONTRADICTIONS IN THE STATEMENTS MADE BY THE            
       FIFTH RESPONDENT FROM TIME TO TIME:       

54.     The contradictions in the complaint of the 5th respondent, on
which the 3rd respondent had endorsed on 13.11.2013; her 
subsequent complaint dated 27.11.2013 which resulted in
registration of Crime No.936 of 2013; and her assertions in the
counter-affidavit filed before this Court; must also be noted.  In her
representation given to the 3rd respondent on 13.11.2013, the 5th
respondent alleged that, on her asking him to divide their
properties, her brother (the petitioner) and his brother-in-law had
threatened to kill her; both of them had also threatened that, if she
did not vacate the flat in Jaya Residency, they would kill her; her
brother, his brother-in-law Raju and one Sivarao came inside her
house and disconnected water supply; and even at Jaya Nagar, 
where she was staying, the petitioner, his brother-in-law and
Sivarao had threatened to kill her.  It is relevant to note that the
representation of the 5th respondent, on which the 3rd respondent
endorsed to the 4th respondent on 13.11.2013 asking him to do
justice, makes no mention of an incident which allegedly took
place three days prior thereto on 10.11.2013, though in her
complaint dated 27.11.2013 the 5th respondent stated that, on
10.11.2013 at about 2200 hours, while she along with Sri DVS
Ramanjaneyulu were returning from Kukatpally and had reached 
S.R. Nagar, her brother and his brother-in-law forcibly stopped
their vehicle; threatened her with dire consequences, and slapped
her; and she was being threatened by her brother and his
associates as and when she asked him about her share in the 
property.
55.     In her statement to the Joint Commissioner on 01.12.2013
the 5th respondent, while referring to the incident on 10.11.2013 at
10.00 p.m., only alleged that the petitioners brother-in-law Sri
Raju had pulled her aside, and had slapped her; and her brother
(the petitioner) had threatened her with dire consequences, with
regards the property disputes.  The statement of the 5th
respondent, recorded by the Joint Commissioner of Police on
01.12.2013, makes no mention of her being assaulted by her
brother on 10.11.2013.   In her counter-affidavit before this Court,
the 5th respondent stated that, on 10.11.2013 at 10.00 p.m, the
petitioner and his brother-in-law had stopped their vehicle; the
petitioners brother-in-law had slapped her, and her brother had
beaten her black and blue.
56.     The contradictions, in the statements made from time to
time by the 5th respondent, do give an impression that a concocted
complaint was hurriedly registered on 27.11.2013, after the
petitioner had invoked the jurisdiction of this Court by way of the
present Writ Petition on 26.11.2013, and after a copy of the Writ
Petition was furnished to the office of the Government Pleader,
High Court on the same day, only to avoid being faulted by this
Court.  As Crime No.936 of 2013, registered with S.R.Nagar Police
Station on 27.11.2013, has, thereafter, been transferred to Central
Crime Station, Hyderabad and re-registered as Crime No.182 of
2013, I refrain from saying anything more.
57.     In his statement, before the Joint Commissioner on
01.12.2013, the 3rd respondent stated that the 5th respondent met
him on 13th November, 2013 and had informed him that her 
brother and his brother-in-law had attacked them on 10.11.2013
at S.R.Nagar traffic signals; and he had endorsed the complaint to
the fourth respondent asking him to call both parties and do
justice.  However the said complaint which the 5th respondent gave
him, and on which he had made an endorsement to the 4th  
respondent on 13.11.2013, makes no mention of any incident 
having taken place on 10.11.2013, much less at Sanjeeva Reddy 
Nagar.  Neither the 2nd respondent nor the Joint Commissioner of
Police who conducted the enquiry have examined why an incident 
which allegedly took place on 10.11.2013, and forms the basis of
registration of Crime No.936 of 2013 dated 27.11.2013, does not
find mention in the 5th respondents representation given to the 3rd
respondent on 13.11.2013, three days after the alleged incident on
10.11.2013.  In his counter-affidavit filed before this Court, the 4th
respondent states that he was telephonically instructed by the 3rd
respondent not to register the complaint of the 5th respondent
containing the endorsement of the 3rd respondent on 13.11.2013;
and that he was asked by the 3rd respondent over telephone on
14.11.2013 to produce the petitioner before him at the office of the
DCP, West Zone. It is disconcerting that, though the 3rd
respondent admitted that he endorsed the complaint of the 5th
respondent to the 4th respondent on 13.11.2013, the Joint
Commissioner of Police should choose not to examine the 4th 
respondent or record his statement during the course of his
enquiry.
VIII.  PROPERTY DISPUTES BETWEEN THE PETITIONER AND            
         THE FIFTH RESPONDENT ARE MATTERS TO BE        
         ADJUDICATED BY A COMPETENT CIVIL COURT AND         
         SHOULD NOT BE EXAMINED IN PROCEEDINGS UNDER           
         ARTICLE 226 OF THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA:    

58.     In her counter-affidavit, the 5th respondent narrates in detail
the property disputes between her and her brother (the petitioner);
she also claims that her brother forcibly vacated her from the flat
where she was residing till August, 2008 and had put her in the
house at plot No.49, Andhra Bank Colony with the intention of
occupying all the flats; whenever he came to India he used to
harass, abuse and beat her and ask her to sign on some 
documents to extinguish her legal rights over the properties; she
had refused to do so; unable to bear his harassment, she had left
his house and was staying in a rented house till May, 2013; since
she is entitled for three flats in the complex, she had taken
possession of flat Nos.101 and 102 and had given them on rent
since September, 2013; when her brother came to know that she 
had occupied flat No.203,  and had given flat Nos.101 and 102 on
rent, he had sent his brother-in-law Sri G. Balraj who beat her,
and slapped her minor daughter; and though she gave a police
complaint, the 4th respondent stated that it was a civil dispute and
could not be entertained.  The affidavit details the claim of the 5th
respondent to her share of the property.  The 5th respondent
alleges that the petitioner had suppressed relevant facts with
regards property disputes; he had not paid maintenance and water
charges for the five flats in his occupation; he is keeping all the
original property documents with him, and did not want to give her
legal share; and, as she was demanding her share of the
properties, he has been harassing her with the aid and support of
his brother-in-law. The 5th respondent narrates in detail her
property disputes, and claims that the petitioner is seeking to
deprive her of her just share of their ancestral property.
59.    As the proper forum for adjudication of the property disputes,
between the petitioner and the 5th respondent, is the Civil Court of
competent jurisdiction, it would be wholly inappropriate for this
Court, in proceedings under Article 226 of the Constitution of India,
to examine much less determine the validity of the rival claims, of
the petitioner and the 5th respondent, over their ancestral
properties.  It is made clear that, in case either the petitioner or the
fifth respondent invoke the jurisdiction of the competent Civil
Court, their respective claims shall be adjudicated on its merits
without being influenced by any observations made in this Order.
IX. OTHER CONTENTIONS:     
60.     It is the case of the 3rd respondent that the statement made
by the petitioner before the Joint Commissioner on 01.12.2013
contradicts the allegations made by him in para 15 of the Writ
Petition; in his statement the petitioner himself stated that he was
not asked to sign any papers or any documents on 19.11.2013; 
and that no such incident took place is evident from the report of
the Joint Commissioner of Police, and the report of the Committee.
61.     In his statement, before Jt.CP (Admn.) on 01.12.2013, the
petitioner stated that, on 14th of November, 2013 at around 1.00
PM, he received a call from Sri Ajay Kumar, Sub-Inspector
Sanjeeva Reddy Nagar PS who asked him to come to the Police   
Station in connection with a complaint lodged by his sister; in
response thereto, he went to the Police Station in a car; after he
met the Sub-Inspector Sri Ajay Kumar, he was called to the
chambers of the Inspector Sri Prabhakar who informed him that a
complaint had been lodged by his sister and asked him to
accompany the Sub-Inspector in the police jeep to the office of the
DCP, West Zone, which he did; his car followed him to the office of
the DCP, West Zone; he spent ten minutes with the 3rd respondent 
in his chambers where his sister and another were present; the 3rd
respondent informed him that, though a complaint was lodged by
his sister against him, he was not being treated as an accused; he
was offered a chair; he was also informed that the complaint was
about his threatening his sister; he was asked by the 3rd
respondent to meet him again; on 19.11.2013 he received a call on
his phone No.8096102190 from the office of the Deputy
Commissioner of Police, West Zone; when he reached the office at
about 2.45 pm he found persons not known to him in the office;
his sister later appeared in the office of the DCP West Zone and
raised the issue of property, alleging that he was not giving her
property; his father had passed away without leaving behind any
will; her share of the property had already been given to his sister,
at the time of her marriage; whenever he came to India, he was
being subjected to severe mental stress by his sisters tormenting
words, asking for her share of the property; he was advised by
people in the chambers of the DCP, West Zone to settle the
property issue, as soon as possible, in accordance with the wishes
of his sister; he was asked to be prepared to sign agreements of
settlement to that effect; he was, however, not shown the papers or
documents on which to sign; no one had manhandled him and no   
vulgar language was used; but he was pressurized that, if he did
not settle the matter with his sister, he may enter into
problems/cases related to property disputes as well as criminal
cases out of his sisters complaints that he was harassing her; he
left the office at about 9.30 pm; on 25th November, 2013, at about
4.30 P.M, a constable visited the house of his father-in-law at
Marredpally, where he had been staying with his family since a few
days; he was away and came to know later that the constable had 
asked for him, in connection with his sisters complaint at
Sanjeeva Reddy Nagar PS, and had waited there upto 10 PM.  
62.     Even before the Joint Commissioner the petitioner stated
that he was asked to be prepared to sign agreement of settlement
of properties but was not shown the papers or documents on
which to sign. He also stated that he was threatened that, if he did
not settle the matter with his sister, he may face criminal cases out
of his sisters complaint; and he was at the office of the 3rd
respondent till 9.30 P.M. on 19th November, 2013.  This Writ
Petition was filed on 26.11.2013, the day next to 25.11.2013 when
a constable is said to have asked for him.
X. CONCLUSION:   
63.     In his additional affidavit, the 3rd respondent states that an
adverse memo dated 10.12.2013 has already been issued to him  
by the Commissioner of Police; he was also facing disciplinary
action by the Government; several daily newspapers have made 
adverse reports against him with reference to the observations of
the Court repeatedly; these facts were, inadvertently, missed in the
earlier counter affidavit;  and if this counter affidavit is not taken
on record, and considered along with the earlier counter affidavit,
he would suffer irreparable loss and injury.  The 3rd respondent
offers his unconditional apology if he has transgressed his limits in
the course of his interaction with the petitioner and the 5th
respondent.
64.     While the 3rd respondent, in his statement before the Joint
Commissioner, admits that both parties (the petitioner and the 5th
respondent) received counselling at his office, he does not even
state what the exercise of Counselling involved, and whether it
related to resolution of property disputes between the petitioner
and the 5th respondent.  In the counter-affidavit filed before this
Court, the 5th respondent admits that the 3rd respondent had
counselled her and her brother regarding settlement of the
property disputes.  It is clear that the 3rd respondent has not only
forced the petitioner to come to his office, but has also resorted to
settlement of property disputes under the guise of family
counselling.  In asking the 4th respondent not to register the
complaint given by the 5th respondent to the 3rd respondent on
13.11.2013, in orally summoning the petitioner to his office (office
of the DCP, West Zone), in forcing him to come to his office on 14th
and 19th November, 2013, and in counselling him at his office
both on 14th and 19th November, 2013, the petitioners
fundamental right of personal liberty, under Article 21 of the
Constitution of India, has been violated by the 3rd respondent.

65.     No person can be forcibly summoned to a police station
except in accordance with law, including the provisions of the
CrPC.  Exercise of power by police officers, and the mode and
manner of its exercise, is circumscribed by the provisions of the
CrPC.  Conferment of power is only to enable police officers to
effectively discharge their statutory/legal obligations.  Exercise of
power, otherwise than in furtherance of a statutory/legal duty, is
an abuse of power.  In the present case, not only does the 3rd
respondent lack the power to summon the petitioner to the police
station, even without registering the complaint and without a
written notice asking him to appear, he has also abused his office
in carrying on a counselling session within the premises of the
office of the DCP, West Zone, that too for resolution of a civil
dispute regarding division of property between the petitioner and
the 5th respondent.
66.      The belated and half-hearted apology tendered by the 3rd
respondent, with a rider that his apology was if he had
transgressed his limits in the course of interacting with the
petitioner or the 5th respondent, does not commend acceptance.  It
is not even the case of the 3rd respondent that the petitioner had
voluntarily, and on his own accord, come to the S.R.Nagar Police
Station on 14.11.2013 or that he had on his volition and free will,
and without being directed by the police officers at S.R.Nagar P.S,
come over to the office of the D.C.P., West Zone, to meet the 3rd
respondent on 14.11.2013.  Neither has the 3rd respondent
admitted that his action in telephonically instructing the 4th
respondent to direct the petitioner to come to S.R.Nagar Police
Station, and to produce him at the office of the DCP, West Zone for
counselling on 14th November, 2013 and in directing the petitioner
to appear before him on 19th November, 2013 is illegal, nor has he
assured this Court that he would refrain from indulging in such
acts in future.  I see no reason, therefore, to accept the apology of
the 3rd respondent which is, evidently, made only to avoid being
faulted by this Court.  The illegal and high-handed acts of the 3rd
respondent, depriving the petitioner of his fundamental right of
personal liberty under Article 21 of the Constitution of India,
cannot be ignored.  The competent authority shall forthwith initiate
major penalty proceedings against the 3rd respondent, conduct a
departmental enquiry, and take disciplinary action in accordance
with law.  The entire exercise, culminating in a final order being
passed by the competent authority, shall be completed within four
months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.  This order
shall not preclude the petitioner from claiming damages, for the
violation of his fundamental rights by the 3rd respondent, in duly
instituted legal proceedings.
67.     While the 4th respondent cannot absolve himself of all blame
on the specious plea that he had merely acted on the orders of the
3rd respondent, this Court must also bear in mind that the 4th
respondent has, in his counter-affidavit filed before this Court,
narrated the sequence of the events but for which the illegal and
high-handed acts of the 3rd respondent may not have been
established.   The 4th respondent must constantly remind himself
that his foremost obligation is to uphold the rule of law,
notwithstanding the illegal orders of his superiors.  It would suffice
to warn the 4th respondent to desist from indulging in such acts
in future.
68.    This Court has only examined the illegal and high-handed
acts of the 3rd respondent in orally summoning and counselling the
petitioner at his office, to settle his property disputes with the 5th
respondent, without even registering the complaint of the 5th
respondent under Section 154(1) CrPC; and has not touched upon  
the property disputes between the petitioner and the fifth
respondent.  It is made clear that, while investigation in Crime
No.182 of 2013 may be conducted in accordance with law and a  
final report submitted under Section 173 CrPC, the 3rd respondent
shall not be involved either directly or indirectly in investigation or
be consulted in the preparation and finalisation of the final report.

69.     The Writ Petition is, accordingly, allowed with exemplary
costs of Rs.10,000/- (Rupees Ten Thousand only).  The costs
should, ordinarily, have been paid to the petitioner.  However, as
he is employed in the U.S.A, and the genesis of this dispute is an
internecine fight over vast extents of property, it is but appropriate
that the cost of Rs.10,000/- is paid by the 3rd respondent to the
Andhra Pradesh State Legal Services Authority, Hyderabad, within
four weeks from the date of receipt of a copy of this Order. The
miscellaneous petitions, if any pending, are also disposed of.
     _______________________________    
(RAMESH RANGANATHAN, J)       
Date: .04.2014.
