
HON'BLE Dr. JUSTICE K.G. SHANKAR      

Crl. Petition No.6875 of 2013

11-07-2014 

Sivangala Thandi Deepak and 3 others.   ... Petitioners/A.1 to A.4              
                                

The State of A.P., rep.by its Public Prosecutor,  High Court of A.P.,
Hyderabad, through the S.H.O. Tenali Rural P.S. and another.... Respondents

 Counsel for the Petitioners:Sri S.R. Sanku

Counsel for Respondent No.1:    Public Prosecutor
 Counsel for Respondent No.2:   


<Gist:

>Head Note: 

? Cases referred:
1.      (2005) 3 SCC 507 
2.      (2007) 1 SCC 262 
3.      (2004) 8 SCC 100 
4.      2008 (2) ALT (Crl.) 327 (AP)
5.      (2012) 10 SCC 741 


HONBLE Dr. JUSTICE K.G. SHANKAR       

Criminal Petition No.6875 of 2013

ORDER:  
        The petitioners are A.1 to A.4 in C.C.No.4 of 2013
on the file of the II Additional Judicial Magistrate of First
Class, Tenali.  They seek for the quashment of C.C.No.4
of 2013 on the ground that Tenali Police and Tenali
Courts do not have territorial jurisdiction to entertain the
controversy between the petitioners on the one side and
the second respondent on the other side.
        
     2. A case was instituted against the petitioners
arraying them as A.1 to A.4 under Section 498-A IPC and
under Sections 3 & 4 of Dowry Prohibition Act. In the
second paragraph of the charge sheet, it was recorded
that the offence took place at Hyderabad and at Mumbai
and that the complainant/second respondent has been 
temporarily staying with her parents at Khajipeta, Tenali
Mandal.  It is stated that the second respondent was
given in marriage to the first petitioner at Hyderabad.
It is also the case of the second respondent that she and
the first petitioner lived at Mumbai for sometime before
the second respondent was driven out from the
matrimonial home.  From the time the second respondent 
was necked out from the matrimonial home, she has  
been staying with her parents at Khajipeta, Tenali
Mandal.  She lodged a complaint with Tenali Rural Police
Station, which was registered as First Information Report
(FIR) in Crime No.121 of 2012. After due investigation,
police laid charge sheet as C.C.No.4 of 2013 on the file of
the II Additional Judicial Magistrate of First Class,
Tenali.

        3.      Sri S.R. Sanku, learned counsel for the
petitioners submitted that Tenali Police and Tenali
Courts do not have territorial jurisdiction to entertain the
dispute and that the charge sheet, consequently, is liable
to be quashed.

        4.      In Ramesh v. State of T.N. , FIR was registered
and later charge sheet was filed for the offences under
Sections 498-A and 406 IPC and u/s.4 of Dowry 
Prohibition Act.  The major part of the overt acts was
allegedly committed in Mumabi and partly in Chennai.
No part of the incident occurred at Tiruchirapalli.  When
the case was entertained by the Courts at Tiruchirapalli,
the husband approached the Supreme Court.  It was held 
that no part of the cause of action had arisen at
Tiruchirapalli and that the Courts at Tiruchirapalli did
not have territorial jurisdiction to entertain the dispute.
        5.      In Manish Ratan v. State of M.P. , the marriage
was solemnized at Jabalpur, Madhya Pradesh. The father 
of the wife lodged a complaint with police at Jabalpur
alleging ill-treatment of his daughter. The wife also
lodged an FIR claiming that her husband and in-laws
were ill-treating her and that the wife was forced to leave
the matrimonial home and to live with her parents at
Datia, Madhya Pradesh.  Holding that u/s.177 Cr.P.C.,
offences shall ordinarily be inquired into and tried by a
Court within whose local jurisdiction the offences were
committed, the attempt of the wife to file the case at
Datia was thwarted.

        6.      In Y. Abraham Ajith v. Inspector of Police,
Chennai , the Supreme Court referred to Sections 177 &
178 Cr.P.C. and held that offences shall ordinarily be
inquired into and tried by a Court within whose local
jurisdiction the offence was committed. The Supreme
Court also held that there are several exceptions to the
general rule and that the case on hand did not fall within
the general exceptions.


     7. In a decision of the Andhra Pradesh High
Court in Nadimpalli Lakshmana Varma v. State of A.P. ,
the Court held that a particular police station did not
have territorial jurisdiction and that another police
station alone had territorial jurisdiction.  The High Court,
consequently, quashed the proceedings with a direction
to the police which conducted the investigation to
transfer the same to the police station having territorial
jurisdiction to enable the transferee police station to
enquire and lay the charge sheet.

     8. All these decisions relied upon by the learned
counsel for the petitioners clearly show that when no
part of the cause of action has arisen at a particular
place, a claim cannot be made at that particular place
ostensibly on the ground that the complainant was
residing at that place at the time of the filing of the case.
        
     9. In Geeta Mehrotra v. State of Uttar Pradesh ,
the Supreme Court observed that the dispute cannot be
resolved through a petition u/s.482 Cr.P.C. when the
dispute is regarding the territorial jurisdiction covered by
Sections 177 to 181 Cr.P.C.  The Supreme Court noticed 
that such a question of the territorial jurisdiction can be
determined by the trial Court itself.

     10.        From the averments of the charge sheet, it is
clear that no part of the cause of action arisen at Tenali.
It is true that the second respondent has been residing at
Tenali where the second respondent chose to file the
complaint.  However, it was noticed in Manish Ratan
(2 supra) that the offence u/s.498-A IPC is not a
continuing offence and that Court cannot hold that cause
of action has arisen partly at the place where the wife has
been residing after she was driven away from the
matrimonial home. 

     11.        In the present case, the second respondent
was driven out from the matrimonial home from Mumbai. 
The second respondent went to the house of her parents
at Tenali.  In view of Manish Ratan (2 supra), Tenali
Courts do not get territorial jurisdiction merely because
the second respondent returned to Tenali.  However, in
view of Geeta Mehrotra (5 supra), where the Supreme
Court held that the question of territorial jurisdiction
shall be determined by the trial Court and not in a
petition u/s.482 Cr.P.C., I consider that this petition is
misconceived. 
        
     12.        Consequently, this Criminal Petition is
dismissed.  The petitioners, however, are at liberty to
move the trial Court for appropriate relief.  The presence
of the appearance of the petitioners before the trial Court
is dispensed with.  However, the trial Court is at liberty
to insist upon the presence of the petitioners on any of
the date if the trial Court considers if necessary for the
petitioners to be present.  Miscellaneous Petitions, if any
pending in this Criminal Petition, shall stand closed.
___________________   
Dr. K.G. Shankar, J.
Date:  11.07.2014
