
THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE R.KANTHA RAO        

CRIMINAL PETITION No.13837 of 2013    

02-01-2014 

Mahasamudram Viswa Priya....Petitioner/De facto complainant  

The State of Andhra Pradesh  Rep.by Public Prosecutor, High Court of AndhraPradesh,Hyderabad and 5 others.....Respondents  

Counsel for the Petitioner: Sri TARLADA RAJASWKHAR RAO      

Counsel for the respondent No.1: PUBLIC PROSECUTOR      
Counsel for the respondent Nos.2 to 6: M/s.S.V.BHARATA LAKSHMI     

<Gist  :

>Head Note: 

?Cases Referred: 
1. (2001) 6 SCC 338 
2. 2005(2) ALT (Crl.) 111 (SC)

THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE R.KANTHA RAO        

CRIMINAL PETITION No.13837 of 2013    

ORDER:  

This Criminal Petition is filed under Section 439(2) of Cr.P.C. seeking
cancellation of bail granted in favour of Respondents Nos.2 to 6 by the learned
II Additional District & Sessions Judge, Chittoor at Madanapalle vide orders
dated 08.11.2013 in Crl.M.P.No.1650/2013 relating to Cr.No.218/2013 of Punganur
Police Station.
Respondents Nos.2 to 6 are A1 to A5 in the aforesaid crime registered for the
offences punishable under section 498-A of IPC and under sections 3 & 4 of Dowry
Prohibition Act.  A1 to A5 filed a petition before the learned II Additional
District & Sessions Judge, Chittoor at Madanapalle under Section 438 of Cr.P.C
seeking anticipatory bail.  The learned Sessions Judge granted them anticipatory
bail with certain conditions.  The petitioner/de facto complainant filed the
present petition seeking cancellation of bail contending that the learned
Sessions Judge while granting anticipatory bail did not assign any valid reasons
and therefore it is liable to be cancelled.
I have heard Sri T.Rajasekhararao, learned counsel appearing for the
petitioner/de facto complainant, Sri Gangainaidu, Senior Counsel, appearing for
Respondents Nos.2 to 6 and the learned Additional Public Prosecutor,
representing the State.
In his order, the learned Sessions Judge, after narrating the facts briefly,
recorded the contentions urged by both the counsel and held as follows:
"The contents of CD disclose examination of eight material witnesses by the
investigating agency and also completion of material part of investigation.  As
the material part of investigation is completed, I am inclined to grant
anticipatory bail to the petitioners/A1 to A5 with conditions."

The aforesaid order is challenged on the ground that it does not furnish any
reasons.  In support of his contention, the learned counsel appearing for the
petitioner/de facto complainant relied on a decision of the Hon'ble Supreme
Court in Puran  Rambilas1 wherein the Hon'ble Supreme Court held that an order
granting bail passed by ignoring material and evidence on record and without
giving reasons, would be perverse and contrary to principles of law, such an
order would itself provide a ground for moving an application for cancellation
of bail and such ground for cancellation is different from the ground that the
accused misconducted himself or some new facts call for cancellation.
Discussing evidence is totally different from giving reasons for a decision and
the Court must record reasons but without discussion of merits and demerits of
evidence.
The learned senior counsel, appearing for Respondents Nos.2 to 6 would submit
that the learned Sessions Judge, in fact, gave adequate reasons for granting
anticipatory bail to the Respondents Nos.2 to 6 herein, therefore, the bail
granted to Respondents Nos.2 to 6 herein is not liable for cancellation.  In
support of his contention, the learned senior counsel relied on a decision of
the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Nityanand Rai v. State of Bihar2, wherein the
Hon'ble Supreme Court held that consideration of an application for grant of
bail stands on a different footing than one for cancellation of bail.  Grounds
for cancellation of bail should be those which arose after grant of bail and
should be referable to the conduct of the accused while on bail, such is not a
case made out in application for cancellation of bail.
In the instant case, obviously, the bail is sought to be cancelled on the ground
that no reasons were assigned by the learned Sessions Judge for granting
anticipatory bail to the Respondents 2 to 6 herein.  This is not a case wherein
the reasons were not assigned at all.  The Hon'ble Supreme Court, however, in
Puran Rambilas (1 supra) held that arbitrary and wrong exercise of discretion by
the trial Court should be corrected and an order passed granting bail by
ignoring the material and evidence available on record and without giving
reasons is liable for cancellation.  In the instant case, the learned Sessions
Judge perused the case diary and noticed that 8 material witnesses have been
examined by the investigating agency and material part of investigation was
over.  Therefore, the learned Sessions Judge made up his mind to grant
anticipatory bail to Respondents Nos.2 to 6 herein with certain conditions.
This Court cannot sit over the judgment of the order passed by the  learned
Sessions Judge on the point as to whether the reasons given by the learned
Sessions Judge are cogent and convincing.  If there is some reasoning for
granting anticipatory bail, then this Court would not interfere with the said
order unless the respondents 2 to 6/A1 to A5 violate any conditions of bail
imposed by the learned Sessions Judge.  Absolutely, there is no material placed
on record showing that the respondents 2 to 6 herein have violated any
conditions imposed by the learned Sessions Judge while granting anticipatory
bail.  The order passed by the learned Sessions Judge therefore cannot be said
to be the result of non-application of mind and lacking any reasons.
For the reasons stated supra, I am not inclined to cancel the anticipatory bail
granted in favour of Respondents Nos.2 to 6 herein by the learned II Additional
District & Sessions Judge, Chittoor at Madanapalle vide orders dated 08.11.2013
in Crl.M.P.No.1650/2013 relating to Cr.No.218/2013 of Punganur Police Station.
Accordingly, the Criminal Petition is dismissed.
_____________________    
R.KANTHA RAO,J    
Date: 02.01.2014
