
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE L. NARASIMHA REDDY and THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE  M.S.K.JAISWAL             

Crl.Appeal No. 1772 of  2009

13-03-2014 

Bheemari Srinivas  Appellant 

State of A.P., rep. by its P.P.,High Court of A.P., Hyderabad ...Respondent

Counsel for the Appellant: Sri P.Sajan Kumar

Counsel for respondent  :  Public Prosecutor

<GIST: 

>HEAD NOTE:    

?CASES REFERRED :       .         

HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE L.NARASIMHA REDDY         
AND  
HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE M.S.K.JAISWAL       

Criminal Appeal No.1772 of  2009

Dated: 13.03.2014 

Criminal Appeal No.1772 of 2009 
JUDGMENT: (Per Honble Sri Justice L.Narasimha Reddy)   
      This appeal under Section 374(2) Cr.P.C. is filed by the sole
accused in S.C.No.490 of 2008 on the file of the Sessions Judge,
Karimnagar.  He was alleged to have committed the murder of his
wife Yellavva on 22-08-2007.  The trial Court convicted him for the
offence punishable under Section 302 of I.P.C and imposed
punishment of imprisonment for life, and fine of Rs.1,000/-, in
default, to undergo simple imprisonment for two months.
2.      The facts of the case are that the marriage between the
accused and the deceased took place about 25 years prior to the
date of the incident and out of their wedlock, a son and a daughter
(PW.4) were born.  PWs.1 and 2 are the parents of the deceased.
      PW.1 submitted a complaint (Ex.P.1) before P.S.Vemulawada 
stating that ever since the marriage of the deceased with the
accused, there used to be disputes and quarrels and that accused
used to demand additional dowry and suspect the character of the
deceased.  Panchayats were said to have been conducted on  
several occasions and that the accused was admonished by the  
elders. It was also alleged that the accused went to gulf countries
and whenever the accused is in India, he used to harass the
deceased. 
      PW.1 stated that he dropped his daughter and her children at
the house of the accused on 20-08-2007, again he went there on
22-08-2007 and remained there up to 10.00 a.m.  He stated that
after he came back to his house, he received a phone call at 2.00
p.m., from one Regula Rajanarsu (PW.6) to the effect that the
accused murdered the deceased  Yellavva.  On his further
verification, PW.6 is said to have received the information about
the death of the deceased from PW.5, by name Sarupula  
Thirupathi.
3.      On receipt of the complaint from PW.1, the police registered
case in Cr.No.212 of 2007 against the accused for the offence
punishable under Section 302 of I.P.C.  The steps contemplated
under law, such as preparation of scene of offence panchanama,
causing of inquest and post-mortem were completed by the 
Investigating Officer (PW.16).
4.      The accused is said to have confessed the commission of 
offence by him before PW.15 in the presence of PW.13.  On the 
basis of the said confession and other information gathered during
the course of investigation, PW-15 filed the charge sheet.
5.      The trial court framed necessary charge and took up the
trial, on denial of the commission of offence by the accused.  The
prosecution has examined PWs. 1 to 16, filed Exs.P.1 to P.14; and
M.Os.1 to 4 were taken on record.  No evidence was adduced on 
behalf of the defence.  The nature of disposal given by the trial
court in the case has already been indicated in the preceding
paragraphs.
6.      Sri P. Sajan Kumar, learned counsel for the appellant submits
that the only source of information for PW-1 to submit Ex.P.1
complaint was the phone-call said to have been made by PW-6  
(Rajanarsu), and not only that witness, but also P.W.5 who is said
to have given information to him i.e., PW.6 did not support the
case of the prosecution and the version presented through Ex.P.1
becomes unbelievable.  He submits that even according to PWs.1 
and 2, there is a grown up son for the accused and the deceased,
and leaving him aside, the prosecution has examined their minor
daughter (PW-4) and the trial Court did not take any precaution, as
required under law, before the evidence of a minor witness is
recorded.  He further submits that the so called extra-judicial
confession of the accused is totally unbelievable and even the
medical evidence did not support the case of the prosecution.
7.      Learned Additional Public Prosecutor, on the other hand,
submits that once the factum of death of the deceased is not
disputed, the very fact that the material witnesses turned hostile
does not make any difference.  She contends that the death of the
deceased took place during the day time, that too when the
children of the deceased and the accused were not there, and the
suspicion naturally would be towards the accused.
8.      The machinery of the police administration became active in
relation to the death of the deceased with the submission of Ex.P.1
by PW.1.  It is said to have been submitted within one hour from
receiving the information.  Ex.P.1 has made a detailed reference
to the nature of relation that is said to have existed between the
deceased and the accused.  Reference was made to the panchayats   
that have been held about the disputes.  At the end of the
complaint, the factum and manner of receiving information about
the death of the deceased are mentioned.  The last part of Ex.P.1
reads as under:
      Later when enquired Regula Rajanarsu was informed by one
Salarampalli person by name Surupu Tirupathi stating that Ellavva was
murdered by my son-in-law Srinivas.  This incident was informed by my
son-in-law Srinivas to Tirupathi and this was informed to me by
Rajanarsu.  When my daughter Ellavva was killed by my son-in-law
Srinivas, it is suspected that his family members and relatives have
encouraged him.  Therefore, I request penal action against the persons
who murdered my daughter.  

9.      From this, it is evident that the information about the death
of deceased was first furnished by the accused to PW.5 and that in
turn was passed on to PW.6.  The phone-call from PW.6 is said to
have been received by PW.1.  The complaint is silent as to whether
the accused was present when PW.1 proceeded to the place of  
occurrence.  Even in chief-examination, he did not state about it.
10.     Since PW.6 was the source of information for PW.1, his
evidence would be of much use.  However, not only PW.6, but also
the person (PW.5), who is said to have informed him about the
death of the deceased, were declared hostile.
11.     Another way of examining the veracity of the evidence of
PW.1 or the contents of Ex.P.1 is to see whether the panchayats
mentioned therein were held at all.  To prove that fact, the
prosecution examined PWs.10 and 11, the elders.  However, both 
of them did not support the case of the prosecution.
12.     In the cross-examination of PW.1 specific questions were put
as to whether he submitted any complaint about the alleged
harassment by the accused, and the answer was given in the 
negative.  So is the case with PW.2, the mother of the deceased.
13.     The prosecution next sought to rely upon the extra-judicial
confession said to have been made by the accused before PW.15,  
in the presence of PW.13.  The only recovery, which is said to have
been affected on the basis of confession, is a towel.  By no stretch
of imagination, a towel, that too after so many days after the
incident, can be said to be an object, with which the crime can be
perpetrated.  Once that fails, nothing remains to connect the
accused with the offence.
14.     Effort was made by the prosecution to prove past conduct of
the accused by examining PW.4, the daughter of the accused and  
the deceased.  This witness was aged about 13 years at the time of
examination.  The trial Court did not take any precautionary
measures that are required in law.  Even where such precautions
are taken, the evidence of a juvenile witness is required to be
assessed carefully.  Once the witness was not put on notice that
she is deposing in a Court and her statement would lead to various
legal consequences, the same cannot be acted upon.  Further, she 
is not an eye-witness and what all she stated is that there used to
be quarrels between her parents.  The mere existence of disputes
in the family cannot lead to an inference that the accused has
committed the murder of the deceased.  Further when a grown-up 
son of the deceased and the accused was very much there, it is
just not understandable as to how the prosecution has chosen to
examine PW-4.  We find it difficult to sustain the conviction
ordered by the trial Court against the accused.  Therefore, we
allow the appeal.
15.     In the result, the Criminal Appeal is allowed.  The
conviction and sentence ordered in S.C.No.490 of 2008 on the
file of Sessions Judge, Karimnagar, dated 30-11-2009, against
the appellant-accused are set aside.  The appellant-accused
shall be set at liberty forthwith, unless his detention is needed
in any other case.  The fine amount, if any, paid by the
appellant-accused shall be refunded to him.  The material
objects, if any, shall be destroyed after the appeal time is
over.
____________________   
L.Narasimha Reddy,J. 
_______________   
M.S.K. Jaiswal,J.
