
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE L. NARASIMHA REDDY and THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE M.S.K.JAISWAL                  

Crl.Appeal No. 182  of  2010

25-03-2014 

Kandikattu Rathnam @ Venkata Rathnam Appellant-Accused No.1       

State of A.P., rep. by its P.P.,High Court of A.P., Hyderabad ...Respondent

Counsel for the Appellant:  Sri O. Kailashnath Reddy.

Counsel for respondent  : Public Prosecutor

<GIST: 

>HEAD NOTE:    


? Cases Referred                                :       . 


HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE L.NARASIMHA REDDY         
AND  
HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE M.S.K.JAISWAL       

Criminal Appeal No. 182 of  2010

Dated: 25. 03.2014



JUDGMENT: (Per Honble Sri Justice L. Narasimha Reddy)   
        This is an unfortunate case, where an innocent person was
made to suffer imprisonment for years together on account of gross
negligence on the part of the Additional District & Sessions Judge,
Nellore.
2.      The appellant is Accused No.1 in S.C.No.437 of 2003 on the
file of Additional District & Sessions Judge, Nellore.  Himself and
his mother (Accused No.2) were tried for the offence punishable
under Sec.302, read with Sec.34 IPC for allegedly causing the
death of wife of A-1, by name Kavitha.  Through its judgment
dt.25.01.2010, the trial Court acquitted A-2, but convicted A-1 for
the offence punishable under Sec.302 I.P.C., and sentenced him to
imprisonment for life and imposed fine of Rs.1,000/-, in default to
suffer rigorous imprisonment for six months.
3.      The wife of A-1 (Kavitha) suffered serious burn injuries and
was admitted in Government Hospital, Nellore at about 3.30 p.m.
on 18.05.2002.  There is a police outpost in the Hospital and the
on-duty Head Constable, PW-12 recorded the statement of the 
injured-Kavitha at about 4.00 p.m. He forwarded the same to the
jurisdictional Police Station,  based on which, the Station House 
Officer, Butchireddypalem Police Station, Nellore registered Crime
No.74 of 2002, and made a requisition to the jurisdictional
Magistrate  PW.15.  At about 5.00 p.m., the statement of the
injured - Kavitha was recorded by PW.15.  Another statement was 
recorded from her by a Police Official on 19.05.2002. While
undergoing treatment, the injured died on 26.05.2002.   The
Inspector of Police took up further investigation, and filed charge
sheet mentioning that the deceased has stated, as in Ex.P.12,
dying declaration, that the burn injuries were caused to her by her
husband and mother-in-law, A-1 and A-2.         
4.      The trial Court framed necessary charges referable to the
relevant provisions of law.  Since the accused pleaded not guilty,
trial was conducted, wherein PWs.1 to 16 were examined, Exs.P.1  
to P.14 were filed, and M.O.No.1 was taken on record.  The nature
of disposal given by the trial Court, has already been indicated, at
the threshold.
5.      Sri O. Kailashnath Reddy, learned counsel for the appellant
submits that serious miscarriage of justice has taken place in this
case on account of the fact that the dying declaration recorded by
Magistrate - PW.15 was not made as part of the record.  He
contends that a certified copy thereof was taken by the accused
well in advance and though it was placed before the trial Court, no
effort was taken to make it part of record.  He contends that both
in Ex.P.9, statement recorded by the Head Constable and in the
dying declaration recorded by PW.15, the deceased categorically
stated that she suffered burn injuries when she was lightening the
kerosene stove and no allegation whatever was made against the
accused, but, the trial Court treated the so called statement
recorded under sec.161 Cr.P.C., as the sole basis for convicting
A-1.  He further submits that Ex.P.12 was not supported by any
witness and therefore, A-1 deserves to be acquitted.
6.      The learned Additional Public Prosecutor, on the other hand,
submits that on finding that the dying declaration recorded by the
Judicial First Class Magistrate (PW-15) was missing, several steps
were taken at various stages, and ultimately, it could not be
traced.  She contends that though in Ex.P.9, the deceased is said
to have mentioned that she suffered burn injuries when she was
lightening the stove, on the next day itself, a different version
came out in the form of Ex.P.12.  According to the learned Public
Prosecutor, even a statement recorded under Sec.161 Cr.P.C., 
would acquire the characteristics of a dying declaration, once the
person from whom it is recorded, is no more.
7.      The incident leading to the burn injuries to the deceased is
said to have taken place at around 3.30 p.m. on 18.05.2002.  Since
the accused and the deceased are residents of sub-urban area of
Nellore town, the deceased was admitted in the hospital, without
loss of any time.  Admittedly, within half-an-hour, PW.12 Head
Constable recorded the statementEx.P.9 from the deceased.  It
reads as under:
        I am resident of Jonnawada village.  Five years back, my
marriage was performed. I got two children - 1.Girl  2.Boy.  My
native place is Gudur, Nellore District.  Since my marriage, we the
wife and husband do not have any disputes and leading amicably.
Today i.e. 18.5.02 in the afternoon at 2 pm, in order to prepare
coffee, I lit gas-stove.  Meanwhile, kerosene fell on my sary from
the stove, touched with fire and sustained burn injuries on my face
and all my front portion of my body.  Then my husband brought me
in a jeep to the Govt. Hospital, Nellore and admitted me in it.
Then Police came and on enquiry, I stated the happened things,
reduced into writing and read over to me.  Reduced into writing as
it is what I stated.  Found correct.

8.      This statement, which was forwarded to the police station,
constituted basis for registration of Crime No.74 of 2002.  Once the
F.I.R., was registered, the Station House Officer gave a requisition
to the jurisdictional Magistrate  PW.15.  In the chief-examination
itself, PW.15 stated that she went to the Government Hospital,
Nellore on 19.05.2002 and recorded the statement of the injured -
Kavitha.  However, she expressed her inability to depose further
without going through the dying declaration recorded by her.
Obviously, the dying declaration recorded by PW-15 was not
available on record.  We have perused the docket sheet of the trial
Court.  Elaborative steps were taken to trace out the dying
declaration recorded by PW.15.  For one reason or the other it did
not form part of the record.
9.      The learned counsel for the appellant has placed before us,
the certified copy of the dying declaration recorded by PW.15,
which was furnished in June, 2009.  It is in vernacular language.  A
perusal of the same discloses that the deceased reiterated,
whatever she has stated in her statement, Ex.P.9.  In a way, the
statement made before PW.15 was brief in its content.  No further
efforts appear to have been made to make the statement recorded
by PW.15, as part of record.  The record discloses that it is A-1
that took the deceased to the hospital and got her treated,
throughout.
10.     PW-1 is the father of the deceased, and PW-2 is her step-
mother.  These witnesses, however, made certain allegations
against the accused to the effect that the accused used to harass
the deceased, to bring additional dowry.  Left to himself, PW.1 did
not submit any complaint.  The statement of the deceased was 
recorded by the police in the Government Hospital.  When PW.1 
did not submit any complaint, not only soon after the occurrence
but also for the entire period during which the deceased-Kavitha,
his daughter, was undergoing treatment, not much importance can 
be given to his evidence.
      PW.2 was cross-examined extensively and it was suggested to
her that her first husband  Maddela Thirupalu of Lingalapadu
village committed suicide and thereafter she married PW.1.  It was
also alleged that she did not properly look after the children of
PW.1 through his first wife.
      PW.3 is sisters husband of the deceased.  He did not support
the case of the prosecution.  PW.4 is said to be a person
acquainted with the accused and the deceased.  This witness also
did not support the case of the prosecution and accordingly he was
declared as hostile.
      PW.5 is a neighbour of the accused and the deceased.  She
stated that on the date of incident she heard the cries of the
deceased and when she went there, the deceased was found in  
flames.  She further stated that A-1 poured kerosene and set her
ablaze.  In the cross-examination, she admitted that she has not
seen the accused killing the deceased but she only heard the cries
of the deceased.  Several contradictions and omissions vis--vis her
statement recorded under Sec.161 Cr.P.C. were elicited.
       PWs.6 and 7, who are said to be acquainted with the family
of the accused and the deceased, did not support the case of the
prosecution and they were declared hostile. PWs.8 and 9 are the
panch-witnesses for the inquest.  They too did not support the case
of the prosecution.
11.     The dying declarations of the deceased have relatively
higher evidentiary value, compared to other evidence.  If there
exists a semblance of corroboration from other evidence, they can
constitute the basis for convicting an accused.  This is, however,
subject to a rider that there must not be any evidence, which
makes the contents of dying declaration, highly improbable.
12.     This is a rare case in which, in the first statement recorded
within half-an-hour after admission into Government Hospital, the
deceased stated that the incident occurred on account of mishap
in the course of lighting the kerosene stove to prepare coffee. This
was followed by recording of a dying declaration by PW.15 
Judicial Magistrate of First Class, within another half-an-hour.
Though the statement recorded by the Magistrate was not given
any mark of exhibit, a certified copy thereof is filed before us.  It
completely accords with the version contained in Ex.P.9.  If these
two documents are taken into account, it clearly emerges that the
deceased herself did not complain of any harassment or attempt by
the accused to cause harm to her.
13.     The trial Court, unfortunately, has ignored these two
documents and has chosen to place reliance upon Ex.P.12,  
statement recorded by the police under sec. 161 Cr.P.C.  It is no
doubt true that in a given case, a statement recorded under
Sec.161 Cr.P.C., can acquire the characteristics of a dying
declaration.  That, however, would be possible if only a statement
of that nature does not conflict with the other formal dying
declarations.  In the event of any conflict, the one which is
recorded after following the prescribed procedure, needs to be
given importance.
14.     The evidence of PWs.1 and 2, making allegations against the
accused could have been taken into account, if only they
submitted a complaint either immediately after the occurrence or
during the course of treatment of the injured.  It has already been
mentioned that the deceased was undergoing treatment for more 
than a weak after the incident, and she did not complain anything
about the accused.  Added to that, it is A-1, who brought the
deceased to the Hospital and was there with her throughout.
PWs.1 and 2 did not dispute this fact, much less did they say that
they got the deceased treated.  Therefore, we hold that the
conviction and sentence ordered by the trial Court against A-1
cannot be sustained in law.
15.     In the result, the Criminal Appeal is allowed. The conviction
and sentence ordered in S.C.No.437 of 2003 on the file of the
Family Court-cum-Additional District and Sessions Judge, Nellore,
dated 25-01-2010, against the appellant  accused No.1 are set
aside.  The appellant - accused No.1 shall be set at liberty
forthwith, unless his detention is needed in any other case.  The
fine amount, if any, paid by the appellant - accused No.1 shall be
refunded to him.  The material objects, if any, shall be destroyed
after the appeal time is over.
___________________   
L.Narasimha Reddy,J. 
_______________   
M.S.K. Jaiswal,J.
Date: 25.03.2014
