
HONOURABLE SRI JUSTICE R.SUBHASH REDDY AND HONOURABLE Dr. JUSTICE B.SIVA SANKARA RAO                       

C.C.C.A.No.338 OF 2004 and batch   

31-12-2014 

B.Chandrakala ...appellant- 1st defendant

A.Anuradha .Respondent- Plaintiff 
 B.Raghunandan .2nd respondent-   
                 2nd defendant
                                                        
Counsel for the Appellant: M/s Thakur Singh

Counsel for respondent No.1 :   Sri Sai Gangadhar Chamarty
 Counsel for the respondent No.2:Sri V.L.N.G.K.Murthy

<GIST :  ---

>HEAD NOTE :  ---  

? Cases referred: :
1.  AIR 1965 SC 289 
2.  AIR 1989 SC 879 
3.  2006(8)SCC-581 
4.  AIR 1964 SC- 510 
5.  [1977] 3 SCC 99
6.  2007(6)SCC-401 
7.  2001(5)ALT-130=(5)ALD402  
8.   2007(4)ALD-642
9.  2006(7)SCC-365 
10. AIR 1957 SC-434=1957 SCR 452    
11. AIR 1967 SC 569 
12. 1929 MLJ 826 
13. (1987)3 SCC 294 
14. (1996) 3 SCC 644 
15. 2009(6)SCC-99 
16. AIR 2003 SC 1989=2003(9) SCC 606   
17. AIR 1963 SC 1516=1964(1) SCR 980   
18. AIR-2001-SC-965 
19. (2003(5)-SCC-89 
20. 1975(1)SCC 212  
21. AIR-1976-SC-634 
22. AIR-1969-SC-1144  
23. AIR 1986 SC 1523  
24. (1993) 1 SCC 645) 
25. 2007(4)SCC-163  
26. AIR-2003-SC-2322  
27. AIR-2004-AP-174 
28. 2009(9)-SCC-52 
29. 2008(4) ALT, 567
30. 1957-SCR-930  
31. 1876-77 (2)AC-743 
32. S.A.No.566 of 2011 with CAS/1762/2011 with CAS/498/2014 in SA/566/2011    
33. 2012(5) Bom.C.R.210  
34. AIR 1978 SC 1239  
35. [1952] AC 109 at 132
36. AIR 1985 SC 716 
37. AIR 1971 AP 363 
38. AIR 1973 AP 58 
39.(1964) 66 Bom LR 351  
40. (1991) 4 SCC 647 
41. AIR 1990 AP 263 
42. 2002(6)ALD-415 
43.Laws(APH)-2014(9)-43  
44.AIR-2006 SC 3332= 2006(8)SCC-656    
45.2002(6)ALD-415  
46.2012(1)ALT-227 
47.2007(5)ALT-447 
48.2011(9) SCC-788=2012(1)ALT 29(SC)   
49.AIR-2011-SC-2077  
50.2007(1)CCC(SC)189   
51.AIR 1967 SC 1470  
52.AS No.497 of 1992, dt.20-06-2014 
53.AIR 2010 Karnataka 124  
54.2009(9)SCC-689  
55.2008(4) KCCR 2333  
56.2008(4) KCCR 2333  
57.2014(2)CTC-113  
58.AIR-1966-SC-1879  


HONOURABLE SRI JUSTICE R.SUBHASH REDDY            
AND  
HONOURABLE Dr. JUSTICE B.SIVA SANKARA RAO           

Cross-Objections (SR)No.3879 of 2005 
and 
Cross-Objections (SR)No.13681 of 2005  
in
C.C.C.A.No.338 OF 2004   
and 
C.C.C.A.No.338 OF 2004   

JUDGMENT (per Honble Dr.Justice B.Siva Sankara Rao)   
           The appeal is filed by the 1st defendant of the suit, challenging
the judgment and decree in O.S.No.45 of 2001 on the file of the XI
Additional chief Judge(Fast Track Court) City Civil Court, Hyderabad,
dated 20.09.2004 showing the plaintiff as 1st respondent and the 2nd
defendant as 2nd respondent to the appeal. The plaintiff-1st respondent
maintained cross-objections vide Cross-Objections(SR). No.3879 of 2005
and the 2nd defendant-2nd respondent also maintained separate cross-
objections vide Cross-Objections(SR) No.13681 of 2005.

        2. The plaintiff filed the suit for partition and separate possession
of 1/3rd share in the plaint schedule property comprising of 3 items viz.,
houses bearing municipal No.1-6-1012; item No.2 house bearing 
municipal Nos.1-6-1021, 1027 to 1029; and item No.3 houses bearing 
Nos. 1-6-936, 954 and 956 which are all located at Zamisthanpur,
Hyderabad. The appeal lis and cross objections are impugning the
preliminary decree and judgement, granting 1/6th share in favour of the
Plaintiff, with costs against 2nd defendant and with no profits.  The
parties hereinafter are being referred as they are arrayed before the
trial Court for sake of convenience.
             3. Few of the relevant facts not in dispute are that, the
plaintiff-A.Anuradha, W/o. Nageshwar and the 2nd defendant-
B.Raghunandan are the issues of the 1st defendant-Chandrakala and her 
late husband Rama Rao.  Father of Rama Rao was late Ramalingaiah,   
s/o. late Ramaiah.  The father of the plaintiff and 2nd defendant by
name Rama Rao died in September,1997, but for the controversy as to 
he died intestate or testate.   The marriage of the plaintiff was
performed on 23.04.1978. 

      4. The plaintiff`s claim for partition and separate possession of
1/3rd share in all the 3 items of the plaint schedule property is on the
grounds that items Nos.1 and 2 supra are that of late Ramaiah-(great
grandfather of the plaintiff and 2nd defendant and grandfather of Rama
Rao) and item No.3 was purchased with the nucleus by late Rama Rao. It 
is also her claim otherwise that the item-1 of the plaint schedule
property in her possession was given to her at the time of her marriage
by her father, orally towards Pasupukumkuma. 

      5.(a). The defendants 1 and 2 in their separate written
statements contested that the suit is not maintainable even otherwise
by virtue of the bar under Section 23 of the Hindu Succession Act
(hereinafter being called HS Act). It is the further contest of the
defendants that the item No.3 of the plaint schedule property is not the
ancestral or coparcenary property but for self-acquired property of late
Rama Rao, vide sale deed dated 29.11.1966 and they also denied giving
of the item-1 of the plaint schedule property to plaintiff towards
Pasupukumkuma, in saying her possession of said Item-1 is as tenant. 

      5.(b). The contest of the 2nd defendant is that item Nos.1 and 2 of
the plaint schedule properties are not even the properties of late
Ramaiah but of the son of late Ramaiah by name Ramalingaiah, who  
bequeathed item No.2 of the plaint schedule in favour of his son Rama
Rao, under unregistered will dated 10.03.1953 (Ex.B.5 and its English
translation Ex.B.6) and Rama Rao, in turn, bequeathed the said item
No.2 as well as half share in items 1 and 3 of the plaint schedule to the
2nd defendant and the remaining half share in items 1 and 3 also
bequeathed to the 1st defendant under unregistered will dated
04.07.1997(Ex.B.7).

      5.(c). It is however the contest of 1st defendant that her late
husband Rama Rao in his lifetime had given all the three items of the
plaint schedule to her and she is thereby the absolute owner and neither
plaintiff nor 2nd defendant got any rights over the same.

      6.(a). Before the trial Court from the respective pleadings, the
plaintiff was examined as P.W.1 being the sole witness and exhibited
Exs.A.1 to A.9 which are the copies of police report, certificate of
market value of suit property, extracts of assessment register, invitation
letter for Upanayanam and marriage and property valuation certificates
issued by Khasim Peeran-Registered valuer for the items.  On behalf of
the defendants, 1st defendant as D.W.1 and 2nd defendant as D.W.2 came   
to the witness box and they cause examined one P.Kotaiah-the so called 
first attestor of Ex.B.7 will and placed reliance upon Exs.B.1 to B.7
certified copies of rental deed, sketch plan of H.No.1-6-1012, certified
copy of judgments in R.C.No.597 of 1993 and R.A.No.524 of 1995, 
unregistered will, dated 10.03.1953, English translation of it and also the
unregistered will, dated 04.07.1997.
      6.(b). From said evidence with reference to the pleadings supra,
the trial Court in answering the issues viz.,
i) Whether item No.3 of plaint schedule is separate
property of Rama  Rao? 

 ii) Whether the plaintiff is entitled for partition of the
plaint schedule properties and possession of her 1/3rd
share as prayed for?

iii) Whether the plaintiff is entitled to future profits with
respect to her share in the plaint schedule properties from
the date of suit till delivery of possession as prayed for? &

iv) To What relief?-

held that the 1st defendant in her cross-examination by plaintiff at page
No.2 admitted that Rama Rao-(her husband) was neither employee nor  
have any other avocation but for maintaining the family with the help of
rents realizing from the plaint schedule items 1 and 2 and with the help
of the incomes therefrom acquired the plaint schedule item No.3.  The
Exs.A.3 to A.5 show that all the three items of the plaint schedule house
properties are assessed in the name of Ramaiah-(great grandfather of
plaintiff and 2nd defendant) and even to say item No.3 was purchased by
Rama Rao, the sale deed is not filed by the defendants and their claim is
inconsistent for 2nd defendant-D.W.2 also deposed in his cross-
examination that item No.3 of the plaint schedule was also acquired by
Rama Rao from his grandfather-Ramaiah.  Thus, it was held that all the
three items are not the self-acquired properties of Rama Rao but for
ancestral properties.  The trial Court also held that so far as the wills set
up by the defendants under Exs.B.5 and B.7, the 2nd defendant-D.W.2 in 
his cross-examination by 1st defendant deposed that his father Rama Rao
in his lifetime has given all the plaint schedule item Nos.1 to 3 to the 1st
defendant and the 1st defendant became owner of the properties after
death of Rama Rao. Said version is opposed to the very plea of the
exclusive right set up by the defendants under the so called bequeaths in
the will-Ex.B.7 said to have been executed by Rama Rao for items 1 and
2 equally in favour of the defendants and for item No.3 exclusively in
favour of the 2nd defendant.  Further, due execution and also existence
of those wills from respective dates is not even proved as required by
law and any of those wills not referred in Ex.B.1 rental deed, dated
13.10.1992 or in Exs.B.3 and B.4 certified copy of judgments in
R.C.No.597 of 93, dt.14.08.1995 and R.A.No.524 of 95, dt.08.12.1999.
Apart from it, Ex.B.5 unregistered will deed, dated 10.03.1953 is on
plain paper with the thumb marks of executants in ink which does not
bring out even one line (ridges) of the thumb and the will is not proved
as required under Section 68 and 69 of the Indian Evidence Act and
Section 63 of the Indian Succession Act and even coming to Ex.B.7 will
deed, dated 04.07.1997 it was on Rs.100/-stamp paper and three ledger
sheets which disclose at page 3 at last line of the matter was typed on
already signed paper and D.W.3`s evidence is clear that it is a
procreative and falsely set up one.  D.W.2 and D.W.3 evidence extracted
in the judgment of the trial Court at para-19 in regard to the Exs.B.5 and
B.7 wills also was with observation of untrustworthy and belying of said
wills by holding in para-20 of the judgment as created and brought into
existence for the defence sake.

[
      7. It is therefrom concluded by the trial Court that as the plaint
schedule properties are the coparcenary properties of Rama Rao and 2nd
defendant, each got undivided half and the bar under Section 23 of the
Hindu Succession Act for claiming partition of dwelling houses by
daughter till partition sought by son has no application as the schedule
properties are not all exclusive dwelling houses of the joint family but
with mulgies and also leased out.  The trial Court ultimately decreed the
plaintiffs suit, though sought for 1/3rd, only for 1/6th out of the plaint
schedule items 1 to 3 with equal share to the 1st defendant-wife of Rama
Rao and to the 2nd defendant(son of Rama Rao) out of the half share of
Rama Rao in the coparcenary and that remaining share is of the 2nd
defendant (for 2/3rd to the 2nd defendant) by disbelieving of giving of
any of the properties by Rama Rao to the plaintiff or 1st defendant. The
trial court however did not choose to grant any profits past or future in
favour of the plaintiff saying she is in possession of item No.1 of the
plaint schedule and she is not paying any rents for the claim even by the
defendants of her as tenant, but for awarded costs of the suit that too
only against the 2nd defendant-brother of plaintiff without awarding any
costs against the 1st defendant-mother of plaintiff and 2nd defendant.

         8. It is impugning said decree and judgement of the trial court
supra, the appeal and two sets of cross objections are filed, Viz.,

      8(a). The 1st defendant-mother of plaintiff and 2nd defendant filed
the main appeal contending that the trial Court went wrong in decreeing
the suit even for 1/6th share in favour of plaintiff out of the plaint
schedule items 1 to 3 instead of holding that Rama Rao during his
lifetime handed over all the plaint schedule items 1 to 3 to the 1st
defendant and she became owner with absolute rights and neither
plaintiff nor 2nd defendant entitled to any share and should have seen
that the plaintiff is only a tenant of item No.1 of the plaint schedule and
in the order in R.C.No.523 of 2002, there was a finding to that effect,
that the trial Court having held Exs.B.5 and B.7 wills are created that
was by 2nd defendant, should have dismissed the suit of the plaintiff for
her disentitlement to the very claim for partition by virtue of bar under
Section 23 of the HS Act.

        8(b). The Cross-Objections (SR)No.3879 of 2005 supra filed by the
plaintiff are by impugning the granting of only 1/6th share and for not
granting 1/3rd share by treating the plaintiff as a coparcener at par with
her brother-(2nd defendant) as per Section 29-A of the Hindu Succession
A.P. Amendment Act,13 of 1986 (hereinafter called AP HS Amended   
Act) and for not granting of profits. It is the submission by learned
counsel for the plaintiff-cross-objector supra that the Hindu Succession
Amended Act,39 of 2005 (hereinafter called HS Amended Act,2005) 
came into force pending the appeal by virtue of which the plaintiff is
also a coparcener with the 2nd defendant and the plaintiff is thus
entitled to the reliefs as prayed for in the suit and there is no bar for the
suit otherwise from Section 23 of the HS Act, since deleted by the HS
Amended Act,2005.  

        8(c). The Cross-Objections(SR) No.13681 of 2005 of the 2nd
defendant is mainly impugning the awarding of costs against him, saying
the trial Court should not have awarded costs much less against him.

      9. Heard the learned counsel for the appellant as well as the
respective Cross-Objectors at length and perused the material on record.

      10. Now the common points that arise for consideration in
deciding the appeal as well as both the Cross-Objections are:-

i). Whether the plaint schedule items 1 and 2 are all
coparcenary properties of Rama Rao and 2nd defendant-(son 
of Rama Rao) and item No.3 is also form part of the
coparcenary and not the self-acquired property of Rama
Rao; if so, whether plaintiff is also a coparcener with equal
rights and if not, to what share she is entitled therein?

ii). Whether the plaint schedule Item-1 was given to the
plaintiff orally as Pasupukumkuma at the time of her
marriage and with what proof and if so with what
consequences?  

iii). Whether the 1st defendant is entitled to plaint schedule
properties absolutely and if so, whether the trial Courts
decree and judgment for partition granting 1/6th share to
the plaintiff is unsustainable?

iv). Whether the very suit claim is barred by Section 23 of
the Hindu Succession Act,1956?  

v). Whether awarding of costs against the 2nd defendant is
unsustainable? 

vi). To what extent this court while sitting in appeal
against the trial Court`s impugned judgement and decree
can interfere and with what observations and conclusions?

vii). To what relief?

Point Nos.i-vi:
      11.  As point Nos. i-vi are interrelated and to avoid repetition of
facts, all the six points are taken up together to answer.  So far as
Exs.B.5 and B.7 wills concerned, it was held by the trial Court as not
proved from the evidence on record.  It is not proved for the reasons
that, it is not only the existence and acting upon of the Exs.B.5 and B.7
wills, but also the proof as required by Sections 68 to 71 r/w. Sections
47, 67 and 100 of the Indian Evidence Act, Section 63 of the Indian
Succession Act and Section 3 of the Transfer of Property Act of due
execution and attestation and in sound and disposing state of mind with
free will and volition and as a last will and testament with absolute right
over the entire plaint schedule properties to bequeath for not even
exclusive properties of Rama Rao to make any bequeaths for the same 
and not even that of his father for his making any bequeaths,
particularly Items 1 & 2 of the plaint schedule are the ancestral
properties and Item 3 of the plaint schedule also part of the coparcenary
for acquired with the ancestral properties undisputedly. There is also a
presumption for the properties acquired with no separate funds would
constitute the joint family property if it is shown that the joint family
has sufficient nucleus-vide K.V.Narayanaswami Iyer Vs. K.V.Rama 
Krishna Iyer  and there is a presumption of jointness in a family
governed by' Hindu Mitakshara Law and that the initial burden lies on the
party claiming disruption if any in the joint Status-vide Shankararao
DaijiSaheb Shinde Vs. Vithalrao Ganpathro Shinde . When it is the
coparcenary property and the 2nd defendant being the son of Rama Rao 
got right by birth for undivided half share therein, there is no right to
make bequeath for the entire property as if his own by said Rama Rao
even from the combined reading of Sections-6,8 & 30 of the HS Act, that
though a coparcenary property in the hands of sole surviving coparcener
is exclusive and disposable property, the moment a son is born the
property automatically reconverts as coparcenary-vide Sheela Devi Vs.
Lal Chand .  There is a propounders influence also from the very
evidence of D.W.2-2nd defendant of he was present and participated, if
at all, otherwise proved the so called execution.  A perusal of the
evidence of D.Ws.2 and 3 regarding execution and existence of the will
is itself in cloud and their evidence is highly incredible to place any
reliance.  There is nothing even to show the so called will Ex.B.7 dated
04.07.1997 was ever seen the light of the day and ever acted upon much
less any mutation pursuant to the bequeaths thereunder in the name of
defendants 1 and 2 respectively and equally for alleged will Ex.B5.  Even
to claim by the 2nd defendant of the item No.3 is bequeathed by Rama
Rao exclusively for him, it is the admission in the evidence on record
from that of D.Ws.1 and 2 that, Rama Rao has no avocation and no 
independent means but for maintaining the family from the rental
income of items 1 and 2 of the plaint schedule properties with mulgies
therein and he acquired item No.3 therefrom.  In fact, there is further
version from their evidence that item No.3 is also not acquired by Rama
Rao but it is the ancestral property of Rama Raos grandfather-Ramaiah,
along with items 1 and 2 and the same is also established from the
mutation in the name of said Ramaiah.  When such is the case, the
making of any bequeath for entire item No.3 of plaint schedule by Rama
Rao to the 2nd defendant (son) does not arise, which itself shows there
was no any voluntary execution of any will as a last testament and in
sound and disposing state of mind by making any bequeath by Rama Rao   
that too including for item Nos.1 and 2 by giving half share out of it to
2nd defendant and half share remaining to the 1st defendant by totally
ignoring without even giving of any little extent at least towards
Pasupukumkuma to the plaintiff for no any property after marriage of
plaintiff given to her by her father towards Pasupukumkuma as per the
defendants in their saying, the plaintiff`s claim of Item 1 given to her as
Pasupukumkuma is not correct and the alleged will no way even reflects
the same.  All these facts and circumstances cumulatively show as
rightly concluded by the trial Court though not in specific words with
specific discussion, of Exs.B.5 and B.7 are introduced by creation by the
2nd defendant to have benefit therefrom if possible.  Once the Ex.B.5
and B.7 not proved and once all the plaint schedule items 1 to 3 are
proved as ancestral properties in the hands of Rama Rao and Rama Rao  
died intestate in September,1997 leaving behind him the plaintiff and
defendants being daughter, wife and son of him and leaving his interest
in the plaint schedule coparcenary properties and as the 2nd defendant
also did not dispute the trial court`s finding on Ex.B.5 and B.7 wills as
not proved and all the plaint schedule items 1 to 3 are proved as
coparcenary properties, there is nothing more to discuss in this regard in
the appeal lis.
      11-A. When such is the case, the claim of 1st defendant that she is
absolute owner of all the plaint schedule properties allegedly given
absolutely to her by her late husband Rama Rao in his lifetime orally is
even untenable for having no absolute rights over the plaint schedule
coparcenary properties for the 2nd defendant also was one of the
coparceners with his father Rama Rao with equal rights by birth; though
the father manager can give a reasonable extent of the joint family
property to the daughter at the time of marriage or even later to it at
any time till actual partition-as per para-18 of the decision in- Guramma
Bhratar Chanbasappa Deshmukh Nagamma Bhratar Ghanbasappa        
Deshmukh Vs. Mallappa Chanbasappa Guramma Bhratar Chanbasappa        
same cannot extend to 1st defendant-wife of Rama Rao, but for if at all
to plaintiff-daughter of Rama Rao.  Thus at best Rama Rao`s undivided
half share could be conveyed by him if at all to the 1st defendant, that
too for any transfer of immovable property worth Rs.100/-and above,
must be in writing and by regd. document and otherwise void, equally
gift of undivided interest is also void.  When it is not even in recognition
of any pre-existing right to 1st defendant-for that is not even her case-
vide decision- V.Tulsamma Vs. Shesha Reddy , and not by assignment   
and not even by any complete family settlement of any disputes in
existence or in anticipation or by partition-cum settlement to validate
oral transaction-vide decision- M.Venkataramana Hebbar Vs.
M.Rajagopal Hebbar , it could when be only by gift; and a gift of
immovable property of any value when requires by document in writing
with stamp duty and compulsory registration, including from Sections
123 and 122 of the Transfer of Property Act read with sections 17 and 49
of the Registration Act, any such oral gift/settlement is invalid and no
rights created thereunder including from the Full Bench decision of our
Honble High Court in Gandevalla Jayaram Reddy Vs. Mokkala  
Padmavathamma  that was also followed in later decisions of this Court
including in Nangineni Radhakrishna Murthy Vs. Kanneganti 
Nagendramma .  No doubt, contra to the Full Bench decision of this
Court in Gandevalla Jayaram Reddy (supra), though not referring to it-
much less by expressly overruling, the Apex Court in the later expression
reported in Government of A.P. Vs. M. Krishnaveni , laid down, in
consonance with the earlier expressions of the Apex Court in Kamaladevi
Vs. Bachulal Quipto , Guramma Bhratar Chanbasappa Deshmukh     
Nagamma Bhratar Ghanbasappa Deshmukh(supra), Perumalakkal v.      
Balakrishuan  and of the Full Bench judgment of the Madras High
Court of the year,1929 - that property gifted by father to his daughter
at the time of or after her marriage per se to an old aged custom
prevailing in the area of Andhra Pradesh and as per the said family
arrangement at the marriage of the daughters R and K, the object is as a
family arrangement to protect the family from long drawn litigation or
perpetual strifes, which mars the unity, solidarity of the family and
create hatred and bad blood between the members of the family; other
way, it promotes legal justice through wider distribution of wealth,
therefore, such family arrangements have to be construed widely.  In so
saying it was held further that, for family arrangement, if it is not
confined only between persons having legal right to the property, for
which a document, which is in the nature of memorandum of such oral
family partition valid and when filed before the court for its
information, which is not compulsorily registerable and therefore can be
used in evidence of the family arrangement as binding and final between
the parties to create rights there under, saying there under absolute
rights are conferred on the female under Section 14(1) of Hindu
Succession Act, which speaks that for any property possessed by a 
female Hindu whether acquired before or after commencement of the 
HS Act,1956 shall be held by her as full owner thereof in holding that by
virtue of section 14(1) of the Act.  Thus, a daughter under the oral
Pasupukumkuma gift as family arrangement got absolute rights from the
possession and enjoyment as per the recognized custom.  However,  
coming to the facts on hand, it is not even the claim of 1st defendant
that it was a transfer for consideration by her husband Rama Rao of his
undivided coparcenary interest under Section 30 of HS Act in her favour.
Otherwise, it could be by settlement/gift.  Even a gift/settlement of
coparcenary undivided interest is void under the south Indian Mitakshara
law; no doubt, if it is to one of other undivided coparceners and not with
consent of others, then it can be treated as a relinquishment for the
benefit of all other undivided coparceners-as held by the Apex Court in
Thamma Venkata Subbamma(dead) by Lr. Vs. Thamma Rattamma and         
others .  The 1st defendant is not at all a coparcener and the plaintiff
also even not a coparcener by virtue of AP HS Amended Act.  There is no
any proof for the claim of 1st defendant that all the plaint schedule
properties given absolutely to her by her late husband Rama Rao in his
lifetime orally.  Likewise, there is no any proof for the claim of plaintiff
that Item-1 of the plaint schedule property was given absolutely to her
by her late father Rama Rao in his lifetime orally towards
Pasupukumkuma.   There is no even mutation of properties in municipal
records in the name of 1st defendant or plaintiff to say any little basis
for their respective claims.  Thus, the so-called oral transfer of all plaint
schedule properties set up by the 1st defendant is invalid and
unenforceable. Equally, the so-called oral transfer or assignment as
Pasupukumkuma of item-1 of the plaint schedule properties set up by
the plaintiff is with no proof and thereby untenable.  Thus, there is
nothing to interfere with the finding of the trial court belying said claim
of the 1st defendant for the item Nos.1 to 3 and of the plaintiff for the
Item-1 of the plaint schedule.

      11-B. Now coming to decide any bar for the plaintiff`s suit claim
to maintain from Section 23 of the HS Act,1956 even after the same is
deleted from the statute book by the HS Amended Act,2005 concerned,  
Section 23 of the HS Act,1956 no doubt disentitles a female heir to
ask for actual partition in respect of a dwelling house wholly occupied
by a joint family until the male heirs choose to divide their respective
shares therein.  It is to mean bar is not for filing suit for partition and
obtaining of preliminary decree, but for obtaining final partition by
actual division and separation as per the settled law.  No doubt in
Narashimaha Murthy Vs. Susheelabai(Smt) - the Apex Court held that 
said bar applies even there is sole male member.  However, the bar has
no application for all buildings but for the one in use for dwelling by the
joint family that too, bar is for actual partition and not for even to file
suit and get preliminary decree for partition.

     12.  In fact, the bar has no longer to survive to the claim of
partition by a coparcener and even a daughter coparcener under the AP
HS Amended Act once the same applies, from its wording in Section 29A  
as the partiable property includes even a dwelling house.  The suit
was filed in December,2000 and the preliminary decree was passed in
September,2004 (which is prior to the Hindu Succession Amended Act,39  
of 2005 came into force) and the AP HS Amended Act,13 of 1986 has no  
application even the plaint schedule items Nos.1 to 3 are coparcenary
properties as marriage of the plaintiff was performed before 5th
September,1985.  In fact the plaint schedule house properties all not in
the occupation of the joint family for dwelling as mostly let out with
mulgies and the bar is not for filing suit for partition and obtaining of
preliminary decree, but for obtaining final partition by actual division
and separation as per the settled law.  The trial court was thus right in
holding that the 2nd defendant is entitled to 2/3rd share and plaintiff and
1st defendant respectively entitled to each 1/6th share in passing the
partition preliminary decree by granting 1/6th share each to the plaintiff
and 1st defendant respectively and 2/3rd share to the 2nd defendant in
holding that Rama Rao died intestate.   Furthermore, Section 23 of the
HS Act is deleted by the HS Amended Act,2005 and as such after the HS  
Amended Act,2005 came into force pending the appeal, there is no such 
bar to survive for female to seek partition of dwelling house as held by
the Apex Court in G.Sekhar Vs. Geetha . 

    13. Now coming to the claim of plaintiff that she is though not
coparcener to claim right by birth at par with her brother and father
being a daughter as if a son, by virtue of the HS AP Amended Act for
her marriage performed in the year,1978 April, prior to the HS AP
Amended Act,13 of 1986 which came into force w.e.f.5-9-1985; from
the HS Amended Act,2005 came into force on 9th September,2005 by    
which (Section 6 of the principal Act was substituted by new section,
providing for devolution of interest in coparcenary property to a
daughter of a coparcener when there was no any registered partition of
the properties before December, 2004), she became a coparcener with 
her brother to claim equal rights with him as right by birth to redefine
and refix the shares and to grant the 1/3rd share in the plaint schedule
properties as claimed in the suit and the court has to take into
consideration the subsequent events, facts and change of law to mould
the reliefs.  To decide the same, it is necessary to discuss the scope of
law with reference to the HS AP Amended Act,1986 and the HS  
Amended Act,2005.  

     14. Before considering the same, it is needful to mention on the
scope of appreciation of evidence in special reference to appeals and in
moulding or grant of reliefs; it was held by the Apex Court in Banarsi  Vs
Ramphal  and Pannalal  Vs  State of Bombay (5 judges bench) and  
also as per the subsequent expressions placing reliance on the above in
Santhosh Hazari Vs Purushottam Tiwari , Madan Lal Vs Yoga Bai ,  
Harihar Prasad Singh Vs Balmiki Prasad Singh , Koksingh Vs  
Deokabai  and Gaisi Ram Vs Ramji Lal  that, 1stappellate Court must
re-appreciate (appreciate afresh) entire evidence like in a suit in giving
its findings supported by reasons as to decide the lis and therefrom to
find how far the decision of the trial court on any of its findings and
conclusions are correct or incorrect, including for confirmation or
reversal of said findings of the trial Court; not only to pass an order or
decree that the trial court ought to have passed, but also while sitting in
appeal against, irrespective of the appeal filed is challenging even part
of the order or decree of the trial court, to grant any further decree or
order within the scope of relief, though not beyond, as the case may
require within the facts and circumstances; and any finding is also left
open to attack by the respondents irrespective of no cross-objections,
though no additional relief the respondents to the appeal can claim
without cross-objections.  For that the appellate Court is conferred with
powers of wide amplitude under Order XLI Rules 22,24 and 33 CPC so as 
to do complete justice between the parties and to prevent to the extent
possible scope for further litigation and also to give finality to the lis and
the power includes the subsequent events to take note of in so moulding
the reliefs and such power is unfettered to make whatever order it
thinks fit even between co-respondents, for ordinarily cross-objections
between co-respondents they do not prefer, but for the three limitations
on such power to say no order against a party not before the Court to be
passed, parties if given up a claim not to revive on its own and not to
grant more relief than what trial court granted to the party with no
cross objections to that extent, for that was made final.


      15. Now coming to consider the scope of the Hindu law on
survivorship and succession with codification  Prior to the HS Act,1956
Shastric (Hindu Canonical) and customary laws that varied from region
to region governed the Hindus. Consequently, in matters of succession
also, there were different schools, like Dayabhaga in Bengal in eastern
India and the adjoining areas; Mayukha in Bombay, Konkan and Gujarat 
in the western part; Marumakkattayam or Nambudri in Kerala in far
south; and Mitakshara in other parts of India, with slight variations.
Mitakshara school of Hindu law recognises a difference between
ancestral property and self-acquired property. It also recognises an
entity by the name of coparcenary which consists of coparceners as its
members.  A coparcenary is a legal institution consisting of three
generations of male heirs in the family-Gowli Buddanna Vs.
Commissioner of Income-Tax, Mysore .  Thus, Coparcener is a person  
who shares equally with other members of the Coparcenary in the
inheritance of an undivided estate or in the right to it.  For a male
member to become coparcener, the existence of Coparcenary is a pre- 
requisite, without which merely because he is a male person and
member of joint family, he cannot be considered as coparcener.  Every
such male member on birth becomes a member of the coparcenary,   
where coparcenary exists.  This means that no persons share in
coparcenary property can be determined with certainty.  It diminishes
on the birth of a male member and enlarges on the death of a male
member.  Any coparcener has the right to demand partition of the joint
family.  Once a partition takes place, leave about the coparcenary of
remaining undivided members to continue, a new coparcenary would  
come into existence, namely the partitioned member and his next two
generations of males.  For this reason, coparcenary rights do not exist in
self-acquired property, which was not thrown into common hotchpotch
of the joint family-(Doctrine of blending), vide- Andhra Pradesh & Ors.
Vs. Union of India .  Thus the concept of a birthright-(Survivorship), at
which a person acquires rights on his birth even if the ancestor is still
alive is fundamental to an understanding of the coparcenary.  In fact,
the birth of a male child diminishes the right of the ancestor instantly,
as each coparcener has an equal share in the undivided whole.  As
contrasted with this, inheritance by succession, whether testamentary or
intestate, is a right that accrues on the death of a person.  Succession
can only be in that property which a man leaves on his death.  Until
then, a person has an unrestricted right to enjoy the property or
alienate it.


      15-A. The HS Act,1956 was the first law to provide a
comprehensive and uniform system of inheritance among Hindus and to  
address gender inequalities in the area of inheritanceit was therefore a
process of codification as well as a reform at the same time.  Prior to
this, the Hindu Womens Rights to Property Act,1937 in relation to
dwelling house, that was extended to agricultural lands also by virtue of
the Madras Amended Act,26 of 1947,  was in operation, vide-Chintamani 
Ammal Vs. Nandgopal  and though this enactment was itself radical as it
conferred rights of succession to the Hindu widow for the first time, it
also gave rise to lacunae which were later filled by the HS Act,1956-the
first post-independence enactment of property rights among Hindus 
applies to both the Mitakshara and the Dayabhaga systems, as also to
persons in certain parts of South India previously governed by certain
matriarchal systems of Hindu Law such as the Marumakkattayam,   
Aliyasantana and Nambudri systems.  
      15-B. The main scheme of the HS Act,1956 is:

1. The hitherto limited estate given to women was converted into
absolute one. Under the old Hindu Law only the stridhana
(properties gifted to her at the time of marriage by both sides of
the family and by relatives and friends) was the widows absolute
property and she was entitled to the other inherited properties
only as a life-estate with very limited powers of alienation, if at
all.  Even under the 1937 Act, the concept of limited estate
continued.  Section 14 of the Hindu Succession Act removed the
disability of a female to acquire and hold property as an absolute
owner, and converted the right of a woman in any estate already
held by her on the date of the commencement of the Act as a
limited owner, into an absolute owner. The provision is
retrospective in that it enlarged the limited estate into an
absolute one even if the property was inherited or held by the
woman as a limited owner before the Act came into force.
 2. Female heirs other than the widow were recognized while the
widows position was strengthened.
3. The principle of simultaneous succession of heirs of a certain
class was introduced.
4. In the case of the Mitakshara Coparcenary, the principle of
survivorship continues to apply but if there is a female or male
claim through female in the line of class-1 heirs of the schedule,
the principle of succession is applied so as not to exclude her. By
virtue of which on the death of a member of a coparcenary, the
property devolves upon his mother, widow and daughter, along
with his son etc., by testamentary or intestate succession, as the
case may be, and not by survivorship under Section 6. This rule
confers on the women an equal right of succession with the male
member of the joint family under Section 8. However, when the
proviso to Section 6 applies, there is no disruption of joint family
status as the proviso creates a fiction so that persons who are to
inherit by succession are identified to separate that share.
5. Remarriage, conversion and unchastity are no longer held as
grounds for disability to inherit.
6. Even the unborn child, son or daughter, has a right if s/he was
in the womb at the time of death of the intestate, if born
subsequently. 


      15-C. As was prior to, even after the HS Act,1956 the daughter in
a Hindu Joint Family governed by Mitakshara law was not considered as
coparcener. Though, the HS Act revolutionized the previously held
concepts on rules of inheritance to some extent, it has its own flaws
while dealing with property rights of women since it still does not give
the right to the daughter of a coparcener in a Hindu joint family to be
coparcener by birth in her own right in the same manner as the son or to
have right of claim by birth.  In fact, the HS Act did not deal with
devolution of interest in the coparcenary property.  Section 6 of the HS
Act made it clear that, when a male Hindu dies after the
commencement of the Act, having at the time of his death an interest in
a Mitakshara coparcenary property, his interest in the property shall
devolve by survivorship upon the surviving members of the coparcenary
and not in accordance with the Act.  However, the proviso to the said
Section speaks that, if a male Hindu dies leaving behind a surviving
female relative specified in Class I of the Schedule or a male relative
specified in that class who claims through such female relative, the
interest of the deceased in the Mitakshara coparcenary property shall
devolve by testamentary or intestate succession, as the case may be,
under the Act and not by survivorship.  The concept of the Mitakshara
coparcenary property retained under Section 6 of the HS Act has not
been amended ever since its enactment by continued to persist the
inequality between a son and a daughter till 1985-86, even by any state.
It is for the first time the then State of Andhra Pradesh brought the
amendment by the Act,13/1986-(HS AP Amended Act) w.e.f. 5th   
September,1985 to the HS Act and the same mostly followed by a few  
states in India namely, Tamil Nadu-w.e.f.25th March,1989; Maharashtra-
w.e.f.22nd June,1994; Karnataka-w.e.f.30th July,1994 and if not also by
some other States, having considered the fact that a daughter needs to
be treated equally with son both in the economic and social spheres and
particularly to eradicate the evils of dowry demands and harassment
after marriage at in-laws family.  In so far as the State of Kerala
concerned, it is the Kerala Joint Hindu Family System(Abolition)
Act,1975-which is an independent statute and not an amendment to the 
Hindu Succession Act and came into force w.e.f. 01-12-1976, abolishes
joint family system among Hindus in the State of Kerala, in respect of a
tarwad or thavazi, a kutumba or kavaru, an illom and an undivided
Hindu family governed by the Mitakshara law. Section 3 of the Act
declares that on and after its commencement, birth in a family would
not give rise to rights in property.


      15-D. This HS AP Amended Act came into force retrospectively
w.e.f. 05.09.1985 is by incorporation of Chapter II-A in the HS Act after
section 29 and before Section 30 to the existing provisions under the HS
Act,30/1956 dt.17-06-1956, additionally as Section 29-A to C, with
overriding effect over Section 6 directly and over Section 23 indirectly.
Section 29-A to C of the HS AP Amended Act, which speaks   
of equal rights to daughter in coparcenary property read that:
Section 29A- Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 6 of
the Act,(HS Act,1956)-
(i).In a Joint Hindu Family governed by Mitakshara Law, the
daughter of a coparcener shall by birth become a coparcener in her
own right in the same manner as the son and have the same rights
in the coparcenary property as she would have had-if she had been
a son, inclusive of the right to claim by survivorship and shall be
subject to the same liabilities and disabilities in respect thereof as
the son;
(ii).At a partition in such a joint Hindu Family the coparcenary
property shall be so divided as to allot to a daughter the same share
as is allotable to a son:
Provided that the share which a pre-deceased son or a pre-deceased
daughter would have got at the partition if he or she had been alive
at the time of the partition shall be allotted to the surviving child of
such predeceased son or of such pre-deceased daughter; 
Provided further that the share allotable to the pre-deceased child
of a pre-deceased son or of a pre-deceased daughter, if such child
had been alive at the time of the partition, shall be allotted to the
child of such pre-deceased child of the pre-deceased son or of the
pre-deceased daughter as the case may be;  
(iii).Any property to which a female Hindu becomes entitled by
virtue of the provisions of clause(i) shall  be held by her with the
incidents of coparcenary ownership and shall be regarded not-
withstanding  anything contained in this Act or any other law for the
time being in force, as property capable of being disposed of by her
by will or other testamentary disposition;
(iv).Nothing in clause(ii) shall apply to a daughter married prior to
or to a partition which had been effected before the commence-
ment of Hindu Succession(Andhra Pradesh Amendment)Act,1986.     

Section 29B- Interest to devolve by survivorship on death-

When a female Hindu dies after the commencement of the Hindu  
Succession(Andhra Pradesh Amendment)Act,1986 having at the time    
of  her death an interest in a Mitakshara coparcenary property, her
interest in the property shall devolve by survivorship upon the
surviving members of the coparcenary and not in accordance this
Act.

Provided that if the deceased had left any child or child of a
predeceased child the interest of the deceased in the Mitakshara
coparcenary property shall devolve by testamentary or intestate
succession as the case may be, under this Act and not by 
survivorship.

Explanation-1:For the purposes of this section, the interest of a
female Hindu Mitakshara coparcener shall be deemed to be the 
share in the property that would have been allotted to her if a
partition of the property had taken place  immediately  before  her
death irrespective  of  whether  she  was  entitled to claim partition
or not.

Explanation-2: Nothing contained in  the  proviso to this section
shall be construed as enabling a person who, before the death of
deceased, had separated himself or herself from the coparcenary
or any of his or her heirs to claim on intestacy a share in the
interest referred to therein.

Section 29C- Preferential right to acquire property in certain
cases- 
(1)     Where, after the commencement of the Hindu Succession(Andhra   
Pradesh Amendment)Act,1986 an interest in any immovable   
property  of an intestate or in any business carried on by him or her,
whether solely or in conjunction with others devolves, under section
29A or section 29-B upon two or more heirs and any one of such
heirs proposes to transfer his or her interest in the property or
business, the other heirs shall have preferential right to acquire the
interest  proposed to be transferred.

(2)     The consideration for which any interest in the property of the
deceased may be transferred under this section shall in the absence
of any agreement between the parties, be determined by the court,
on application being made to it in this behalf, and if any person
proposing to acquire the interest is not willing to acquire it for the
consideration so determined, such person shall be liable to pay all
costs of or incidental to the application.

(3)     If there are two or more heirs, proposing to acquire any interest
under this section, that heir who offers the highest consideration
for the transfer shall be preferred.

Explanation: In this section `court' means the court within the limits
of whose jurisdiction the immovable property is situate or the
business is carried on, and includes any other court which the State
Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, specify in
this behalf. (Vide with retrospective effect from 05-09-1985).

     15-E. From the above, Section 29(A) when speaks daughter of a
coparcener shall by birth become a coparcener as if son including by
survivorship, notwithstanding anything contained in Section 6 of HS Act
and such property shall be held by her as full owner and the partiable
property includes even a dwelling house.  Section 29(B) speaks of
interest to devolve by survivorship on death of such female. Section
29(C) speaks of the preferential right. The only riders are that, the
daughters marriage (minor or major) should not have been performed
by the time the Act came into force i.e. by 5.9.1985-(Vide,
B.Chandrasekhara Reddy Vs. State of AP ; G.Valli Vs. State of AP  and 
R.Mahalakshmi Vs. AV Anantharaman ) and there should not be actual   
partition of the property affected by metes and bounds.
      15-F. As the HS AP Amended Act provisions covered by section 29(A
to C) not amended the existing provision- Section 6 of the HS Act,1956,
but for saying- notwithstanding anything contained therein, the HS AP
Amended Act applies when there was no any partition by metes and  
bounds by the time the AP Amended Act,13/1986 came into force w.e.f. 
05.09.1985, as concluded already.  The Section 29A is thus worded to
prevail with non-obstante clause as it is not withstanding anything
contained in Section 6 of the existing HS Act,1956. Thereby irrespective
of the legal fiction from the concept of notional partition or deemed
partition from Section-6 Proviso Explanation-1, from any female relative
etc., specified in class-(1) of the Schedule of the Act; for no actual
partition taken place, the unmarried daughter is entitled to claim right
as coparcener with equal share in the coparcenary property with other
male coparceners, as daughter of even one of the Coparceners.
     15-G. As the subject is in the concurrent list and the HS AP
Amended Act received the assent of the President of India, by virtue of
Articles 246 and 254 of the Constitution of India; the HS AP Amended Act
Section 29 (a) to (c) supra prevails over the HS Act,1956 Sections 6,8 &
23 in the area of any irreconcilability between the provisions of Sections
6,8,23 and Section 29(a) to (c) supra.  It is to say succession though
opens by the notional partition concept under Section 6 of the HS
Act,1956, in the case of a male Hindu died intestate leaving coparcenary
property and left behind him female relative etc., specified in class-I of
the Schedule of the HS Act, for his undivided interest to devolve by
succession to determine the shares as if there is actual partition by the
time of his death, once the AP Amended Act applies, since prevails over
the notional partition concept and then Section 6 notional partition
concept has no bar even from death of the father of the unmarried
daughter by the time the AP Amended Act came into force, to the claim
of such unmarried daughter as coparcener with her brothers, even it is
worded as daughter of coparcener and not sister of coparcener, for the
same makes no difference, once bar of Section 6 of HS Act has no
application, where the HS AP Amended Act Section 29 (a) to (c) apply.  It
is practically to say, notional partition concept not taken away, but
notwithstanding that notional partition, the daughter can claim as
coparcener.  No doubt, there is a bar for application of the HS AP
Amended Act, once marriage of daughter performed prior to 05.09.1985
or once there is an actual partition by metes and bounds before that
date, but for to say even notional partition by virtue of legal fiction got
all the traits of actual partition by metes and bounds, once that legal
fiction of notional partition has no bar to the claim of daughter as
coparcener, it makes no difference.
     15-H. However it could not be missed noticing that, after the HS
Amended Act,2005 came into force, Section 6 of the HS Act amended by   
the Act,2005 prevails over the AP Amended Act Section 29(a) to (c)
supra.  This court in Jangireddy Vs. Y.N.Reddy  also held that the HS
Amended Act,2005-(Central amended Act)-prevails over the HS AP  
Amended Act,1986-(State amended Act), despite the HS AP amended Act     
commences with the non-obstante clause.  From the combined reading   
of Articles 245, 246 and 251 read with 254 of the Constitution of India,
more particularly from the proviso to Article 254, it clearly shows that a
subsequent Central amendment Act will prevail over the earlier State
amendment Act of the subject in concurrent list, to such an extent the
State Act even received the assent of president of India is not reconciled
with the subsequent Central Legislation.
     15-I. The HS Amended Act,2005 amended Section 4, Section 6, 
Section 23, Section 24 and Section 30 of the Hindu Succession Act,1956,
of which Section 6 is presently more relevant to consider.  It reads that:
Section 6-Devolution of interest in coparcenary property-
    (1) On and from the commencement of the Hindu 
Succession (Amendment)Act,2005, in a Joint Hindu family 
governed by the Mitakshara Law, the daughter of a coparcener
shall,-
    (a) by birth become a coparcener in her own right in the
same manner as the son;  
    (b) have the same rights in the coparcenary property as she
would have had if she had been a son;
    (c) be subject to the same liabilities in respect of the said
coparcenary property as that of a son,
    and any reference to a Hindu Mitakshara coparcener shall
be deemed to include a reference to a daughter of a
coparcener:
    Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall
affect or invalidate any disposition or alienation including any
partition or testamentary disposition of property which had
taken place before the 20th day of December,2004.
    (2) Any property to which a female Hindu becomes entitled
by virtue of Sub-section(1) shall be held by her with the
incidents of coparcenary ownership and shall be regarded, not-
withstanding anything contained in this Act, or any other law
for the time being in force, as property capable of being
disposed of by her by testamentary disposition.
    (3) Where a Hindu dies after the commencement of the
Hindu Succession(Amendment)Act,2005, his interest in the 
property of a Joint Hindu family governed by the Mitakshara
law, shall devolve by testamentary or intestate succession,
as the case may be under this Act and not by survivorship, and
the coparcenary property shall be deemed to have been
divided as if a partition had taken place and,-
    (a) the daughter is allotted the same share as is allotted to
a son;
    (b) the shore of the pre-deceased son or a pre-deceased
daughter, as they would have got had they been alive at the
time of partition, shall be allotted to the surviving child of such
predeceased son or of such predeceased daughter; and  
    (c) the share of the predeceased child of a pre-deceased
son or a predeceased daughter, as such child would have got had
he or she been alive at the time of the partition, shall be
allotted to the child of such pre-deceased child of the pre-
deceased son or a pre-deceased daughter, as the case may be.  
    Explanation- For the purposes of this sub-section, the
interest of a Hindu Mitakshara coparcener shall be deemed
to be the share in the property that would have been
allotted to him if a partition of the property had taken place
immediately before his death irrespective of whether he was
entitled to claim partition or not.
    (4) After the commencement of the Hindu Succession
(Amendment)Act,2005, no court shall recognise any right to
proceed against a son, grandson or great-grandson for the
recovery of any debt due from his father, grandfather or great-
grand-father solely on the ground of the pious obligation under
the Hindu law, of such son, grandson or great-grandson to
discharge any such debt;
    Provided that in the case of any debt contracted before the
commencement of the Hindu Succession(Amendment)Act,2005      
nothing contained in this sub-section shall affect-
    (a) the right of any creditor to proceed against the son,
grandson of great-grandson, as the case may be; or
    (b) any alienation made in respect of or in satisfaction of,
any such debt, and any such right or alienation shall be
enforceable under the rule or pious obligation in the same
manner and to the same extent as it would have been 
enforceable as if the Hindu Succession(Amendment)Act,2005 had  
not been enacted.
    Explanation-For the purposes of Clause (a), the expression
"son", "grandson" or "great- grandson" shall be deemed to refer
to the son, grandson or great-grandson, as the case may be, who
was born or adopted prior to the commencement of the Hindu 
Succession (Amendment) Act,2005.   
    (5) Nothing contained in this section shall apply to a
partition, which has been effected before the 20th day of
December,2004.  
    Explanation- For the purposes of this Section "partition"
means any partition made by execution of a deed of partition
duly registered under the Registration Act,1908(16 of 1908)
or partition effected by a decree of a court.

    15-J. Though, both under the Shastric Hindu Law and the HS
Act,1956 (un-amended Section 6 of the HS Act,1956), a female Hindu 
was not recognized as a coparcener at all, but for dealt with interest of
a male Hindu in a Mitakshara coparcenary property; the parliament
intended to change the existing law and create and confer such right on
a daughter of a coparcener also by the HS Amended Act,2005.  
Therefore, they chose to make a declaration signalling the change in
the law, as it existed till then and heralding a new era.  The equality
to be restored was between son and daughter only and not between 
male and female Hindu and though not absolutely and axiomatically,
as divesting of any right already vested is not the intention of the
legislature from its close and combined reading.  Thus, Gender
discrimination between the son and daughter is removed to the
extent possible by bringing the law in conformity with the Articles
14 and 15 of the Constitution of India.

    15-K. When the HS Amended Act came into force in 2005, naturally
the question and a doubt would arise, as to when the daughter would
get that right.  Section 6 of the Amended Act says On and from the
commencement of the Hindu Succession(Amendment)Act,2005, in a     
Joint Hindu family governed by the Mitakshara Law, the daughter of a
coparcener shall,-(a) by birth become a coparcener in her own right in
the same manner as the son; (b)---. The parliament though expressly
stated in the section itself that this "right is by birth", this amendment
is introduced however by way of substitution using the phrase, "on and
from the commencement of the Hindu Succession(Amendment)     
Act,2005" as the opening words of the Section and the above scope is
further restricted by the proviso to the amended section 6, which
states that nothing contained in Sub-section (1) of Section 6  shall
affect or invalidate any disposition or alienation including any partition
or testamentary disposition of property which had taken place before
20th day of December, 2004.  In this amended Section 6 the word
'partition' has been given a very narrow meaning by Proviso to Sub-
section(5) of Section 6-viz., (1) Partition made by execution of a deed
of partition duly registered under the Registration Act,16 of 1908 or (2)
Partition effected by a decree of the Court.  Sub-section(3) of section
deals with succession of property after commencement of the Hindu
Succession Act,2005(from 09.09.2005). Further, Sub-section(3) of the
amended Section 6 provides that, where a Hindu dies after the
commencement of the Hindu Succession(Amendment)Act,2005, his      
interest in the property of a Joint Hindu family governed by the
Mitakshara law, shall devolve by testamentary or intestate succession,
as the case may be, under this Act and not by survivorship, and the
coparcenary property shall be deemed to have been divided as if a
partition had taken place. Therefore, with the passing of the
Amendment Act,2005, the concept of survivorship is given a go by once
and for all so far as the interest of the Hindu(not restricted to male
Hindu, to say even of female Hindu). The words as if a partition had
taken place save the concept of notional partition by legal fiction.

    15-L. A combined reading of the provisions indicate that, if no
disposition or alienation or partition or succession had taken place till
20th December,2004, the central amendment will have to be given
effect, since there had been no occasion for application of State law,
where there had been no partition or death of a coparcener before this
date, so that married daughter would also count for a share in the
event of further partition or death on or after December 25, 2004,
provided she is alive by 9th September,2005.  The Parliament
consciously used the phrase "the daughter of a coparcener" is the
person on whom they are conferring the right and not on any other
female relative, who may be a member of Joint Hindu Family, so also,
not used the words sister of a coparcener, as not intended to say
irrespective of fathers death and of notional partition with all traits
of actual partition by legal fiction and succession even opened
therefrom, to seek partition with brothers for remaining
coparcenary after death of father even continues.  It is though in the
HS AP Amended Act also, the words "daughter of a coparcener" used;  
there the bar of notional partition was excluded by the non-obstanti
clause used of notwithstanding anything contained in Section 6 of HS
Act.  The combined reading of the HS Amended Act Section 6 and HS AP   
Amended Act Section 29A indicates the difference and intention of the
legislature from the same also.

    15-M. This intention can be gathered also from the fact that in the
HS Act,1956- Section 6, proviso conferred rights on a "female
relative" and not only on a "daughter of a coparcener".  Likewise,
the HS Act,1956- Section-6, proviso speaks of a notional partition by
legal fiction and Section-6 of the HS Amended Act not used the
words notwithstanding anything contained in Section-6 Proviso of
the HS Act, though same is used in Section 29A of HS AP Amended    
Act.  Thus, it is subject to Section-6 of the HS Act,1956 or any State
Law that was in operation prior to coming into force of the HS
Amended Act, the rights that are created or conferred and vested,
not being divested even used the words by birth becomes a
coparcener for the same not represents point of time traced back
to her birth, but to the nature of the right and subject to its
existence. It is also to say where the daughter is not alive by the
time the Amended Act,2005 has come in to force, the question of
becoming a coparcener pursuant to the Act does not arise, much less
with coparcenary right by birth. If the daughter is born after the Act
came in to force, she can claim.  Thus, it is only where such right is
available and not vested on others by the time the HS Amended
Act,2005 came into force, from the opening words of the Section 6(1)
itself says on and from commencement of the Act, then only for its
tracing back as birth right arises, to say the Amended Act,2005 is not
retrospective in operation. The rights that conferred by the HS
Amended Act,2005- Section 6, where there is no partition effected (by
legal fiction or otherwise) or where there is no alienation or any
disposition by the prescribed date before the Act came into force) are:
(a) Equality in Status - The daughter of a coparcener becomes a
coparcener by birth only from the commencement of the Act and in her
own right in the same manner as the son and (b) Equal rights in
coparcenary property  to say it is in the coparcenary property
existing, as she would have had, if she had been a son.  The parliament
also took care to see that the daughter who is conferred rights in the
coparcenary property (subject to availability) on par with the son, is
also saddled her with the liabilities in respect of said coparcenary
property as that of a son, by making it clear that the right in property
conferred on her is not free from all encumbrances on the said
property.  The rights and liabilities are to be shared equally by the son
and daughter, thus giving effect to the equality clause in letter and
spirit, to a major extent.  With the change in the law, the legal concept
of coparcenary underwent a radical change. The coparcenary hitherto
the monopoly of male lineal descendants and consisting of only male
member of a Joint Hindu Family now has to accommodate a daughter   
among the females also.  Thus, any reference to a Hindu Mitakshara
coparcener shall be deemed to include a reference to a daughter of a
coparcener.  Once daughter is conferred with the right of a coparcener,
it follows that, she would get a right by birth in the available
coparcenary property as on date of the Act.  From the opening words of
the HS Amended Act,2005- Section 6 saying on and from  
commencement of the Act, it suggests the same and a combined   
reading of the amended Section 6 with earlier provision(Section 6) and
the State amendments in between that were in force bring about the
real intention of the Legislature as stated supra of the Amended Act is
not retrospective in operation.
    15-N.  In this context of interpretation of the words used with
other provisions of the Statute and with reference to the legislative
intention, it is apt to quote -
      15-N.(a). As per Plowden - the intent of statutes is more to be
regarded and pursued than the precise letter of them..and the best way
to construe an Act of Parliament is according to the intent rather than
according to the words..  Each law contains of two parts viz., of BODY
and SOUL, the letter of the law is the body of the Law and the sense and
reason of the Law is the Soul of Law  When the words of statute enact  
one thing, they enact all other things which are in the like degree.
      15-N.(b). As per Austin  When the words are ambiguous or of any
doubtful significance, the intention of the Legislature must be interpreted.
It is to say, the Legislative silence conveys signals of the duty on the
interpreter to interpret the meaning and for that the interpretation and
construction have same effect by identifying the Legislative intent as part
of duty of the Court since the Legislative authorities are functuous officio
after the legislation is passed &
    15-N.(c). The Apex Court in its expression in RMD
Chamarbangwalla Vs. Union of India  referring to the expression in
River Wear Commissioners Vs. William Adamson  held that although  
the words occurring in a particular statute are plain and unambiguous,
they have to be interpreted in a manner which would fit in the context
of the other provisions of the Statute and bring about the real intention
of the legislature there from.
    15-O-(i). A Full Bench of the Bombay High Court in Shri
Badrinarayan Shankar Bhandari Vs. Omprakash Shankar Bhandari    
answering a reference, by Judgement dated 14-08-2014, by overruling
the earlier Division Bench expression in Vaishali S.Ganorkar Vs. Satish
Keshavrao Ganorkar  of only those daughters born after September 9,
2005, will be entitled to equal rights in ancestral property, held that-
Section 6 of Hindu Succession Act,1956 as amended by the Amendment    
Act of 2005 is retro-active in operation. The judges observed: The
principle laid down by the Supreme Court in Sheela Devis case,
therefore, does not militate against the view taken by us that the
Amendment Act of 2005 applies to a daughter of coparcener, who(the 
daughter)is born before 9th September,2005 and alive as on 9th
September,2005 on which date the Amendment Act of 2005 came into    
force.  Of course, there is no dispute about entitlement of a daughter
born on or after 9th September,2005.  The daughters would be able to
exercise their right only after 9th September,2005 when the Act was
amended. Therefore, it is imperative that the daughter who seeks to
exercise such a right must herself be alive at the time when the
Amendment Act,2005 was brought into force. It would not matter
whether the daughter concerned is born before 1956 or after 1956. This
is for the simple reason that the Hindu Succession Act,1956 when it
came into force applied to all Hindus in the country irrespective of their
date of birth. The date of birth was not a criterion for application of the
Principal Act. The only requirement is that when the Act is being sought
to be applied, the person concerned must be in existence/living. To
that conclusion, the expression of the Apex Court in Sheela Devi (supra)
placed reliance.
    15-O-(ii). In Sheela Devi (supra), it was held that, by the time the
HS Amended Act came into force, if succession opened by notional 
partition under Section 6 of HS Act by death of father, the daughter who
got right by birth by virtue of the Act, cannot be considered as
Coparcener. 
    15-O-iii. On the aspect whether notional partition by virtue of legal
fiction can be considered as actual partition, the Apex Court in Gurupad
v Hirabai -observed that the fiction created by Explanation I of Section
6 HS Act,1956 has to be given its full and due effect.  The Court in this
regard quoted a passage from East End Dwellings Co Ltd. Vs. Finsbury 
Borough Council , by Lord Asquith that-If you are bidden to treat an
imaginary state of affairs as real, you must also imagine as real, the
consequences and incidents which, if the putative state of affairs had in
fact existed, must inevitably have flowed from or accomplished it, and if
the statute says that you must imagine a certain state of affairs, it
cannot be interpreted to mean that having done so, you must cause or
permit your imagination to boggle when it comes to the inevitable
corollaries of the state of affairs. The Apex Court therefrom
interpreted the concept of notional partition by legal fiction used in the
Section 6 to mean that, a partition had taken place between the
deceased and other coparceners immediately before his death. This
assumption, as per the Court, is irrevocable once made and all the
consequences that would flow from a logical partition would follow;
which means that the share of the heirs must be ascertained on the basis
that they had separated from one another and had received a share in
the partition which had taken place during the lifetime of the deceased.
    15-O-iv. No doubt it was in the context of benefiting a female it was
specifically noted by the Court in the case that all the reforms that had
taken place earlier were with a view to improve the property rights of
women and a narrow approach would lead to taking a step backwards.  
The Court went on to mention that it would render fruitless the social
reform that has enabled Hindu women to acquire an equal status with
men and as such the interpretation that be preferred should be the one
that furthers the intention of the legislature and remedies the injustice
from which Hindu women have suffered over the years.  This approach
of the Court of all the consequences that would flow from a logical
partition would follow for notional partition was later reaffirmed in
State of Maharashtra Vs. Narayan Rao Sham Rao Deshmukh .     
    15-O-v). It is pertinent to mention here that, a narrow approach has
been also followed by the High Court of Andhra Pradesh in P Govinda
Reddy Vs. Golla Obulamma  and Yethirejulu Neelaya Vs. Mudummuru     
Ramaswami  and earlier to it by the High Court of Bombay in Sriram Bai
Vs. Kalgonda  that, though from the concept of notional partition
U/Section 6 HS Act, the basic principle has been to presume that a
partition had been affected only for a specific purpose which is to
ascertain the interest of the deceased coparcener as available for
succession.  It was further presumed that in this particular approach
once the said interest was ascertained there was no need to allot shares
to the other members, whether male or female, to the family.  Even
from that approach, for not used the words sister of Coparcener, but
used only the words daughter of Coparcener, once father died and his
share by notional partition divided for succession opened, there is no
coparcenary of father to claim after commencement of the HS Amended  
Act,2005 for a daughter as if a son of right by birth.

    16.(a). From the above, even the legal fiction of notional partition
under Section 6 of the HS Act,1956 has no bar from the overriding
effect with non-obstanti clause in Section 29A of the HS AP Amended
Act, where the HS AP Amended Act applies. In the case on hand,  
admittedly, the marriage of the plaintiff was performed on 23-04-1978
itself and thus the HS AP Amended Act,13 of 1986 which came into 
force w.e.f.05-09-1985 has no application. The plaintiff in the suit
thereby cannot claim as coparcener in the plaint schedule coparcenary
property for 1/3rd share as per the HS AP Amended Act,13 of 1986 in
the coparcenary of her brother and late father.  However, where the
HS AP Amended Act has no application, the HS Act,1956-Section 6   
notional partition concept applies. When such is the case, even the
appeal suit as well as both the cross-objections impugning the trial
Courts degree and judgment supra are continuation of the suit
proceedings to say for all purposes the suit lis is pending (under the
Doctrine of Merger) even by the time, the HS Amended Act,2005 came  
into force as held in G.Sekhar(supra), since Rama Rao-(father of
plaintiff and 2nd defendant as well as husband of 1st defendant) died in
September,1997 intestate leaving them behind him and the plaint
schedule properties and of whom the plaintiff and 1st defendant are his
female classI legal heirs to succeed his interest in the coparcenary
therein with 2nd defendant-male classI legal heir and there from, by
the legal fiction of notional partition succession since opened, for there
is no further coparcenary of father of plaintiff, the plaintiff even under
the HS Amended Act,2005 cannot claim as coparcener with her late  
father as daughter of coparcener.
    16.(b). Thus, a perusal of the scope of Section 6 HS Amended
Act,2005-definition of partition by explanation to Section-6(5) if read
with proviso to section-6(1) is no way exhaustive, but an inclusive
definition from the interpretation by a whole reading of the Section,
which even to include the concept of notional partition that brings an
irreversible situation from the irrevocable legal fiction to draw that
would flow from a logical partition with all consequences as share of
the deceased at least separated just before his death, leave about
others as discussed supra.
    17. In this regard coming to the scope of Section 6 (before and
after the HS Amended Act,2005) and Section 29A of AP HS Amended     
Act,1986 supra with reference to the expressions of this Court and the
Apex Court in particular and of other High Courts in general:
    17.(i). The Apex Court in S.Sai Reddy Vs. S.Narayana Reddy
confirming the expression of this Court(reported decision ), while
considering the scope of the HS AP Amended Act,1986 as to when a   
partition can be said to have been effected for the purposes of the AP
amended provision; held that "a partition of the joint Hindu family can
be effected by various modes, viz., by a family settlement, by a
registered instrument of partition, by oral arrangement by the parties,
or by a decree of the court.  When a suit for partition is filed in a court,
a preliminary decree is passed determining shares of the members of
the family. The final decree follows, thereafter, allotting specific
properties and directing the partition of the immovable properties by
metes and bounds.  Unless and until the final decree is passed and the
allottees of the shares are put in possession of the respective property,
the partition is not complete. The preliminary decree which determines
share does not bring about the final partition.  For, pending the final
decree the shares themselves are liable to be varied on account of the
intervening events.  In the instant case, there is no dispute that only a
preliminary decree had been passed and before the final decree could
be passed the amending Act came into force as a result of which Clause
(ii) of Section 29-A of the Act became applicable.  This intervening
event which gave shares to daughters had the effect of varying shares
of the parties like any supervening development, since the legislation is
beneficial and placed on the statute book with the avowed object of
benefitting women which is a vulnerable section of the society in all its
stratus, it is necessary to give a liberal effect to it.  For this reason
also, we cannot equate the concept of partition that the legislature has
in mind in the present case with a mere severance of the status of the
joint family which can be effected by an expression of a mere desire by
a family member to do so.  The partition that the legislature has in
mind in the present case is undoubtedly a partition completed in all
respects and which has brought about an irreversible situation.  A
preliminary decree which merely declares shares which are themselves
liable to change does not bring about any irreversible situation.  Hence,
we are of the view that unless a partition of the property is affected by
metes and bounds, the daughters cannot be deprived of the benefits
conferred by the Act.  Any other view is likely to deprive a vast section
of the fair sex of the benefits conferred by the amendment.  Spurious
family settlements, instruments of partitions not to speak of oral
partitions will spring up and nullify the beneficial effect of the
legislation depriving a vast section of women of its benefits".  In this
expression of Sai Reddy, the observation-The partition that the
legislature has in mind in the present case is undoubtedly a partition
completed in all respects and which has brought about an
irreversible situation and a preliminary decree which merely
declares shares which are themselves liable to change does not bring
about any irreversible situation it appears is made for the reason
that notional partition has no way a bar for the HS AP Amended Act to
apply for the daughter (unmarried) to become coparcener and what is
remained is preliminary decree passed pending in appeal from which
there was no actual division.
      17.(ii). In Dodla Chinnabbai Reddy Vs Dodla Kumara Swami
Reddy  referring to the expression of Sai Reddy(supra) though stated
not applicable on facts, it was held in considering the scope of Section
29-A of the HS AP Amended Act that, the Non-obstante clause used in  
Section 29-A of the Act is intended to carve out an exception in favour of
the daughters who remained unmarried till 5.9.1985, to confer
additional benefits of coparcenary rights on them.

    17.(iii). In Parchuri Vs. Parchuri -this court (in the single judge
expression) held referring to the expression of the Apex Court in Sai
Reddy(supra), that the benefit of the HS Amended Act,2005 can be 
extended in a pending matter to mean even after passing of preliminary
decree to say the suit is deemed pending.  There, father was alive by
the time suit filed against him and he even died pending appeal filed by
him against the preliminary decree for partition of 2/3rd share passed
by trial court in favour of his two minor sons by its challenge and the
unmarried daughter also as one of legal heirs came on record
before,2002 and held for redefining preliminary decree shares for giving
her one such share as coparcener with her brothers, for death of father
coparcener was pending the lis in appeal.  However, once the HS AP
Amended Act has no application for daughter married already and
later before the HS Amended Act,2005 came in to force the father
died, and thereby succession opened under Section 6 of HS Act,1956 
by virtue of the notional partition from non-application of the HS AP
Amended Act; can the daughter claim partition invoking benefit of
the HS Amended Act,2005, was not fallen for consideration for
specifically to answer in Parchuri(supra).
       17.(iv). For the above question, the answer was held in negative
by the expression of the Apex Court in Anardevi Vs. Parmeshwari Devi
that was almost reiterated of Sheela Devi(supra)-holding that before
the HS Amended Act,2005 came into force, the father when died, the
daughter cannot claim partition invoking benefit of the HS Amended
Act,2005, as by virtue of notional partition under Section 6 HS Act,
succession opened and his interest was devolved by succession under 
Section 8 of the HS Act,1956 and the HS Amended Act,2005 is only  
prospective in operation.
      17.(v). In Sai Reddy(supra) once it is held by the Apex Court as
the partition that the legislature has in mind in the present case(under
the AP HS Amended Act) is undoubtedly a partition completed in all
respects and which has brought about an irreversible situation-the
notional partition under Section 6 of the HS act by legal fiction is not
mere severance in status, but as if actual partition that also brings out
an irreversible situation. In the expression of Sai Reddy (supra), the
notional partition concept under Section 6 of HS Act, 1956 did not fall
for consideration as the HS AP Amended Act provisions given prevalence
with non obstanti clause in Section 29 (A-C) of the HS AP Amended Act 
for giving overriding effect irrespective of what is contained in section 6
of the HS Act,1956. In Sai Reddy(supra), the Apex Court thus only
interpreted the wording of Section 29A-C of the AP HS Amended Act of
actual partition by meets and bounds, in saying preliminary decree since
only defines rights and not an actual partition by meets and bounds, the
shares can be redefined once under the AP HS Amended Act, the   
daughter became coparcener before passing of final decree. The
expressions of the Apex Court in Anardevi and Sheela Devi(supra)-
cannot be said running contra to the principle laid down in Sai Reddy
(supra), even by any stretch of imagination.

    17.(vi). In C.Anitha Vs Narne Constructions Pvt. Ltd  referring
to the expressions of Sai Reddy and Dodla Chinnabbai Reddy(supra) 
held at para-25 on facts that, after death of Eswaraiah and Anjaiah, the
properties were not partitioned by metes and bounds by the
Coparceners including the Plaintiff-(daughter of Eswaraiah)-and
therefore plaintiff is entitled to coparcenary rights in the property with
her brothers among the defendants 1-6, by negated the contention of
alienations made before the HS Amended Act,2005 and before  
December,2004 bars the suit claim of plaintiff.
       17.(vii). The expressions of the Apex Court in Anardevi and
Sheela Devi(supra) even already rendered by the time Parchuri(supra)
and C.Anitha (supra) decided, same were not brought to its notice to
consider, apart from the concept of notional partition not considered at
all therein.
      17.(viii). Referring to the above expressions of the Apex Court in
Anardevi and Sheela Devi(supra) and in Sai Reddy(supra), it was held by
another single judge expression of this Court in R.V.Padmavathi Vs.
Gangarapu S.Chowdary -that once father died leaving wife and
daughter, besides sons, before the AP HS Amended Act came into force,  
since succession opened by notional partition, even the unmarried
daughter  is not entitled to claim coparcenary interest as per Section 6
of the HS Amended Act,2005 Act and as laid down in Anardevi and 
Sheela Devi (supra) and by saying in Sai Reddy(supra) exclusively dealt
with Section 29A of the AP HS Amended Act.  
      17.(ix). The above decision in Padmavathi(supra) did not go into
the scope of the non-obstante clause in Section 29A of the AP HS
Amended Act, saying not withstanding anything contained in Section 6 of
HS Act, to extend the benefit of Section 29A of the AP HS Amended Act 
and once the benefit of Section 29A of the AP HS Amended Act applies, 
Section 6 HS Amended Act,2005 Act later came into force no way takes  
away the accrued rights under Section 29A of the AP HS Amended Act on   
the principle of vested right won`t divest.  Even Section 6 HS Amended
Act,2005 prevails over Section 29A of the AP HS Amended Act for any 
inconsistency to reconcile and for any irreconcilability to say the State
law deemed repealed by subsequent central legislation to the extent of
such irreconcilability by virtue of Articles 245 and 251 read with 254,
more particularly from the proviso to Article 254, however, that does
not mean vested right conferred by State Act before the Central Act
came into force also divests-(See-Jangireddy(supra) and also the other
expression in Damalanka Gangaraju Vs. Nandipati Vijaya Lakshmi . 
      17.(x). As such, the decision in Sai Reddy(supra) rendered was
prior to coming into force of Section 6 of the HS Amended Act,2005 and
not an authority on the concept of notional partition whether
tantamount to actual partition or otherwise any disposition, besides
from notional partition succession opens by the legal fiction.  Further,
the expressions in Parchuri, Padmavathi and C.Anitha(supra) are not
the full fledged authorities on the scope of Section 6 HS Amended
Act,2005 Act with reference to Section 29A of the AP HS Amended Act,  
but for to the extent of subsequent change of law pending proceedings
in appeal or for final decree can be taken consideration to mould the
reliefs.  As also laid down by the Apex Court in Ganduri Koteswaramma
Vs. Chakiri Yanadi  referring to Section 6 HS Amended Act,2005 besides
G.Sekhar(supra) and in Prema Vs Nanje Gowda  in a suit for partition
and as a general principle of law in M/s. Bay Berry Apartments Pvt.Ltd
Vs. Shobha - subsequent change of law pending proceedings in appeal 
or for final decree can be taken consideration to mould the reliefs.
      17.(xi). In Ganduri Koteswaramma(supra) the suit for partition
was filed by one of the sons of Chakiri Venkata Swamy in the court of
Senior Civil Judge, Ongole-(Andhra Pradesh) impleading his father
Chakiri Venkata Swamy(1st defendant), his brother Chakiri Anji Babu (2nd
defendant) and his two sisters-as 3rd and 4th defendants respectively, in
respect of schedule properties `A', `C' and `D' - coparcenary property 
claiming by the plaintiff that he, 1st defendant and 2nd defendant have
1/3rd share each. As regards schedule property `B'--as the property
belonged to his mother--he claimed that all the parties have 1/5th equal
share. The 1st defendant died in 1993 during the pendency of the suit
and after the HS AP Amended Act,1986 came into force and later the 
trial court vide its judgment and preliminary decree dated March 19,
1999 declared that plaintiff was entitled to 1/3rd share in the plaint
schedule `A', `C' and `D' properties and further entitled to 1/4th share in
the 1/3rd share left by the 1st defendant(father) and as regards schedule
property `B' the plaintiff was declared to be entitled to 1/5th  share,
that was amended on September 27, 2003 declaring that plaintiff was
entitled to equal share along with 2nd, 3rd and 4th defendants in 1/5th
share left by the 1st defendant in schedule property `B'.  In the course of
consideration of the report submitted by the Commissioner and before
passing of the final decree, the HS Amended Act,2005 came into force
on September 9,2005, pursuant to which the 3rd and 4th defendants made 
an application for passing a preliminary decree in their favour for
partition of plaint schedule properties `A', `C' and `D' into four equal
shares and to allot one share to each of them by metes and bounds and
for delivery of possession.  The trial court, on hearing the parties, by its
order dated June 15,2009, allowed the application of the 3rd and 4th
defendants holding that they are entitled for re-allotment of shares in
the preliminary decree, i.e., to 1/4th share each and separate possession
in schedule properties `A', `C' and `D'.  The plaintiff challenged the
order of the trial court in appeal before this Court-(Andhra Pradesh High
Court).  The Single Judge by his order dated August 26,2009 allowed the
appeal and set aside the order of the trial court, holding that final
decree is always required to be in conformity with the preliminary
decree and Section 97 of the Code of Civil Procedure (for brevity CPC)
provides that, where any party aggrieved by a preliminary decree passed
after the commencement of the Code does not appeal from such decree,  
he shall be precluded from disputing its correctness in any appeal which
may be preferred from the final decree.  The Apex Court referring to the
earlier 3-Judges Bench decision in Phoolchand Vs. Gopal Lal  and Sai
Reddy(supra) held that, Section 97 of CPC does not create any hindrance
or obstruction in the power of the court to modify, amend or alter the
preliminary decree or pass another preliminary decree if the changed
circumstances so require even if no appeal has been preferred from such
preliminary decree, as there can be more than one preliminary decree
and particularly in partition suits when after the preliminary decree
some parties die and shares of other parties are thereby augmented. . . .
.. So far therefore as partition suits are concerned we have no doubt
that if an event transpires after the preliminary decree which
necessitates a change in shares, the court can and should do
so;..........there is no prohibition in the CPC against passing a second
preliminary decree in such circumstances and we do not see why we 
should rule out a second preliminary decree in such circumstances only
on the ground that the CPC does not contemplate such a possibility. . .
for it must not be forgotten that the suit is not over till the final decree
is passed and the court has jurisdiction to decide all disputes that may
arise after the preliminary decree, particularly in a partition suit due to
deaths of some of the parties. . . .a second preliminary decree can be
passed in partition suits by which the shares allotted in the preliminary
decree already passed can be amended and if there is dispute between 
surviving parties in that behalf and that dispute is decided the decision
amounts to a decree....." and thus the view of the High Court is against
law and the decisions of this Court in Phoolchand and Sai Reddy(supra).
      17.(xii). There is nothing came for discussion and consideration in
Ganduri Koteswaramma(supra) as to the daughters were married or not 
by the time HS AP Amended Act,1986 came into force and if married and  
the same not applicable to them for preliminary decree not considered
them as coparceners; whether-notional partition concept of Section 6 of
HS Act is a bar or not to get the benefits of the HS Amended Act,2005.
The earlier expressions in Anardevi and Sheeladevi(supra) were also not
considered on the scope of the Amended Act is only prospective and the
concept of notional partition defined in Section 6 of HS Act, opens the
succession. It was not even considered whether the concept of notional
partition defined in Section 6 of HS Act,1956 falls within the meaning of
the word partition used in Section 6 of the HS Amended Act,2005.
      17.(xiii). In another single judge expression of this court in
Burugupalli Seesharatnam Vs. Sirigina Ramalakshmi  referring to
Damalanka Gangaraju, G.Sekhar, Ganduri Koteswaramma and mainly      
relying upon Ganduri Koteswaramma(supra)-held that, daughters are 
entitled to the benefits of the HS Amended Act,2005. But the
expressions in Anardevi and Sheeladevi(supra) were also not considered
on the scope of the Amended Act is only prospective and the concept of
notional partition defined in Section 6 of HS Act, opens the succession.
It was not even considered whether the concept of notional partition
defined in Section 6 of HS Act,1956 falls within the meaning of the word
partition used in Section 6 of the HS Amended Act,2005.
      18.(i). Though a Division Bench of the Karnataka High Court in
Pushpalatha N.V. Vs. V.Padma  held that the aforesaid judgments of
the Apex Court in Anardevi and Sheeladevi(supra) are purely on the
facts of those cases and they were not really interpreting the
amended provisions and they have not laid down any law, same 
appears not acceptable. The conclusions arrived in paras 114&115 of
Pushpalatha (supra) are as follows:
    114. However, while determining the share of the
male Hindu who has died before the commencement of the   
amended Act, i.e.9.9.2005, who had an interest in a
Mitakshara coparcenary property, if he has left him
surviving a female relative, his share is to be determined
treating his daughter also as a coparcener. Thereafter in
the notional partition, the share to be allotted to him
devolves as per proviso to the unamended Section 6 of the
Act. Thus, the vested right accrued to the other female
members is not affected by the amendment, as the said 
vested right is not taken away expressly or by necessary
implication by the Parliament.  May be the extent of their
share be diminished, but it does not amount to taking away
the vested right. That is the sacrifice the other female
members who are none other than the mother,  
grandmother, a granddaughter, has to make in favour of a
daughter.
    115. Therefore, in so far as other female members left
behind by a male coparcener dying before the
commencement of the Amendment Act, succession to this    
property is governed by the unamended Section 6 by virtue
of Section 6 of the General Clauses Act.
      18.(ii). In fact, Pushpalatha(supra) reached the conclusion that
the daughter is conferred with right by birth as coparcener and as such a
right is vested that relates back to date of her birth, which do not divest
by death of father by notional partition, when death of father is after
her birth, though prior to coming into force of the HS Amended
Act,2005, to say before considering the notional partition for death of
father, the daughter`s share as coparcener also to be determined by
date and time back to the death of father.  This expression no way
speaks notional partition concept of Section 6 HS Act,1956 does not
fall within the meaning of the word partition used in Section 6 of the
HS Amended Act,2005.   
      18.(iii). No doubt as held by the Apex Court, as in Gurupad;
Narayan Rao Sham Rao Deshmukh; P.Govinda Reddy; Yethirejulu     
Neelaya and Sriram Bai(supra) and in Shub karan Bubna Vs. Sita Saran 
Bubna  at para-6 that, where only one or few of coparceners get
separated, others can continue to hold the remaining property jointly
without division by metes and bounds and in M.Venkataramana  
Hebbar(supra) at para-10 held that, despite severance in status of joint
family by expressing unequivocal intention by one of coparceners to
others, till partition by metes and bounds the parties may continue to
possess the property jointly.  It is to say, severance in status is not
actual partition and any separation by one or few does not affect the
remaining others to continue joint of the coparcenary property.
However, that concept is different to the concept under Section 6 of the
HS Act,1956 with reference to Section 6 of the HS Amended Act,2005, as 
to from the said notional partition, it amounts to separation of the share
of deceased father for succession opens, to bar the daughter of said
deceased coparcener to maintain suit as coparcener with her brothers.

    18.(iv). When notional partition by virtue of legal fiction created
by Explanation I of Section 6 of the HS Act,1956 has to be considered as
actual partition by given its full and due effect to the fiction as held by
the Apex Court in Gurupad and Narayan Rao Sham Rao    
Deshmukh(supra), from that the basic principle has been to presume
that a partition had been affected even for a specific purpose which is
to ascertain the interest of the deceased father coparcener as available
for succession and once the said interest was ascertained, even
remaining brother coparceners continue; even death of father taken
place before the HS Amended Act,2005 came into force and by legal 
fiction of notional partition, the father`s undivided share in the
coparcenary interest is ascertained for the limited purpose of its
separation, whether the daughter after the HS Amended Act came into 
force from continuation of remaining coparcenary by her brothers, can
claim as coparcener with them from any right by birth accrued after
the Amended Act came into force, is the question?.  For that the
answer is even in negative for the reasons discussed supra and also for
the reasons that, when Section 6 of the HS Act,1956 speaks notional
partition on death of any male member of coparcenary left behind him
female relatives etc., specified in Class-1 of the schedule of the Act, by
virtue of legal fiction his interest in coparcenary devolve by succession
and once it is the father that died and therefrom by virtue of notional
partition, there is no coparcenary of father, even brothers continue the
coparcenary with the remaining property, so far as daughter
concerned, after coming in to force of the Section 6 of the HS Amended
Act,2005, to claim right by birth, there is no coparcenary subsisting of
her father, from wording of the amended section is the daughter of a
coparcener and not even sister of coparcener, much less specifically
provided to claim in the deemed coparcenary of brothers even after
death of father, where notional partition concept of Section 6 of the HS
Act,1956 applies. Needless to say once Section 29A HS AP Amended Act    
was applicable for which notional partition not a bar and therefrom any
right already vested on daughter as coparcener, that wont divest after
coming in to force of the Section 6 of the HS Amended Act,2005.

    18.(v). Thus, the expressions of the Apex Court in Anardevi and
Sheela Devi(supra) cannot be said confined to facts and not laid down
any law to bind under Article 141 of the Constitution as law of the land.
A careful reading of Section 6(1) read with Section-6(5) and also
with Section 6(3) of the HS Amended Act clearly indicates that a
daughter can be considered as a coparcener only if her father was
a coparcener at the time of coming into force of the amended
provision.  The above two decisions categorically say therefrom that
the right of the daughter to claim as a coparcener under the HS
Amended Act, arises when the father manager is alive with coparcenary
property and if he is no more, from the notional partition, Succession
since opens, the right no longer accrues to claim by a daughter as a
coparcener and there by the HS Amended Act is prospective in 
operation.
    19. The earlier Division Bench expressions of the Karnataka High
Court in the case of M.Prithviraj Vs. Smt.Leelamma N - relying on
the expression of the Apex Court in Sheela Devi(supra) also held that
once father died and by virtue of notional partition under Section 6 of
the HS Act,1956 there was partition and succession opened, by virtue of
subsequent legislation by the HS Amended Act,2005, the daughter 
cannot claim share in the remaining properties and the HS Amended 
Act,2005 is thereby held prospective in operation, needless to say
another expression of the Karnataka High Court in the case of R.Kantha
Vs. Union of India  in further answering the HS Amended Act,2005
prevails over the earlier HS Karnataka State Amended Act,1994.

    20. In a recent single judge expression of the Madras High Court in
K.M.Thangavel Vs. K.T.Udaya Kumar  also it was held particularly at
para 29 that, by virtue of the notional partition under Section 6 of the
HS Act,1956 from death of male coparcener, from a female heir
intervenes, there was succession opens and once succession opened,  
the HS Amended Act,2005 has no application.  

    21. Thus, the law is consistent on the aspect of notional partition
under Section 6 of HS Act,1956 from death of male coparcener, from a
female heir intervenes there was succession opens by vesting of right
with irreversible situation by the legal fiction of a logical partition with
all its consequences and once the succession opened, the HS Amended   
Act,2005 has no application, from the wording of daughter of a
coparcener and not sister of coparcener, but for to say once HS AP
Amended Act applies for which notional partition is not a bar to claim
by female as coparcener and therefrom any right vested, that does not
divest after the HS Amended Act,2005. 

    22. Further, the Apex Court in G.Sekhar(supra) observed even by
referring to the 174th Report of the Law Commission of India and the
Statement of objects and reasons of the HS Amended Act,2005 of what  
Parliament intended to achieve the goal of removal of discrimination;
however held that the HS Amended Act,2005 is prospective and not 
retrospective in operation, as neither the 1956 Act nor the 2005 Act
seeks to reopen vesting of a right where succession has already taken
place.  For that conclusion also relied upon the expression in Eramma
Vs. Veerupanna  where it was held that if partition has not taken
place by the time HS Act,1956 came into force, Section 6 of the HS
Act,1956 would apply and the operation of the statute is thus
prospective in operation.

    23. Here coming back again to the facts of the case on hand, the
plaintiff was a married daughter by the time HS AP Amended Act,1986 
has come in to force and thereby not entitled to the benefits of it and
even the HS Amended Act,2005 has no application as before that, the
plaintiff`s father Rama Rao died in september,1997 where from
succession opened and the plaintiff got only 1/6th share that was by
notional partition determined and thus there is no question of
continuation of the plaintiff later as coparcener with her brother-2nd
defendant (from the wording of the Section 6 of the HS Amended
Act,2005 of the daughter of a coparcener and not the sister of a
coparcener) to take benefit of the Amended Act 2005.  From that,
when the cloud is cleared by the above referred expressions from
reading of the provisions of the Hindu Succession Act with Central and
A.P. State Amendments and therefrom when the plaintiff is not entitled
to claim any share by birth much less as a coparcener on par with 2nd
defendant, there is nothing to rearrange or redefine the shares defined
by the trial Court in the partition preliminary decree.
           24. Now coming to the costs awarded against the 2nd defendant
covered by the Cross Objections(SR)No.13681 of 2005 concerned;  
undisputedly, the plaintiff and 2nd defendant are sister and brother and
they are daughter and son of 1st defendant who are the family members
with close relationship and the plaint valued is on fixed Court Fee and
not on market value even, from the claim of joint and constructive
possession. Thus, awarding of costs against the 2nd defendant for the suit
claim no way justified for sustaining.  Hence, the Cross-Objections of the
2nd defendant are to be allowed by ordering no costs throughout.

        25. Coming to the Cross Objections(Cross-Objections(SR) No.3879  
of 2005) of the plaintiff as answered Supra when plaintiff is in possession
of item No.1 of the plaint schedule for which no rent she is paying and
other two items are with the 1st and 2nd defendants of whom 2nd
defendant is major shareholder of 2/3 share and the 1st defendant is
1/6th shareholder equal to plaintiff is no other than mother of plaintiff,
the trial Court is justified in not awarding past or future profits against
the defendants or any of them.  Thus, the trial Court`s decree holds
good and appeal of the 1st defendant also liable for dismissal in this
regard also.   Accordingly point No.1 is answered.
Point No. 2:
      26. In the result, appeal filed by the 1st defendant and the Cross-
Objections(SR)No.3879 of 2005 filed by the plaintiff are dismissed with
no costs and the Cross-Objections(SR)No.13681 of 2005 filed by the 2nd
defendant is allowed with no costs and by setting aside that portion of
the trial Courts decree awarding costs of suit against the 2nd defendant.
Memo filed by the 2nd defendant stating that during lifetime of his
mother-1st defendant, he is not seeking for division of his share in the
plaint schedule properties is recorded for the reason that there is no
limitation for obtaining final decree in a partition suit and Article 137 of
the Limitation Act,1963 also has no application of three years limitation
to obtain final decree. It is made clear that till actual division and
separation of share of plaintiff, from she is in possession of item No.1
out of the plaint schedule item Nos.1 to 3 properties and for no profits
awarded in favour of plaintiff for her share, she is neither liable for any
profits to the defendants nor for eviction meanwhile by the defendants
from item No.1 of the plaint schedule.

      27. Consequently, miscellaneous petitions, if any, pending in this
appeal shall stand closed.
___________________   
R.SUBHASH REDDY,J      
_______________________    
Dr.B.SIVA SANKARA RAO,J     
Date: 31.12.2014.
