
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE K.C.BHANU AND THE HONBLE SMT. JUSTICE ANIS              

CIVIL MISCELLANEOUS APPEAL NO. 4506 OF 2003         

07-08-2014 

G.Fazeel Ahmad.Appellant                               

S.Jameela Unnisa.....Respondent 

Counsel for the Appellant:Sri Nazeer Khan

Counsel  for the Respondent: Sri O.Manoher Reddy  


<Gist :

>Head Note: 


? Cases referred:

1. AIR 2001 S.C. 3958 

THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE K.C.BHANU       
AND  
THE HONBLE SMT. JUSTICE ANIS      

CIVIL MISCELLANEOUS APPEAL NO. 4506 OF 2003         

JUDGMENT:  (Per the Honble Smt. Justice Anis)  

1.      This Civil Miscellaneous Appeal, under Section 19 of the
Family Courts Act, 1984, is directed against the order, dated
10.11.2003 passed in O.P.No.2 of 2002 on the file of the
Judge, Family Court, Kurnool.
2.      Appellant was arrayed as the respondent, while the
respondent as the petitioner in O.P. before the Family Court.
3.      For the sake of convenience, the parties are referred to
as arrayed in the O.P. before the Family Court.
4.      The petitioner filed the petition under Section 3(1)(a) &
(d) of the Muslim Women (Protection of Rights on Divorce)
Act, 1986 (for short the Act) for reasonable and fair provision
of maintenance of Rs.6,00,000/- for her whole life, for return
of dowry amount and for return of Jahez articles mentioned
in petition schedule or its equivalent value.
5.      The brief averments made in the petition filed before the
Family Court is as follows:
        The marriage between the petitioner and the respondent
was solemnized on 11.07.1999 at Kurnool as per Shariath i.e.
Muslim customs.  At the time of marriage, the petitioners
parents incurred heavy expenditure towards marriage and
they presented the petition schedule articles and Rs.60,000/-
as dowry in cash to the respondent.  Further, the parents of
the petitioner gave 9  tulas of gold to the respondent at the
time of marriage.  After the marriage, the petitioner joined the
matrimonial society with the respondent and spent forty days.
During that period, the respondent started harassing the
petitioner to bring Hero Honda motorcycle and additional
dowry.  The petitioner has not been provided food properly,
thereby she fell sick for a period of four months and she was
not treated like a human being.  Thereafter, the petitioners
father took her to Kurnool for treatment.  After recovery from
illness, the father of the petitioner went to the house of
respondent at Nandyal and requested the respondent and his 
family members to take the petitioner to the matrimonial
society of the respondent, but they did not heed the request of
the father of the petitioner.  As the respondent has deserted
the petitioner, she filed M.C.No.1 of 2001 before the Family
Court at Kurnool. On 22.11.2000, the respondent
pronounced talaq to the petitioner by paying the Mehar and
three months Iddat amount i.e. Rs.4,692/-, but he has not
given dowry amount, gold and jahez articles as mentioned in
the schedule.
        The petitioner is a housewife and she is not in a position
to maintain herself by doing any work as she is a
Pardanashin lady and her parents are not financially sound
to maintain her as they became old.  The petitioner has no
source of income except the petitions schedule articles.  The
respondent is working in T.M.C. Cotton Seed Oil and Cake
Industries.  Apart from that, the respondent is earning a sum
of Rs.5,000/- per month through furniture business.  Hence,
the petitioner is entitled for reasonable and fair maintenance
extending beyond iddat period for her whole life.
6.      The brief averments made in the Counter filed by the
respondent before the Family Court is as follows:
        The respondent admitted that his marriage with the
petitioner was performed as per Muslim Law.  After the
marriage, the respondent took the petitioner to his house at
Nandyal where his parents were residing.  The parents of the
petitioner did not incur heavy expenditure in performing the
marriage between the petitioner and the respondent as
claimed by the petitioner.  The parents of the petitioner gave
Rs.20,000/- but not Rs.60,000/- and out of that Rs.20,000/-,
Rs.1,000/- was deducted by the parents of the petitioner
towards stitching charges of the clothes of the respondent.
The father of the petitioner has no capacity to give
Rs.60,000/- towards dowry.  The respondent denied that the
parents of the petitioner gave 9  tulas of gold ornaments
and jahez articles shown in the petition schedule, but
admitted that the petitioner filed M.C.No.1 of 2001.  The
respondent specifically stated that he is in possession of the
articles as mentioned in his counter in M.C.No.1 of 2001.
After marriage, the petitioner never stayed at Nandyal with
the respondent.  From the date of marriage, the petitioner,
her mother and her uncle by name Jaffer Miah forced the
respondent to keep the petitioner separately at Kurnool by
leaving his old aged parents at Nandyal, but the respondent
did not agree and whenever the respondent went to Kurnool
to get the petitioner to Nandyal, they used to quarrel with
him. The petitioner voluntarily left the house of the
respondent in the month of December, 1999 with gold articles
weighing about 9  tulas and other sarees.  The respondent
stated that he is ready to return Rs.19,000/- to the petitioner
after deducting the amount of 2  tulas of gold chain worth
Rs.12,000/- which was given to the petitioner at the time of
marriage.  The respondent denied that he demanded Hero 
Honda motorcycle and additional dowry from the parents of
the petitioner.  The respondent also denied that he harassed
the petitioner by not providing proper food to her.  The
respondent denied that he deserted the petitioner and the
petitioner fell sick for about nine months and her father took
her to Kurnool for treatment.  The petitioner not pressed
M.C.No.1 of 2001  and O.S.No.13 of 2001 for the reasons best
known to her.  The misunderstandings between the petitioner
and the respondent cropped up because of the petitioners
mother and her uncle by name Jaffer Mia as they started
forcing the respondent to keep the petitioner separately at
Kurnool at their house leaving his aged parents at Nandyal.
When the petitioner failed to join with the respondent, the
respondent gave legal notice on 24.05.2003 directing the
petitioner to stay with him at Nandyal, but she did not agree
to join with him, as such, he pronounced Talaq by paying
proper mehar and iddat amount. 
        The respondent also alleged that the petitioner filed a
criminal case, in which his parents and himself were obtained
anticipatory bail from the Court.  The respondent denied that
the petitioner is an unemployed lady and not having any
movable or immovable properties of her own.  The respondent
specifically stated that he was removed from service on
30.08.2000 by the management of the industry as he was not 
regularly attending the duties.  Further, the respondent also
not running the furniture business as claimed by the
petitioner, and therefore, finally prayed the Court to dismiss
the petition.
7.      Basing on the above pleadings, the Tribunal framed two
points and in order to substantiate her case, the petitioner
herself was examined as PW1, got examined her parents as  
PWs 2 and 3, examined one independent witness and got   
marked Exs.A.1 to A.10.  On behalf of the respondent, RWs 1 
to 3 were examined and Exs.B.1 to B.7 were marked.  
8.      After considering the oral and documentary evidence
and upon hearing the learned counsel for both the parties,
the trial Court allowed the petition in part and held that the
petitioner is entitled to recover the following amounts from
the respondent:
        (i) Rs.3,000/- being the amount towards Iddat period;
        (ii) Rs.1,125/- towards Mahar amount;
        (iii) Rs.20,000/- towards dowry amount;
         (iv) Rs.35,000/- towards the worth of gold ornaments
weighing seven tulas of gold retained by the
respondent;
        (v) for return of 25 items of the Jahez articles as
mentioned in the counter of the respondent; and
        (vi) a sum of Rs.1,000/- per month is awarded to the
petitioner towards reasonable and fair provision
including of her maintenance from the date of the
petition i.e. from 5.1.2002.
9.      Aggrieved by the order of the trial Court, the respondent
preferred the present appeal.
10.     The learned counsel for the appellant/respondent
argued that there is no dispute about the marriage of the
appellant with the respondent/petitioner on 11.07.1999 and
the appellant divorced the respondent as per Muslim law by
pronouncing talaq on 22.11.2000; that the allegations of the
respondent that her parents gave Rs.60,000/- as dowry and
9  tulas of gold and performed the marriage by spending
Rs.10,000/-, are all false; that as the appellant pronounced
talaq on 22.11.2000 by paying mehar and iddat amount, 
question of paying maintenance at Rs.1000/- per month does 
not arise; that the appellant is not working in T.M.C. Cotton
Seed Oil and Cake Industries, Nandyal and not earning
Rs.2,000/- per month as salary or Rs.5,000/- per month
from furniture business; that the appellant divorced the
respondent by pronouncing talaq on 22.11.2000 and the trial
Court erred in granting maintenance @ Rs.1,000/- per month
from the date of petition to the respondent, which is contrary
to the provisions of the Act and relied the case-law reported in
Danial Latifi and another  Vs.  Union of India  and finally
prayed the Court to set aside the order passed by the trial
Court in respect of the maintenance of Rs.1,000/- per month
granted to the respondent.
11.     On the other hand, the learned counsel for the
respondent/petitioner argued that the trial Court rightly
granted maintenance to the respondent herein by allowing the
O.P. in part; that the trial Court also held that the respondent
is entitled for Rs.20,000/- towards dowry amount,
Rs.35,000/- towards return of gold ornaments, Rs.4,125/-
towards iddat and mehar amount and Jahez articles, thus
there is no need for interference by this Court with respect to
the orders passed in favour of the respondent, and finally
prayed the Court to dismiss the appeal.
12.     After hearing both sides, the point that arises for
consideration is:
        Whether the appellant has made out any case to set 
aside the impugned order passed by the trial Court as
prayed for?


13.     POINT: 
      After hearing both sides and on perusal of oral and
documentary evidence, it is clear that there is no dispute
regarding the marriage of the appellant with the respondent
on 11.07.1999 as per Muslim law.  Immediately, after the
marriage, the respondent joined the matrimonial society of
the appellant and lead marital life for six months.  Thereafter,
the appellant and his family refused to receive the company of
the respondent.  The evidence on record shows that the
evidence of respondent and her parents supported the
pleadings, whereas the appellant denied the allegation of
demanding additional dowry and harassing the respondent. 
14.     It is an admitted fact that on 22.11.2000, the appellant
divorced the respondent as per Muslim law by pronouncing
talaq and the respondent admitted this fact in the petition
filed before the trial Court and also admitted that the
appellant paid Rs.4,692/- towards mehar and three months
iddat amount.  In the O.P. filed before the trial Court, the
respondent herein not only claimed the return of dowry
amount, jahez articles and 9  tulas of gold or equivalent
amount of Rs.47,500/- but also sought for a reasonable and
fair provision of maintenance of Rs.6,00,000/- under Section
3(1)(a) and (d) of the Act.  Section 3(1)(a) and (d) of the Act
reads thus:
3.     Mahr or other properties of Muslim woman to be
given to her at the time of divorce. -

(1)     Notwithstanding anything contained in any other
law for the time being in force, a divorced woman
shall be entitled to-

(a)     A reasonable and fair provision and
maintenance to be made and paid to her 
within the iddat period by her former
husband: 

(b)     * * *

(c)     * * *

(d)     All the properties given to her before or at
the time of marriage or after the marriage
by her relatives or friends or the husband
or any relatives of the husband or his
friends.
15.     The learned counsel for the appellant argued that the
appellant paid Rs.4,692/- towards mehar and three months
iddat amount and he is ready to return Rs.20,000/- towards
dowry amount instead of Rs.60,000/- claimed by the
respondent and also ready to return the jehaz articles
mentioned in the counter filed by him in the trial Court and
also ready to pay Rs.35,000/- towards cost of the gold
ornaments.  So far as payment of dowry amount is concerned, 
the respondent contended that her father gave Rs.60,000/- as
dowry at the time of marriage, whereas the appellant stated
that he received only Rs.20,000/- towards dowry amount and
he is ready to pay the same.  Since there is no specific
evidence on this aspect, the trial Court rightly ordered to
return of Rs.20,000/- towards dowry amount.  Likewise, the
trial Court also rightly held that the appellant has to return
Rs.35,000/- towards the cost of gold ornaments and also
return of Jahez articles.   However, the trial Court after
considering the evidence, legal propositions enumerated in
various decisions and settled law reported in Danial Latifi and
another  Vs.  Union of India (1 supra), granted Rs.1,000/- per
month towards maintenance from the date of petition i.e.
05.01.2002.
16.     Now, the only dispute remains is with regard to the
payment of Rs.1,000/- per month as maintenance which was  
awarded by the trial Court.  The learned counsel for the
appellant argued that after divorce, the respondent is not
entitled to claim maintenance  from the appellant as she is no
more the wife of the appellant and whatever amount paid
towards mehar and three months iddat amount is sufficient
and the appellant is not liable to pay any further maintenance
to the respondent.   On the other hand, the learned counsel
for the respondent argued that iddat period maintenance is
not fair and reasonable and the appellant has to provide
sufficient means of livelihood to the respondent and relied on
a decision reported in Danial Latifi and another  Vs.  Union of
India (1 supra), wherein the Honble Supreme Court held at
Para 29 as follows:
        A careful reading of the provisions of the Act would
indicate that a divorced woman is entitled to a
reasonable and fair provision for maintenance.  It was
stated that Parliament seems to intend that the divorced
woman gets sufficient means of livelihood, after the
divorce and, therefore, the word provision indicates that
something is provided in advance for meeting some
needs.  In other words, at the time of divorce the Muslim
husband is required to contemplate the future needs
and make preparatory arrangements in advance for 
meeting those needs.  Reasonable and fair provision may
include provision for her residence, her food, her cloths,
and other articles.  The expression within should be
read as during or for and this cannot be done
because words cannot be construed contrary to their
meaning as the word within would mean on or before,
not beyond and, therefore, it was held that the Act
would mean that on or before the expiration of the iddat
period, the husband is bound to make and pay a 
maintenance to the wife and if he fails to do so then the
wife is entitled to recover it by filing an application before
the Magistrate as provided in Section 3(3) but nowhere
the Parliament has provided that reasonable and fair
provision and maintenance is limited only for the iddat
period and not beyond it.  It would extend to the whole
life of the divorced wife unless she gets married for a
second time.
It is also held at Para 37 as follows:
        While upholding the validity of the Act, we may sum up
our conclusions:
1)      A Muslim husband is liable to make reasonable and 
fair provision for the future of the divorced wife
which obviously includes her maintenance as well.
Such a reasonable and fair provision extending
beyond the iddat period must be made by the 
husband within the iddat period in terms of Section
3(1)(a) of the Act.
2)      Liability of Muslim husband to his divorced wife
arising under Section 3(1)(a) of the Act to pay
maintenance is not confined to iddat period.
3)      A divorced Muslim woman who has not remarried  
and who is not able to maintain herself after iddat
period can proceed as provided under Section 4 of
the Act against the relatives who are liable to
maintain her in proportion to the properties which
they inherit on her death according to Muslim law
from such divorced woman including her children
and parents.  If any of the relatives being unable to
pay maintenance, the Magistrate may direct the
State Wakf Board established under the Act to pay
such maintenance. 
4)      The provisions of the Act do not offend Articles 14,
15 and 21 of the Constitution of India.
17.     The contention of the appellant that he paid mehar and
three months iddat amount amounting to Rs.4,692/- and it is
sufficient for the respondent towards maintenance.  On the
other hand, the learned counsel for the respondent contended
that the divorced woman is entitled to a reasonable and fair
provision for maintenance.  The Honble Supreme Court in
the above judgment clearly held that a Muslim woman is
entitled for a reasonable and fair provision extending beyond
the iddat period.  The Honble Supreme Court further held
that reasonable and fair provision may include provision for
her residence, her food, her clothes and other articles.
Therefore, payment of Rs.4,692/- towards mehar and three
months iddat amount to the respondent, is not a reasonable
and fair maintenance.
18.     In the petition filed before the trial Court, the
respondent herein no doubt claimed Rs.6 lakhs towards 
reasonable and fair maintenance.  But, a careful reading of
the evidence of the appellant and respondent shows that the
appellant was working in T.M.C. Cotton Seed Oil and Cake 
Industries, Nandyal and drawing a salary of Rs.2,000/- per
month, however as the appellant has not been attending the
office, he was removed from service and now, he is not in a
position to pay such maintenance.   Though the appellant has
not produced any evidence to show that he lost his job, but
the fact remains that the appellant divorced the respondent
on 22.11.2000 by pronouncing talaq and now it is the duty of
the appellant to provide reasonable and fair maintenance to
the respondent.
19.     Taking into consideration of the financial background of
the appellant, an amount of Rs.50,000/- is awarded to the
respondent herein towards maintenance, which is a
reasonable and fair provision for maintenance and the
impugned order of the trial Court with regard to granting of
Rs.1,000/- per month towards reasonable and fair provision
from the date of petition, is hereby set aside.   The impugned
order of the trial Court with regard to awarding of Rs.3,000/-
towards iddat period amount, Rs.1,125/- towards Mehar
amount, Rs.20,000/- towards dowry amount, Rs.35,000/-  
towards worth of gold ornaments weighting 7 tulas of gold
and for return of 25 items of Jahez articles as mentioned in
the counter filed before the trial Court, is hereby confirmed.
20.         With the above modification, the Civil Miscellaneous
Appeal is dismissed.  No order as to costs.  Miscellaneous
Petitions, if any, pending in the appeal shall stand closed.
-----------------------
(K.C. BHANU, J) 
-----------------------
(ANIS, J)
07.08.2014
