
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE U. DURGA PRASAD RAO           
Criminal Petition No.10782 of 2014
28.11.2014 
Between: 
Nalla Thirupathi Reddy
and others.                                                             .... Petitioners
AND  
The State of Telangana,
Rep. by its Public Prosecutor,
High Court of Judicature at Hyderabad
For the States of Telangana and A.P
and another.                                                           . Respondents
! Counsel for Petitioners               : Sri Y. Hema Chander 
^ Counsel for Respondent No.1   : Public Prosecutor for State
< Gist:
> Head Note: 
? Cases referred:
1)      (2007) 15 SCC 369 
2)      (2011) 1 OLR (SC) 328 
3)      (2010) 3 Crimes (HC) 497 
4)      (2011) 7 SCC 616 = (2011) 3 ALT (Cri) 242


HONBLE SRI JUSTICE U. DURGA PRASAD RAO          
Criminal Petition No.10782 of 2014
ORDER:  
        The point for determination in this quash petition is whether a second
wife can lodge a police report under Section 498-A I.P.C.
2)      On factual side, the Nalla Rama presented a report to S.H.O, Metpalli
P.S with the allegations that Nalla Thirupathi Reddy/ first petitioner herein
is her husband and petitioners 2 and 3 herein are his parents and that
initially first petitioner married one Latha about 10 years back and begot
two children and the said Latha suffered injuries in a fire accident and
subsequently about 4 years back the first petitioner married the complainant
with the consent of Latha and the parents of complainant presented him
Rs.2,00,000/- as dowry and some land and Rs.1,00,000/- towards other 
paraphernalia and out of their wedlock they begot a daughter by name
Vysali and thereafter all the petitioners started harassing her for additional
dowry of Rs.10,00,000/- and they subjected her to physical and mental
cruelty and ultimately necked her out and the disputes raised by her parents
through elders did not yield any result and ultimately on 03.11.2012 the
first petitioner went to her paternal home and bet her.  The police registered
a case in Crime No.221/2012 under Section 498-A and 506 of I.P.C and the
case is under investigation.
3)      While-so, the petitioners/A.1 to A.3 filed the instant petition seeking
to quash the FIR in Crime No.221/2012 on the grounds of denying the
complaint allegations on one hand and questioning the locus standi of the
complainant, being the alleged second wife to file complaint under Section
498-A I.P.C.
4)      Heard learned counsel for petitioners.  Though notice was served on
the second respondent/complainant, there is no representation on her behalf.
5)      While denying the complaint averments, learned counsel vehemently 
argued that even assuming that the allegations are true, still the right to file
complaint under Section 498-A I.P.C vests with a legally wedded wife
alone but not a second wife or a concubine.  He would submit that the
complaint itself shows she is a second wife and the Latha, who is the legally
wedded wife of the first petitioner is very much alive and in these
circumstances, continuation of proceedings would amount nothing but
abuse of process of law.  Learned counsel further submitted that apart from
lodging the present complaint, the complainant also filed M.C.No.6/2013
and D.V.C.No.2/2013 against the petitioners making the same allegations.
Besides, she also filed O.P.No.1/2014 before the Senior Civil Judges
Court, Jagithyal seeking annulment of her marriage with first petitioner.  In
all these petitions she admitted to be a second wife having married the first
petitioner knowing fully well that he is having a legally wedded first wife
alive.  To buttress his argument that a second wife cannot maintain a
complaint under Section 498-A I.P.C, he relied upon the following
decisions:


1)      Shivacharan Lal Verma vs. State of Madhya Pradesh  
2)      Sunita Jha vs. State of Jharkhand
3)      A. Subash Babu vs. State of Andhra Pradesh  
6)      POINT: A perusal of the complaint averments, no doubt reveal that
the first petitioner already married one Latha about 10 years back and begot
children and subsequently she met with a fire accident and so the
complainant married the first petitioner with the consent of said Latha.  So
the complainant is the second wife of the first petitioner.  Then she made
allegations about the physical and mental harassment said to be meted out
by all the petitioners demanding her to bring additional dowry.   Be that it
may, the petitioners are challenging her locus standi on the ground that she
is not the legally wedded wife but only a second wife even assuming her
allegations to be true.
a)      In Shivacharan Lal Vermas case (1 supra), the facts are that
appellants 1 and 2 are husband and wife and first appellant married the
deceased second time.  Both the appellants were convicted for the offences
under Sections 306 and 498-A I.P.C on the ground that they harassed the
deceased who was living with them and abetted her in committing suicide.
Honble Apex Court while maintaining the conviction under Section 306
I.P.C set aside the conviction under Section 498-A I.P.C on the observation
that the alleged marriage with Mohini (deceased) during the subsistence of
valid marriage with Kalindi (A.2) is null and void.
b)      In Sunita Jhas case (2 supra), the point for consideration was who
can be termed as relative of the husband for the purpose of Section 498-A
I.P.C.  This decision has no relevance to the present case on hand.
c)      In A. Subash Babus case (3 supra), a learned single Judge of this
High Court relying upon Shivacharan Lal Vermas case (1 supra) held that
a second wife cannot maintain a complaint under Section 498-A I.P.C.   It
should be noted here that against the judgment in A. Subash Babus case (3
supra) Criminal Appeal was carried out to Honble Apex Court in A.Subash
Babu vs. State of A.P. , wherein Honble Apex Court while deprecating the
learned Single Judges order quashing the proceedings in respect of the
offence under Section 498-A I.P.C has observed thus:
Para 16: This Court finds that the High Court has quashed the
proceedings pending before the learned Magistrate under
Section 498A of IPC on the spacious ground that the marriage of the
Appellant with the Respondent No. 2 is void and as Respondent No.
2 is not the wife, she was not entitled to lodge first information
report with the police for commission of offence under
Section 498A IPC and on the basis of police report, cognizance of
the said offence against the Appellant could not have been taken by
the learned Magistrate. Such reasoning is quite contrary to the law
declared by this Court in Reema Aggarwal v. Anupam and  
others ((2004) 3 SCC 199). After examining the scope of
Section 498A of the Indian Penal Code and holding that a person
who enters into marital arrangement cannot be allowed to take
shelter behind the smoke screen of contention that since there was
no valid marriage the question of dowry does not arise, this Court
speaking through Hon'ble Mr. Justice Arijit Pasayat, has held as
under:
Such legalistic niceties would destroy the purpose of the provisions.
Such hairsplitting legalistic approach would encourage harassment
to a woman over demand of money. The nomenclature "dowry" does   
not have any magic charm written over it. It is just a label given to
demand of money in relation to marital relationship. The legislative
intent is clear from the fact that it is not only the husband but also
his relations who are covered by Section 498A. The legislature has
taken care of children born from invalid marriages. Section 16 of the
Marriage Act deals with legitimacy of children of void and voidable
marriages. Can it be said that the legislature which was conscious of
the social stigma attached to children of void and voidable
marriages closed its eyes to the plight of a woman who unknowingly
or unconscious of the legal consequences entered into the marital
relationship? If such restricted meaning is given, it would not
further the legislative intent. On the contrary, it would be against the
concern shown by the legislature for avoiding harassment to a
woman over demand of money in relation to marriages. The first
exception to Section 494 has also some relevance. According to it,
the offence of bigamy will not apply to "any person whose marriage
with such husband or wife has been declared void by a court of
competent jurisdiction". It would be appropriate to construe the
expression "husband" to cover a person who enters into marital
relationship and under the color of such proclaimed or feigned
status of husband subjects the woman concerned to cruelty or
coerces her in any manner or for any of the purposes enumerated in
the relevant provisions-Sections 304B/498A, whatever be the
legitimacy of the marriage itself for the limited purpose of
Sections 498A and 304B IPC. Such an interpretation, known and 
recognized as purposive construction has to come into play in a case
of this nature. The absence of a definition of "husband" to
specifically include such persons who contract marriages ostensibly
and cohabit with such woman, in the purported exercise of their role
and status as "husband" is no ground to exclude them from the
purview of Section 304B or 498A IPC, viewed in the context of the
very object and aim of the legislations introducing those
provisions.
        With the above observations, Honble Apex Court set aside the order
of learned Single Judge insofar as his quashing the proceedings under
Section 498-A I.P.C is concerned and held as follows:
Para 17: In view of firm and clear law laid down on the subject, this
Court is of the confirmed view that the High Court was not justified
at all in quashing the proceedings initiated against the Appellant
under Section 498A of the Code on the ground that the Respondent 
No. 2 was not wife within the meaning of Section 498A of the IPC
and was not entitled to maintain complaint under the said
provision.
        It is true that there is a dichotomy of opinion between Shivacharan
Lal Vermas case (1 supra) and A. Subash Babus case (4 supra). However, 
I tend to follow the decision of Honble Apex Court in A. Subash Babus
case (4 supra) as it being the latest judgment on the subject in issue i.e,
whether complaint initiated by a second wife for the offence under Section
498-A I.P.C can be quashed or not.  In the light of above decision of
Honble Apex Court in A.Subash Babus case (4 supra), the petitioners/A.1
to A.3 cannot seek for quashing of the proceedings. Sofaras the genuinity of
the complaint allegations touching the harassment for additional dowry is
concerned, at this peripheral stage of the matter which is under
investigation, that aspect cannot be decided and therefore, police shall be
allowed to investigate the matter.
7)      In the result, this Criminal Petition is dismissed with a direction to the
police to continue the investigation to its logical end.
        As a sequel, miscellaneous applications pending, if any, shall stand
closed.
_________________________   
U. DURGA PRASAD RAO, J      
Date: 28.11.2014
