
HONOURABLE SRI JUSTICE L. NARASIMHA REDDY AND HONOURABLE SRI JUSTICE M.S.K.JAISWAL                     

CRIMINAL APPEAL No.1727 OF 2009      

13-03-2014 

State of A.P., rep. By Public Prosecutor, High Court, Hyderabad... Appellant

Smt. Ettekapalli Yellamma @ Yellamma @ Nayomi W/o. E. Shyam and another ...     
Respondents  

Counsel for the Appellant: Public Prosecutor

Counsel for the Respondent:Sri Madhusudan Reddy   

<Gist:

>Head Note: 

?Cases referred                 

:  2014 (2) Supreme Court Cases 776 

HONOURABLE SRI JUSTICE L. NARASIMHA REDDY            

AND  


HONOURABLE SRI JUSTICE M.S.K. JAISWAL         

CRIMINAL APPEAL No.1727 of 2009     


JUDGMENT: (Per Hon'ble Sri Justice L.Narasimha Reddy)   

        The total dishonest and illegal act performed by a senior Police Officer -
PW-15 in this case, by name, P. Williamcary, who functioned as the Assistant
Commissioner of Police, Begumpet Division, in the year 2005, has watered down an 
otherwise fit case for trial under Section 304-B IPC.  The efforts made by him
yielded result and A-1 and A-2, the mother-in-law and husband of the deceased,
were given a clean acquittal.  The trial Court also was not alert enough and
either has failed in its duty or was indifferent about such a blatant
illegality.

        2.  PW-1, by name, Balaraju had a daughter, by name, Premalatha @ Latha.  
The marriage of that girl was performed with A-2 on 24.04.2006.  In the
afternoon of 16.10.2006, PW-1 received a message from P.S. Begumpet, that his 
daughter died.  He rushed to the spot along with his wife - PW-2 and other
relatives and found the dead body of Latha in the house of A-1 and A-2.  Chunni
was said to have been put around the neck of the deceased and on removal of
that, they said to have noticed the injuries around the neck.  Promptly, he
submitted a complaint, Ex.P-1, before the police station.  FIR No.356 of 2006
was registered even before arrival of PW-1, wherein a crime punishable under
Section 304-B IPC was alleged against A-1 and A-2.  As required under law, the
investigation was handed over to a senior Police Officer i.e. PW-15.  The
inquest, post mortem and other formalities, as required under law, were
completed with the participation of the officials of the concerned departments.

        3.  A serious turn in the case has taken place with the issuance of
section alteration memo - Ex.P-16, by PW-15 on 23.10.2006.  The sole basis for
him to alter the provision of law into Sections 302 and 498-A IPC instead of
304-B IPC was the alleged confession of A-1 during the course of interrogation.
Though the charge sheet made extensive reference to Section 304-B IPC, 
ultimately, the trial Court framed a charge referable to Sections 498-A and 302
IPC, omitting Section 304-B IPC.
        
        4.  During the course of trial, PWs.1 to 16 were examined and Exs.P-1 to
P-16 were filed.  MOs.1 and 2 were taken on record.  Contradictions elicited
from PWs.1 and 2 were marked as EXs.D-1 and   
D-2.

        5.  Through its judgment, dated 27.11.2008, the trial Court acquitted both
the accused.  Hence, this appeal by the State under Section 378(1) and (3)
Cr.P.C.

        6.  Learned Additional Public Prosecutor submits that the investigating
officer has completely altered the course of investigation by changing the
provision of law without there being any basis.  She contends that even if there
was a confession by A-1 as to the commission of offence, the alteration of
provision of law was not at all warranted, and the trial Court could have
proceeded by framing the charge under Section 304-B IPC.  She contends that the
trial Court was not vigilant enough to prevent miscarriage of justice on account
of the collusion of PW-15 with the accused.

        7.  Learned Public Prosecutor further contends that even otherwise, the
circumstantial evidence was sufficient to convict the accused. She submits that
the death of the deceased took place right in the house of A-1 and A-2, that
too, less than six months from the date of marriage and various injuries noticed
around the neck of the deceased were not even explained.  She submits that being
the mother-in-law and husband of the deceased, the accused failed to explain the
incriminating circumstances atleast in their statements under Section 313
Cr.P.C., and failure in this behalf would lead to a suspicion as to their
involvement.  She placed reliance upon the judgment of the Supreme Court in
Anjappa v. State of Karnataka1.

        8.  Sri Madhusudan Rao, learned counsel for the accused, on the other
hand, submits that the investigation, in this case, was conducted in accordance
with law and at no stage, objection was raised by anyone.  He submits that there
are no circumstances, whatever, to suspect the involvement of the accused for
the death of the deceased and on finding that the prosecution failed to prove
the case, the trail Court acquitted the accused.  He submits that A-2 was not in
the house when the incident took place and there is nothing on record to
indicate that A-1 has caused any harm, much less any injury to the deceased.

        9.  The death of the deceased took place hardly within six months from the
date of her marriage with A-2.  PWs.1 to 3 stated that the deceased used to
complain about the harassment being caused to her by A-1 and A-2 by demanding  
additional dowry.  PW-1 is a Mason and he was maintaining the family of quite a
considerable size.  On account of the poverty, he could not meet the demands of
A-1 and A-2.

        10.  There is no dispute that the death of the deceased took place in the
house of A-1 and A-2.  Three factors, namely, 1) the death took place within
seven years from the date of marriage, 2) the death occurred in the house of the
accused and 3) the death was unnatural; were sufficient to invoke the provisions
of Section 304-B IPC.  That, in fact, was done by the Station House Officer, and
the further steps in the matter were also taken on that basis.  Though the
investigation could have been conducted in the ordinary course by the C.I. of
Police, it was entrusted to PW-15 - the Assistant Commissioner of Police,
because of the requirement under Section 304-B IPC.  The inquest was conducted 
in the presence of the Executive Magistrate - PW-11.  The post mortem was also
conducted with the participation of two Medical Officers as required under law.

11.  PW-15 appears to have started interrogating the accused.  Hardly, within
one week, he gave a serious turn to the entire case by issuing Ex.P-16, which
reads:
        "During the course of investigation, on examination of the body of the
deceased, it appears to be a case of strangulations, forcibly compressed the
neck of the deceased Smt. Premlatha with green colour chunni, till her death as
such it is established that it is a case of murder, not a case of suicidal
death, due to dowry harassment. 
        During the course of interrogation, the accused smt. Yellamma confessed
that, due to fit of anger she tied the chunni over the neck of her daughter-in-
law Premlatha till her death, which constituted an offence U/S.302 IPC.  In
addition to the above, the FIR states that, there is harassment for additional
dowry, which constituted U/s.498(A) IPC.
        Under the above circumstances, the section of law was altered from 304(B)
IPC to Sec.302 and 498(A) IPC and instructed the Inspector of Police, Begumpet
PS to take up further investigation in the case."

        12.  We are indeed shocked to notice the ingenuinity, if not, dishonesty
on the part of PW-15.  But for the fact that he retired from service, we would
have directed initiation of disciplinary proceedings against him.

        13.  The only reason stated in Ex.P-16 for altering the provision of law
from 304-B IPC to 302 and 498-A IPC is that A-1 confessed of the commission of
offence.  It is just ununderstandable as to how that confession would warrant
the alteration of provision.  Even with that confession, the investigation and
the trial could have been continued by citing that very provision i.e. 304 IPC.
In the charge sheet, the fact that the FIR was registered by invoking Section
304-B IPC and the provision of law altered was half way through, was clearly
mentioned.  The trial Court, however, did not pay attention and has simply
framed the charges under Sections 302 and 498-A IPC. 

        14.  After the trial, a finding was recorded by the trial Court to the
effect that there are no eye-witnesses to the incident and even the
circumstantial evidence is not sufficient to hold the accused guilty.  We are of
the view that had the charge been framed under Section 304-B IPC, the things
would have been different altogether.  The accused would have been under
obligation to explain the circumstances under which the death of the deceased
occurred, particularly, as to how the injuries around her neck were caused.

        15.  The very purpose of inserting Section 304-B IPC, by the Parliament
was to neutralize the collusive and ingenuine steps, mostly taken by the
prosecution and leaving no alternative for the Courts to convict the persons
accused of committing the murder of innocent and gullible brides and women.

        16.  The commission of crimes against women, that too, shortly after the
marriage, by demanding additional dowry and causing other kinds of harassment
has become so rampant that substantial amendment to the criminal law had to be 
made.  The parameters of the trial and adjudication of such matters are changed
by placing the burden to prove innocence upon the accused, than to require the
prosecution to prove the guilty of the accused.  Not only Section 304-B IPC was
introduced, but also the corresponding provisions were incorporated in the
Evidence Act.  However, with one stroke of pen i.e., by signing on Ex.P-16, PW-
15 has defeated the very objective intended by the Parliament.

        17.  We would not have felt disturbed had it been a case where provisions
of Section 304-B IPC were not invoked at any stage at all, though the case
wanted it otherwise.  The prosecution proceeded on correct lines and all the
formalities that were required under Section 304-B IPC were complied with.  This
included (a) entrustment of investigation to a Sub-Divisional Police Officer,
(b) conducting of inquest before the Executive Magistrate, and (c) conducting
the postmortem with the participation of two medical officers.  The confession
of A-1 was cited as the lamest possible excuse for PW-15, to give a totally
different direction to the case, which was proceeding on correct lines.

        18.  However, we are not helpless.  Section 216 Cr.P.C., confers the power
upon a Court to alter the charge.  The only requirement is that once the charge
is altered, the witnesses must be recalled as provided for under Section 217
Cr.P.C.  We are of the view that this is one of the fittest case, where the
charge can be altered at the appellate stage also, and the record not only
permits, but also warrants such a course.

19.  Therefore, the Criminal Appeal is allowed setting aside the judgment dated
27.11.2008 of the trail Court in S.C. No.149 of 2007 and the matter is remanded
to the trial Court for de novo trial.  The trial Court shall frame a charge
under Section 304-B IPC.  The bail granted to the accused by this Court on
12.05.2010, shall remain in force till the disposal of the criminal case, after
remand.  The trial Court shall endeavour to dispose of the case within a period
of six months.  None of the observations made by us herein shall be treated as a
finding on any aspect.  We also make it clear that the case shall be adjudicated
after re-trail, uninfluenced by any of the observations made in this appeal.
________________   
L.NARASIMHA REDDY, J     
__________________   
M.S.K.JAISWAL, J   
March 13, 2014
