
THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE  M. SEETHARAMA MURTI          

SA.Nos.1140 of 2003 and batch  

07-12-2015 

1.Gottumukkala Sundara Narasaraju and 2 others . Appellants  

1.Pinnamaraju Venkata Narasimharaju and 4 others . Respondents    

Counsel for the Appellants: Sri Y.V. Ravi Prasad
                             (senior counsel)

Counsel for the Respondents/plaintiffs  : Sri K.V.Satyanaranaya 
                                         (senior counsel)

<Gist :

>Head Note: 

? Cases referred:

1. AIR 2011 AP 88 
2. (2011) 9 SCC 126 
3. AIR 2008 SC 363 
4. 2006 (1) ALD 116
5. AIR 1951 PATNA 556 (CN.157)   
6. AIR 1961 SC 808 
7. AIR 1975 SC 1089 
8. AIR 1964 SC 207 
9. (2009) 10 SCC 273 
10 (2005) 4 SCC 120 
11  AIR 1963 SC 385 
12. AIR 2000 SC 1238  
13. AIR 2000 SC 3272 (1) 
14. 1998(2) ALT 277 
15. (2014) 2 SCC 269 
16. AIR 1999 SC 2213  
17. AIR 1965 SC 1812  

HONBLE SRI JUSTICE M. SEETHARAMA MURTI          

S.A Nos. 1140 and 1305 of 2003 

COMMON JUDGMENT:       

      The second appeal in SA.No.1140 of 2003 under Section 100
of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (the Code, for brevity) by
the unsuccessful defendants 2 and 4 is directed against the decree
and judgment dated 11.09.2003 in AS.No.204 of 2001 on the file of
the Court of the learned II Additional District Judge,
Visakhapatnam.  
1.1     By the impugned decree and judgment, the Court below had  
dismissed the first appeal of the defendants 2 and 4 and also the
cross objections of the plaintiffs.
1.2     Therefore, feeling aggrieved of the dismissal of their cross
objections and for not awarding future mesne profits, the plaintiffs
had brought the other second appeal SA.No.1305 of 2003. 
1.3     The learned Additional District Judge while dismissing the
said first appeal of the defendants 2 and 4 and the cross objections
of the plaintiffs had confirmed the decree and judgment dated
27.08.2001 of the learned Senior Civil Judge, Yelamachili of
Visakhapatnam District passed in OS.No.32 of 1997 (Old 
OS.No.287/91 on the file of the Court of the learned Principal
District Munsif Court, Yelamachili) filed for declaration of
plaintiffs right, title and interest over Ac.5.89 cents of Zeroithi
land of Z. Chinthuva village, Rambilli mandal in four items viz.,
Ac.1.95 cents in S.No.103/3A; Ac.1.95 cents in S.No.103/3B; 
Ac.1.35 cents in S.No.103/3C and Ac.0.64 cents in S.No.103/4 
situate contiguously and for recovery of possession of the said
property more fully described in the schedule annexed to the
plaint.
2.      At the time of admission of the second appeal of the
plaintiffs, the following substantial questions of law were
formulated:
1)      Whether the courts below were justified in not
awarding future mesne profits even though not prayed
decreeing the suit holding that the plaintiffs are having
right, title and interest over the suit schedule lands?
2)      Whether the courts below were correct in not
awarding future mesne profits as not being prayed
contrary to the judgments of AIR 1965 SC 1812, AIR 1952 
SC 358 and AIR 1974 Gujarat 95?  
      [Reproduced verbatim]

3.      At the time of admission of the second appeal of the
defendants 2 and 4, the following substantial questions of law were
formulated.
1)      Whether, under the facts and circumstances, certain
findings in an earlier suit after reaching its finality can be
reversed in subsequent suit when the parties disputed
property and the documents relied upon are one and the
same, irrespective of the relief sought for?
2)      Whether it is justified that when certain exhibits,
which are disbelieved in the earlier proceedings could be
believed in subsequent proceedings?

      [Reproduced verbatim]

4.      At the time of hearing of these two appeals, the following
additional substantial questions of law are formulated in the
second appeal of the defendants 2 and 4.
1)      Whether the suit of the plaintiff is barred by law of
limitation in view of the provision of Section 58 of the
Indian Limitation Act?
2)      Whether the Courts below are justified in ignoring the
findings in the earlier suit on the ground that a document
which is filed in the present litigation was not filed in the
earlier suit despite the fact that the findings in the
earlier suit, which have become final are binding on the
parties insofar as the disputed property?

5.      I have heard the learned senior counsel appearing for the
defendants 2 and 4/the appellants in SA.No.1140 of 2003 and the
learned senior counsel appearing for the plaintiffs/the appellants
in SA.No.1305 of 2003.  The 4th defendant had died during the
pendency of these appeals and the 3rd appellant is brought on
record in SA.No.1140 of 2003 being his legal representative.
6.      The parties in these appeals shall hereinafter be referred to
as the plaintiffs and the defendants as arraigned in the suit, for
convenience and clarity.
7.      The introductory facts, in brief, are as follows:
7.1     The plaintiffs had brought the suit against the defendants 1
and 2 for declaration of their right, title and interest over the
plaint schedule property and for recovery of possession of the same
after evicting the defendants therefrom.  During the pendency of
the suit, the 1st defendant had died and his legal representatives
were brought on record as defendants 3 and 4.  The 1st defendant
during his life time had filed a written statement and resisted the
suit.  The 2nd defendant had filed a written statement stating that
he is not a necessary party to the suit.  The 3rd defendant, who is
one of the legal representatives of the 1st defendant, had remained
ex parte.  Though the suit was originally instituted in the Court of
the Principal District Munsif, Yelamanchili on 08.08.1997, the said
learned Munsif having passed an order holding that the said Court
has no pecuniary jurisdiction to try the suit had accordingly
returned the plaint for presentation to the proper Court.
Thereafter, the plaint was presented in the Court of the Senior
Civil Judge, Yelamanchili and the suit was renumbered as OS.No.32 
of 1997.  After the death of the 1st defendant, the 2nd defendant
had filed a further written statement denying the plaint averments
and had claimed that after the death of the 1st defendant, the
subject property devolved upon him and the 4th defendant by
virtue of a registered Will dated 28.03.1990 executed by the
deceased 1st defendant and that the 3rd defendant is not a
necessary party and that in terms of the said Will, the suit property
had devolved upon the defendants 2 and 4.
7.2     At trial, the 1st plaintiff and his supporting witness were
examined as PWs1 and 2 and exhibits A1 to A42 were marked on    
the side of the plaintiffs.  The 2nd defendant and his supporting
witnesses were examined as DWs1 to 3 and exhibits B1 to B20 were   
marked on the side of the defendants.
7.3     On merits, the trial Court had decreed the suit of the
plaintiffs declaring the right, title and interest of the plaintiffs
over the plaint schedule property and that they are entitled to
recover possession of the same from the defendants.  However,
the trial Court did not grant future mesne profits to the plaintiffs.
The unsuccessful defendants had preferred the first appeal in
AS.No.204 of 2001.  In that first appeal, the plaintiffs had filed
cross objections feeling aggrieved of the denial of grant of future
mesne profits to them by the trial Court.  As already noted, by the
impugned decree and judgment, the Court below had dismissed  
the first appeal of the defendants 2 and 4 and also the cross
objections of the plaintiffs.  Therefore, the plaintiffs had preferred
SA.No.1305 of 2003 and the defendants 2 and 4 had preferred
SA.No.1140 of 2003.  In the facts and circumstances, both these
appeals are being disposed of by this common judgment. 
8.      To begin with, it is necessary to refer to the pleadings.
8.1     The averments in the plaint, in brief, are as follows:
      The plaint schedule properties are the self acquired
properties of the 1st plaintiff and also the family properties of the
plaintiffs.  They are in possession and enjoyment of the same for
more than 50 years and they are paying regularly land revenue to
the Government.  The revenue authorities had recognized the title
and possession of the plaintiffs and had issued ryot patta passbooks
in their favour.  Though the plaintiffs had divided the plaint
schedule properties amongst them, they are cultivating the entire
plaint schedule land jointly and sharing the produce.  The plaintiffs
had raised Casurina Tope in the plaint schedule land nearly about
19 years prior to the suit and had realized the produce about 12
years prior to the suit.  They had again raised Casurina tope in the
schedule land about 11 years prior to the suit.  The 1st defendant is
the son-in-law of the 1st plaintiff.  As the plaintiffs had not allotted
any share in the family properties to the daughter of the 1st
plaintiff by name Appalanarasamma, who is the wife of the 1st
defendant, both the defendants 1 and 2 had started harassing her
to bring Rs.50,000/- from the 1st plaintiff, who is her father.  As
she was unable to bring any dowry amount from the 1st plaintiff as
desired by the said defendants, they had started threatening the
plaintiffs and began to declare in the village that they would
occupy the plaint schedule land and cut away the Casurina tope
and appropriate the same towards the dowry amount.  In the said
circumstances, the plaintiffs had filed OS.No.330 of 1986 against
the defendants 1 and 2 herein on the file of the Court of the
learned Principal District Munsif, Yelamanchili for a perpetual
injunction in respect of the plaint schedule property.  That suit
was decreed with costs on 28.04.1988 by granting a perpetual
injunction against the said defendants.  Against that judgment, the
defendants 1 and 2 had preferred a first appeal in AS.No.26 of 1988
on the file of the Senior Civil Judge Court, Anakapalli.  The said
appeal was allowed and the decree and judgment granted by the 
trial Court in OS.No.330 of 1986 were set aside and consequently
the said suit of the plaintiffs was dismissed.  In that judgment, the
learned Senior Civil Judge had observed that the plaintiffs are not
entitled to seek perpetual injunction but, they are at liberty to file
a suit for declaration of their title and recovery of possession of
the plaint schedule property.  Aggrieved of the said judgment in
the first appeal, the plaintiffs had filed a second appeal in
SA.No.409 of 1989 on the file of this Court.  That second appeal
was dismissed.  The LPA preferred before the Supreme Court was  
also dismissed.  That earlier suit is only a suit for perpetual
injunction based on mere possession over the plaint schedule
property.  Further, there was an observation in the judgment of
the learned Senior Civil Judge in AS.No.26 of 1988 that the
plaintiffs are at liberty to file a suit for declaration of title.
Hence, the plaintiffs had filed the present suit for declaration of
title and recovery of possession of the plaint schedule property.
Since the earlier suit is only for mere injunction and as the title of
the plaintiffs and possession of the defendants over the plaint
schedule lands are not finally adjudicated and as those aspects are
not at all gone into by either of the appellate Courts, the findings
given in OS.No.330 of 1986 or AS.No.26 of 1988 do not operate as
res judicata.  After the disposal of the suit by virtue of the
judgment in AS.No.26 of 1988 by the learned Senior Civil Judge,
Anakapalli and while the stay orders granted in CMP.No.16450 of
1990 pending disposal of the SA.No.409 of 1989 on the file of this
Court are in force, the defendants had forcefully trespassed into
the plaint schedule land on 06.12.1990 and had cut and
appropriated the standing Casurina Tope, which was raised by the
plaintiffs in the schedule land.  Thus, the defendants had caused
loss and damage to the extent of Rs.1,50,000/- to the plaintiffs.
The plaintiffs, therefore, had got issued a lawyers notice dated
17.12.1990 to the defendants condemning their illegal acts and
also claiming damages.  The defendants had sent a reply dated
22.12.1990 with false and untrue allegations.  The entire plaint
schedule land belonged to Vizianagaram Estate.  The old survey
numbers of the schedule lands are 5/1 and 5/4.  The new survey
numbers assigned to the schedule lands are 103/3 and 103/4. 
While the lands were originally in the possession and enjoyment of
one Vemparala Suryanarayana, a resident of Anakapalli, the 1st
plaintiff was the tenant under him for 55 years.  The 1st plaintiff
used to raise dry crops for some time and also Casurina Topes for
sometime therein and enjoyed the same with his sons (plaintiffs 2
to 4).  While so, the 1st plaintiff had purchased from Vemparala
Laxminarayana, S/o Suryanarayana an extent of Ac.0.74   cents  
out of Ac.5.25 cents in S.No.5/1 of Zeroyati Chinthuva village and
also another extent of Ac.0.73  cents out of Ac.5.89 cents in
S.No.219/2A, and 219/2C of Lalamkoduru village through a
registered sale deed dated 03.04.1952.  As by that time the entire
land of Ac.5.89 cents in Lalamkoduru village was in possession and
enjoyment of Lalam Ramaswamy and his brothers, the 1st plaintiff
could not get possession of the said Ac.0.73  cents of land.  In
the same manner another Ac.0.74  cents of land in S.No.5/1 of
Zeroyati chinthuva village which was in possession of the 1st
plaintiff as a tenant was purchased by Lalam Rama Murthy and his
brother Demullu @ Appanna from another share holder.  But, they
too could not get possession of the same from the 1st plaintiff.
Subsequently, a compromise was affected and consequently Lalam   
Ramaswamy had executed a registered sale deed dated 05.04.1957    
in favour of the 1st plaintiff for Ac.0.74  cents in S.No.5/1 which
was in-fact in possession of the 1st plaintiff as a tenant.  So also,
the 1st plaintiff had executed a registered sale deed in favour of
Lalam Ramasamy for Ac.0.73  cents which was in fact in  
possession of Lalam Ramaswamy but, in fact purchased by the 1st  
plaintiff.  Thus, the 1st plaintiff had got purchased Ac.1.49  cents
(0.74  cents + 0.74  cents) out of Ac.5.25 cents in S.No.5/1
(old) by virtue of registered sale deeds dated 03.04.1952 and
06.04.1957.  Thus, the 1st plaintiff had acquired title to the 1/4th
extent of the present plaint schedule property through the above
registered sale deeds.  For the remaining extent of land out of
Ac.5.89 cents in S.No.5/1 and 5/4, the Government gave full rights
to the 1st plaintiff after the abolition of the Inams on the
commencement of the Inams Estates Abolition Act during the year 
1958 to 1960 as by then the 1st plaintiff has been in possession and
enjoyment of the same since more than 55 years under the 
Inamdar-Vemparala Suryanarayana.  Thus, the 1st plaintiff has been
enjoying the entire plaint schedule land of Ac.5.89 cents with full
rights along with his sons.  Though the plaintiffs had partitioned
the plaint schedule properties along with other lands and are
paying the land revenue to their respective lands, they are
cultivating the schedule land jointly.  During sub divisions the
survey numbers 5/1 and 5/4 are registered with new survey
numbers 103/3-A, 103/B, 103/3C and 103/4 and accordingly patta 
pass books are issued to the plaintiffs.  The sale deeds, patta pass
books and land revenue receipts are filed in OS.No.330 of 1986.
The 1st plaintiff filed for himself and also as guardian of the 4th
plaintiff Land Ceiling Declarations before the land ceiling
authorities.  The plaintiffs 2 and 3 also had filed in their individual
capacities their declarations before the said authorities.  In the
said declarations, they had shown the plaint schedule land of
Ac.5.89 cents.  Basing on those declarations, the Land Reforms
Tribunal also passed orders dated 21.06.1983.  In that order, it is
clearly mentioned that plaint schedule land of Ac.5.89 cents was
left over to the plaintiffs as their holdings.  But, a mistake had
crept in the order showing the plaint schedule land in the order as
having been situate in M. Chinthuva instead of showing those lands
as situate in Zeroyatii Chinthuva village.  However, the plaintiffs
had clearly shown in their declarations that the plaint schedule
lands are in S.No.103/3 in an extent of Ac.5.25 cents and
S.No.103/4 in an extent of Ac.0.64 cents and they are situate in
Zeroyati Chinthuva village.  The plaintiffs are taking steps before
the land ceiling authorities for rectification of the mistake in the
said orders.  Thus, the land ceiling authorities had also recognized
the right, title, interest and possession of the plaintiffs over the
plaint schedule lands.  The Photostat copy of the verification
document under the Land Ceiling Act in respect of the 2nd plaintiff
issued by the Mandal Revenue Officer, Narsipatnam is also filed
into Court.  In that also, the plaint schedule lands in S.No.103/3
and 103/4 of a total extent of Ac.5.89 cents are shown as situate
in Zeroyati Chinthuva village.  The Inam patta dated 11.07.1970
issued to the 1st plaintiff is filed along with the plaint.  The notices
issued under the Land Ceiling Act are filed in OSNo.330 of 1986 and
were marked as exhibits A17 to A19; the copies of 10 (1) adangals
were also filed in the said suit.  The plaintiffs are in continuous
possession and enjoyment of the plaint schedule lands for over the
statutory period and had thus perfected right and title over the
plaint schedule property by adverse possession.  Even if the
defendants have got any right and title over the plaint schedule
lands, that title is extinguished by adverse possession.  The
defendants have no manner of right, title and interest or
possession over the plaint schedule lands and the defendants are
continuing in the plaint schedule lands since 06.12.1990 only and
that too as mere trespassers.  Hence, the suit is filed.

8.2     The 1st defendant had filed a detailed written statement
denying each and every allegation in the plaint and had inter alia
contended in the written statement as follows:
      The 1st defendants marriage with the daughter of the 1st
plaintiff took place in the year 1961.  Within a year of the
marriage, the 1st defendant had put up separate residence with his
wife separating from his brother in the year 1962 due to the
pressures of the 1st plaintiff; and, this defendant alone had
provided everything to his wife to the best of his ability.  In the
division of the properties with his father, the plaint schedule
property which has been in possession and enjoyment of the family
of the defendants for the last 30 years by then fell to the share of
this defendant and this defendant has been in possession and
enjoyment of the property in his own right and is enjoying the
same by raising Casurina Topes and dry crops as per his
convenience.  In or about the year 1986 this defendant fell ill,
seriously.  At that time, this defendant had executed a Gift
Settlement Deed dated 02.09.1986 in respect of his properties
including the suit schedule property in favour of his nephew by
making provisions for his wife.  At that time, the 1st plaintiff had
started canvassing that the 1st defendant became a Cancer patient
and will not survive; and wanted this defendant to transfer all his
properties in his name or in the name of his daughter.  This
defendant did not agree for the said proposal.  Having come to
know about the execution of the gift settlement deed by this
defendant, the 1st plaintiff had developed ill will; and, in a bid to
take revenge made the wife of this defendant to stay away from
him.  While this defendant is at Hyderabad for his treatment, his
wife under the evil advise of her father had taken away all the
papers/documents and also movable properties from the house and  
had fled away to her parents house.  Since then, the 1st plaintiff
had started making false claim by filing frivolous suits.  Ultimately,
the litigation in OS.No.330 of 1986 ended in favour of the
defendants observing that by the date of the suit, the 1st plaintiff
is not in possession of any part of the plaint schedule property and,
therefore, the question of trespass during the pendency of that
litigation does not arise.  This defendant has been in possession
and enjoyment of the properties since the year 1962 and had
perfected title to the said property by all means.  Prior to this
defendant, the defendants family consisting of his father and
brother (2nd defendant) has been in possession and enjoyment of
the property.  The claim of the plaintiffs in this suit is barred by
law of limitation.  There is no cause of action.  As a mark of
revenge, the plaintiffs have been harassing this defendant.  This
defendants wife had deserted him.  He had filed a divorce
petition in OP.No.59 of 1990 on the file of the Senior Civil Judge
Court, Anakapalli.  The averment in regard to dowry demand is a
fictitious averment made by the 1st plaintiff.  The suit is frivolous
and fictitious.  The stand of the plaintiffs in the former suit-
OS.No.330 of 1986 and AS.26 of 1988 is inconsistent with the
present stand regarding acquisition of title.  The suit is liable to be
dismissed with compensatory costs. 
8.3     The 2nd defendant had filed a written statement adopting
the written statement of the 1st defendant and supporting the case
of the 1st defendant stating that he and the 1st defendant are
divided brothers since 1962 and that since then the plaint schedule
properties are in possession and enjoyment of the 1st defendant
and that the 1st defendant alone has got possession and enjoyment
of the plaint schedule properties since 1962 and that prior to that
the properties were in exclusive possession and enjoyment of the
2nd defendant and his family for over 30 years and that the 2nd
defendant is not a necessary party.
8.4     Further, after the death of the 1st defendant, the 2nd
defendant had filed an additional written statement stating that
the 1st defendant had executed a Will dated 28.03.1990 and that as
per the bequests in the said Will, the property of the 1st defendant
had  devolved upon him (the 2nd defendant) and the 4th defendant-
Rajeswaramma and that during his life time the deceased 1st
defendant had sold away some of his properties to meet his
medical and other expenses and that the 3rd defendant has no
interest what-so-ever in any of the properties of the deceased 1st
defendant including the suit schedule property and that as per the
bequests under the said Will of the 1st defendant, his properties
had devolved upon the defendants 2 and 4 and that therefore, they
are only entitled to the plaint schedule properties.
9.      Now the substantial questions/additional substantial
questions in the defendants second appeal are first taken up.  A
reading of the substantial questions would show that the
substantial questions raised deal with two principal issues; and,
they are - (1) the plaintiffs suit for declaration of title and
recovery of possession is barred by law of limitation; and, (2) The
consideration of the documents of the plaintiffs and placing
reliance on the said documents by the Courts below is erroneous as
the plaintiffs herein have pressed into service the very same and
similar documents in the earlier suit and that as a competent civil
court, which had an occasion to deal with the said documents in
the former suit, did not accept the case of the plaintiffs while
disbelieving the said documents.  On this aspect, the further
contention of the defendants 2 and 4 is that merely because some
additional document/s is/are filed, the same is not sufficient to
advance the case of the plaintiffs any further and that basing on
the documents, which were earlier disbelieved by a competent
Civil Court in the earlier proceeding, the Courts below ought not to
have granted the reliefs to the plaintiffs.  It is also pertinent to
note that keeping in view the scope and ambit of the additional
substantial question of law number 2, the defendants 2 and 4 also
would contend that the instant suit of the plaintiffs is barred by
the principle enunciated in the doctrine of res judicata in view of
the dismissal of the earlier suit filed by the plaintiffs for perpetual
injunction in respect of the very same property.
10.1    This Court shall first deal with the question of Limitation.
The learned senior counsel for the defendants 2 and 4 would
contend that the limitation for filing a declaratory suit is three
years under Article 58 of the Indian Limitation Act, 1963 (the
Limitation Act, for short) and that in the earlier suit for perpetual
injunction filed by the plaintiffs, the 1st defendant having filed a
written statement on 16.02.1987 had denied the title of the
plaintiffs stating that the plaintiffs have no  title to and possession
over the plaint schedule land and that the standing Casurina Tope
has been in possession and enjoyment of the 1st defendant since
more than 19 years and that therefore, the suit instituted in the
year 1991 is barred by law of limitation since the limitation
provided under law is three years for the present suit for
declaration of title and recovery of possession.   He would further
submit that the present suit ought to have been filed within a
period of three years from the date of the written statement in the
said suit and that the present suit-OS.287 of 1991, which was filed
in the year 1991, is barred by law of limitation.
10.2    On the other hand, the learned senior counsel for the
plaintiffs had contended that in terms of Articles 64 and 65 of the
Limitation Act the period of limitation is 12 years from the date
when the possession of the defendants becomes adverse to the 
plaintiffs and that the burden would be on the defendants 2 and 4
to prove that they have acquired title by adverse possession and
that in the absence of such proof of adverse possession, the
defendants 2 and 4 cannot be heard to say that the suit instituted
by the plaintiffs for declaration of title and recovery of possession
is barred by law of Limitation.  He would further contend that the
issue of limitation is not a pure question of law and it is a blend of
fact and law and is not a substantial question of law and that,
therefore, the defendants are not entitled to raise the said issue of
limitation in this second appeal.
10.3    In view of the contentions of the learned senior counsel for
the parties, it is necessary to first refer to the three articles on
which reliance was placed.
Article 58:
Description of Suit
Period of Limitation
Time from which period
begins to run

To obtain any other
declaration
Three years
When the right to sue
first accrues



Article 64:
Description of Suit
Period of Limitation
Time from which period
begins to run

For possession of
immovable property based 
on previous possession and 
not on title, when the
plaintiff while in possession
of the property has been
dispossessed 
Twelve years
The date of dispossession

Article 65:
Description of Suit
Period of Limitation
Time from which period
begins to run

For possession of
immovebale property or
any interest therein based
on title.

Explanation:-- For the
purposes of this article

(a)     Where the suit is by a
remainder-main, a
reversioner (other than
a landlord) or a devisee
the possession of the
defendant shall be
deemed to become   
adverse only when the
estate of the
remainderman, 
reversioner or devisee
as the case may be , 
fails into possession;
(b)     Where the suit is by a
Hindu or Muslim 
entitled to the
possession of
immovable property on 
the death of a Hindu or
Muslim female, the
possession of the
defendant shall be
deemed to become   
adverse only when the
female dies;
(c)     Where the suit is by a
purchaser at a sale in
execution of a decree
when the judgment- 
debtor was out of
possession at the date
of the sale the
purchase shall be
deemed to be a 
representative of the
judgment debtor who 
was out of possession.

Twelve years
When the possession of the 
defendant becomes  
adverse to the plaintiff

The first division of the Schedule of the Limitation Act deals with
suits.  Part III of the said division deals with suits relating to
declaration.  Article 58 is contained in this part.  Part V deals with
suits relating to immovable properties.  Articles 64 and 65 are
contained in this part.  Thus, Part V specifically deals with suits
relating to immovable property.
10.4    If Article 58 is the appropriate Article applicable to the facts
of the present case as contended by the learned senior counsel for
the defendants 2 and 4, then the period of limitation would be 3
years; and, if that is so, it must be held that the plaintiffs suit is
barred by limitation, according to his submissions; and that on the
other hand, if it is to be held that the said Article has no
application to the facts of the present case, then it follows that
the suit is maintainable and not barred by law of limitation.  The
trial Court had framed a specific issue on bar of limitation and had
answered the said issue in favour of the plaintiffs and against the
defendants.  On this issue the specific case of the plaintiffs is that
they were in possession and enjoyment of the suit schedule
property till 06.12.1990 but, the 1st defendant taking advantage of
the decree and judgment passed in AS.26 of 1988 had forcefully
taken possession of the plaint schedule property and, as such, the
suit that was brought in the year 1991 is well within time even
assuming for a moment that the period of limitation is three years.
However, the main contention of the plaintiffs is that the period of
limitation allowed under law is 12 years for the present suit, which
is filed for declaration of title and recovery of possession, and that
the time of twelve years would begin to run from the time when
the possession of the defendants becomes adverse to the plaintiffs.
However, as per the defence of the deceased 1st defendant, he was
and is in possession of the plaint schedule property since a long
time i.e., since the date of partition in the year 1962 between him
and his family members and that the plaint averment that he had
trespassed into the plaint schedule property on 06.12.1990 is false.
In support of the said defence, strong reliance was placed on the
finding that was recorded in AS.No.26 of 1988 to the effect that
the plaintiffs herein in that suit for injunction were required to
prove their possession over the suit property as on the date of the
said suit-OS.No.330 of 1986 and that the plaintiffs had miserably
failed to show that they were in possession and enjoyment of the
suit property by the date of the said suit.  Placing reliance on the
said finding, it is urged that the contention of the plaintiffs that
they were dispossessed on 06.12.1990 i.e., within three years prior
to the institution of the instant suit is contrary to the findings in
the former proceedings and therefore, such a contention of the
plaintiffs cannot be countenanced.  Be it noted that except placing
reliance on this observation/finding, no revenue records are
produced by the contesting defendants 2 and 4 to prove their
actual possession and enjoyment of the suit property prior to the
filing of the instant suit by the plaintiffs herein.  The learned
senior counsel for the plaintiffs would contend that a finding that
the plaintiffs miserably failed to prove their possession and
enjoyment over the suit property as on the date of the former suit
does not mean that they were not in possession even prior to that
suit.  Admittedly, the suit property is a Zeroyati land.  However,
no documents like cultivation accounts are exhibited on the side of
the defendants to prove that the 1st defendant was in long
possession specifically from 1962 onwards.  On the other hand,
exhibits A4 to A7, the ryot pass books; exhibits A11 to A14, the
land revenue receipts; exhibits A22 to A28, the copies of the
village accounts i.e., the certified copies of no.2 adangals for
faslies 1388, 1404, 1394 and 1393; exhibit A15, the verification
report issued by the Tahasildar, Land Ceilings, Yelamanchili;
exhibits A16 and A17, the declarations given by the 2nd plaintiff
and the 1st plaintiff under the Land Ceilings Act; exhibit A18, the
verification report issued by the Tahasildar, Yelamanchili; exhibits
A19 and A20, similar verification reports issued by the Tahasildar,
Chodavaram; and, exhibit A21, the proceedings of the Land
Ceilings Tribunal and Sub-Collector, Narsipatnam issued to the 1st
plaintiff sufficiently establish the possession of the plaintiffs over
the suit land within 12 years prior to the filing of the instant suit.
Therefore, the trial Court had held that the suit is not barred by
law of limitation.  The first appellate Court having placed reliance
on the decision in Indira v. Arumugam & another [AIR 1999 SC
1549] had noted the change in the law of limitation brought about
by the amendment and had further held that under Article 65 of
the Limitation Act, the limitation for a suit for recovery of
possession of immovable property or any interest thereon based on
title is 12 years from the time when the possession of the
defendants becomes adverse to the plaintiffs.  In view of the above
settled position of law, the Court below had held that if the
defendants want to defeat the rights of the plaintiffs they have to
establish their adverse possession for a period of 12 years and that
on their failure to do so, the plaintiffs cannot be non suited merely
because they were not able to prove possession within 12 years
preceding the institution of the suit.  The Court below had inter
alia held that the defendants could not establish either the plea of
adverse possession or that they had perfected title to the suit
schedule property by adverse possession against the true owners.
In the well considered view of this Court, the concurrent findings
of fact supported by valid and cogent reasons recorded by the
Courts below are justified and do not call for any interference.  Be
that as it may.
10.5    The learned senior counsel for the defendants 2 and 4 had
placed strong reliance on the following decisions:
      Tumu Srihari v. Thumu Padmamma and others .  The facts
of the reported case are as follows: The plaintiff had filed a suit
for declaration of title and consequential perpetual injunction.
The contention of the defendants is that the suit is barred by
limitation.  The defendants 3 to 5 had earlier filed a suit-
OS.213/1992 denying the sale deed dated 12.01.1970 and sought  
partition.  In the above stated set of facts, this Court held that
the cause of action for filing the suit arose immediately on filing of
the suit-OS.213 of 1992, and within 3 years there from, under
Article 58 of the Limitation Act, the suit for declaration ought to
have been filed; but, the suit is filed in the year 2005 i.e., after a
period of 13 years, and hence the suit is hopelessly barred by law
of limitation.
      Khatri Hotels Private Limited and another v. Union of India
and another .  The facts of this cited case, in brief, are as follows:
The suit land was owned by one Smt. Kasturi and Rattan Lal.  They
had sold it to Parma Nand, Tej Nath, Tej Prakash, Gokal Chand and
Ram Dhan by a registered sale deed dated 07.10.1959.  The legal
heirs of Parma Nand and other vendees sold the same to the
second appellant and his brothers by a sale deed dated 10.10.1963.
The suit was filed in the year 2000 alleging that the cause of action
accrued to the appellants for the first time in 1998 when they
came to know about the entries in the revenue records in favour of
Delhi Development Authority.  The respondents alternatively
contended that the cause of action accrued to the appellants in
December 1990 when the written statement was filed on behalf of
the DDA with a categorical assertion that with the urbanization of
the rural areas of Village Kishangarh the suit land automatically
vested in the Central Government which transferred it to DDA vide
Notification dated 20.08.1974 and that, therefore, the suit was
barred by law of limitation.  In the above stated factual
background and contentions, the Supreme Court held as follows:
The appellants have not explained stark contradictions in the
averments contained in three suits on the issue of cause of action
and in the absence of cogent explanation, it must be held that the
statement contained in para 19 of suit no.313 of 2000 was per se
false and, as a matter of fact, the cause of action had first accrued
to the appellants on 10.08.1990 when their so called right over the
suit land was unequivocally threatened by the respondents.
Therefore, the suit filed by the appellants on 14.02.2000 was
clearly beyond the period of limitation of 3 years prescribed under
Article 58 of the 1963 Act and was barred by time.
In this cited case the title divested and vested in Central Government
and thereafter, the Government have transferred the property to DDA in
1974.
        Placing reliance on these decisions, it is contended that since
the present suit is for declaration and not for bare recovery of
possession based on title, Article 65 has no application and that
Article 58 is alone applicable and that, therefore, the period of
limitation is (3) three years.
10.6    On the other hand, the learned senior counsel for the plaintiffs
had placed reliance on the following decisions.
      C. Natarajan v. Ashim Bai and another .  The facts of the cited
case show that the appellant therein had filed a suit against the
respondents claiming  (a) declaration of title; (b) consequential
injunction; (c) alternatively recovery of vacant possession of the suit
property, if for any reason the Court comes to the conclusion that the
plaintiff is out of possession and (d) for costs;  The cause of action for
the suit arose in the year 1994, but, the suit was filed in the year 2001;
While so, the respondent had filed an application under Order VII Rule
11(d) of the Code for rejection of the plaint on the premise that the suit
was barred by limitation.  In the above stated factual background the
Supreme Court at paragraph nos.13 and 15 held as follows:
13.  If the plaintiff is to be granted a relief of recovery of
possession, the suit could be filed within a period of 12 years.
It is one thing to say that whether such a relief can be granted
or not after the evidences are led by the parties but it is
another thing to say that the plaint is to be rejected on the
ground that the same is barred by any law.  In the suit has been
filed for possession, as a consequence of declaration of the
plaintiffs title, Article 58 will have no application.
15.  The law of limitation relating to the suit for possession has
undergone a drastic change.  In terms of Articles 142 and 144
of the Limitation Act, 1908, it was obligatory on the part of the
plaintiff to aver and plead that he not only has title over the
property but also has been in possession of the same for a
period of more than 12 years.  However, if the plaintiff has
filed the suit claiming title over the suit property in terms of
Articles 64 and 65 of the Limitation Act, 1963, burden would
be on the defendant to prove that he has acquired title by
adverse possession. 

        On facts, the ratio in the above decision squarely applies to the
instant case, in the considered view of this Court.
        Mechineni Chokka Rao and others v. Sattu Sattamma .  The
facts are as follows: The respondent had filed a suit for perpetual
injunction against the revision petitioners.  At the stage when the suit
was adjourned for judgment, the respondent had filed an application to
amend the plaint to seek the relief of declaration of title.  That
application was resisted.  The trial Court had allowed the application.
In the revision before this Court, the core contention of the revision
petitioners is that the proposed amendment is barred by law of
limitation and that the said contention is conspicuously not considered
by the trial Court.  Having regard to the rival contentions, this Court
considered the scope and ambit of Articles 58 and 65 of the Limitation
Act and held as follows:
10. While part-Ill of first division deals with suits relating to
declarations; Part-V thereof deals with suits relating to
immovable property. In Part-III there are three Articles, namely,
56, 57 and 58. While Article 56 prescribes three years period of
limitation to institute a suit for declaration that the instrument
issued or registered is a forged one; Article 57 prescribes an
equal period for declaring the alleged adoption as invalid and
Article 58, however, prescribes albeit an equal period in respect
of any other declaration. It is obvious that Article 58 is in the
nature of residuary provision among the declaratory suits.
Indubitably the relief of declaration can be sought for in respect
of an immovable property or movable property, or in respect of
an instrument, or in respect of a decree, or in respect of an
adoption. Thus, various types of declaratory reliefs can be sought
for pertaining to those categories. Therefore, the relief of
declaration alone appears to be not the criterion for prescribing
the period of limitation but the subject-matter of the suit in
respect of which the declaration is sought for, appears to be
germane for consideration.
11. One shall not be oblivious of the fact that part-V of first
division specifically deals with category of suits relating to
immovable property. Coming in the domain of part-V, Articles 64
and 65 specifically deal with the period of limitation to institute a
suit for possession of immovable property based on previous
possession and to institute a suit for possession of immovable
property or any interest therein based on title. Having regard to
the categorisation sought to be made in the Schedule, although
Part-Ill of the first division thereof apparently deals with suits
relating to declarations, that part does not deal with suits relating
to immovable property inasmuch as Part-V thereof exclusively
deals with the suits pertaining to immovable property, prima
facie it appears, therefore, that notwithstanding the fact that the
suit is filed for the relief of declaration but the suit is in respect
of an immovable property, Article 58 of the Act has no
application, instead Articles 61 to 67, which specifically deal with
the suits relating to immovable property, seem to be applicable.

Having so held, this Court had referred to the recommendation made by
the Law Commission in the 89th Report for amendment of Article 58 by
adding the words without seeking further relief after the word
declaration in the first column of Article 58 so as to avoid any
confusion and had noted that so far no amendment has been brought in 
by the Parliament as recommended.  This Court had finally held as
follows:
The preponderance of authority which holds the view that in
respect of declaratory suits pertaining to immovable property, the
period of limitation is governed by Articles 64 and 65 but not
Article 58 of the Act is in conformity with the Scheme of the Act,
as discussed hereinabove.

10.7    As rightly pointed by the learned senior counsel for the plaintiffs,
in the instant suit there are two main reliefs viz., one for declaration of
title and the other for recovery of possession.  For a suit for declaration
of title the limitation is three years under Article 58 and the time from
which the period of limitation begins to run is the time when the right to
sue first accrues.  For a suit for recovery of possession of immovable
property or any interest thereon based on title, the limitation is 12 years
under Article 65 and the time from which the period of limitation begins
to run is the time when the possession of the defendants becomes
adverse to the plaintiffs.  In the instant suit, since declaration of title as
well as recovery of possession based on title are sought, the periods of
limitation, which govern the two reliefs are three years and twelve years
respectively and, therefore, the limitation of twelve years is the period
of limitation available to the plaintiffs under Article 65 as the question
of instituting a suit for declaration and recovery of possession would
hardly arise until there was an actual disturbance of possession of the
plaintiffs.  The 12 years period of limitation for the relief of recovery of
possession is to be reckoned from the time the possession of the
defendants becomes adverse to the plaintiffs.  However, the period of
limitation for the relief of declaration of title is three years from the
date of accrual of the cause of action.  The instant suit is filed seeking
the relief of declaration of title as well as the relief of recovery of
possession.   Hence, the relief of declaration of title is unaffected by the
mere fact that the period of limitation is three years for a suit seeking
the relief of a bare declaration.
      Having regard to these factual and legal aspects, it is necessary
now to refer to the decision in Radha Gobinda Roy and others v. Sri Sri
Nilkantha Narayan Singh and others .  The facts of the reported case
are as follows: - The plaintiff had brought a suit for recovery of arrears
of way-leave rent against one set of defendants on the basis of
agreement entered into with them and had also prayed for a declaration
of his right to receive the rent as against the other set of defendants,
who were adversely claiming a right under the sale deed from the
plaintiff.  He had actually realized the rent for many years from the first
set of defendants.  Thus, there are two parts in the plaint, which are
intimately connected with each other and the declaration asked for in
one part of the plaint is the basis of the claim in the other part.  A
contention that the suit was barred under the proviso to Section 42 of
the Specific Relief Act, 1877 was raised.  In this backdrop of facts,
while considering the plea on the bar of limitation, the High Court of
Patna had held that the suit is not purely a declaratory suit and it is a
suit for recovery of rent and as a preliminary to the decree for rent it
was necessary for the Court to come to a finding as to title and it is not
suggested that the recovery of the rent claimed was barred by time, the
prayer for the determination of the title was equally unaffected.  From a
reading of the ratio in the decision, it is obvious that when there are two
parts of the plaint which are intimately connected with each other and a
declaration is asked for in one part of the plaint and it is the basis of the
claim in the other part, which is for recovery of possession, then the
period of limitation for recovery of possession being larger and being 12
years, the relief of declaration of title for which the period of limitation
is less being 3 years is unaffected even though the suit which is
comprehensive is instituted beyond three years.   In the present context,
to put it more precisely, when two prayers seeking two reliefs made in
the plaint are intimately connected, the period of limitation which is
larger and which is governing one of the two reliefs becomes the
determinative factor and the prayer in regard to the relief for which the
period of limitation is less remains unaffected.
        C. Mohammad Yunus v. Syed Unnissa and others  the Supreme     
Court has drawn a distinction between the suits for declaration
simpliciter and the suits for declaration with further relief.  In this
decision, the plaintiffs claiming as heirs of one F had sued to obtain a
declaration of their rights in certain institution, which was in the
management of trustees, with an injunction restraining the defendants
(other claimants) from interfering with their rights.  While dealing with
the question of limitation, the Supreme Court had held as follows:
 A suit for declaration with a consequential relief for injunction,
is not a suit for declaration simpliciter: it is a suit for declaration
with further relief.  Whether the further relief claimed in a
particular case as consequential upon a declaration is adequate
must always depend upon the facts and circumstances of each  
case. In Kunj Behari Prasadji v. Keshavlal Hiralal it was held that
S.42 of the Specific Relief Act does not empower the court to
dismiss a suit for a declaration and injunction and that an
injunction is a further relief within the meaning of S.42 of the
Specific Relief Act. In that case, the plaintiff had claimed that a
certain Will was null and void and that being a close relative of
the last holder of a gadi, he was entitled to be the Acharya in the
place of that last holder and for an injunction restraining the
defendants from offering any obstruction to his occupation of the
gadi.  It was held that such a suit was maintainable.

      From the ratio in the cited decision it is evident that a suit for
declaration of title seeking further relief of recovery of possession or a
consequential relief of perpetual injunction is not a suit for declaration
simpliciter and it is a suit for declaration with further relief.
        In Lal Bal Mukand (dead) by LRs v. Lajwanti and others  the
interpretation of the provision of Section 12(2) of the Limitation Act fell
for consideration.  The material part of Section 12(2) runs thus: In
computing the period of limitation for an appeal the day on which the
judgment complained of was pronounced and the time requisite for
obtaining a copy of the decree or order appealed from shall be
excluded.  The Allahabad High Court has taken one view which was first
propounded in the decision in Bechi v. Ahsan Ullah Khan.  However, a
contrary view was taken by the High Court of Bombay, Calcutta, Nagpur
and Assam.  The contrary view proceeded on a liberal approach of
interpretation of language of Section 12(2).  In the background the
Supreme Court held as follows:
We do not wish to encumber this judgment with a detailed
discussion of all the citations and the reasoning advanced therein
in support of one or the other view.  It will be sufficient to say
that upon the language of Section 12(2) both the constructions
are possible, but the one adopted by the majority of the Courts,
appears to be more consistent with justice and good sense.  The
Limitation Act deprives or restricts the right of an aggrieved
person to have recourse to legal remedy, and where its language
is ambiguous, that construction should be preferred which
preserves such remedy to the one which bars or defeats it.  A
Court ought to avoid an interpretation upon a statute of
Limitation by implication or inference as may have a penalizing
effect unless it is driven to do so by the irresistible force of the
language employed by the legislature.
      The ratio supports the proposition that while interpreting the
provisions of the Indian Limitation Act, when two constructions are
possible, the construction which preserves the remedy should be
preferred to the one which bars or defeats it.
10.8    It is to be next noted that in part III of the first division of the
Schedule of the Limitation Act, which relates to suits for declaration,
there are three Articles viz., 56, 57 and 58.  Articles 56 & 57 relate
respectively to  (i) declaration that an instrument issued or registered is
forged; and, (ii) a declaration that an alleged adoption is invalid; or
never, in fact, took place.  Whereas Article 58 in that part, which deals
with suits to obtain any other declaration, is a general provision.  Part V
of the said division deals specifically with the suits relating to
immovable properties.  The law is well settled that a special provision
should be given effect to the extent of its scope leaving the general
provision to control cases where the special provision does not apply.
The view of this Court gets reinforced by the ratio in the decision in
South India Corporation (P) Ltd., v. Secretary, Board of Revenue,
Trivandrum and another  wherein the two questions that were raised
before the Supreme Court are   (1) whether Article 372 of the
Constitution is subject to Article 277 thereof? And, (2) whether Article
372 is subject to Article 278 thereof?  While considering the said
questions, the Supreme Court held as follows:
Article 372 is a general provision; and Article 277 is a special
provision.  It is settled law that a special provision should be given
effect to the extent of its scope, leaving the general provision to
control cases where the special provision does not apply.  The
earlier discussion makes this abundantly clear that the Constitution
gives a separate treatment to the subject of finance, and Art,.277
saves to the existing taxes etc. levied by States, if the conditions
mentioned therein are complied with.
10.9    Having regard to the reasons and the precedential guidance, this
Court holds that the period of limitation for institution of a suit for
declaration of title seeking the further relief of recovery of possession
based on title is governed by Article 65 and that, therefore, the period
of limitation is twelve years from the time when the possession of the
defendants becomes adverse to the plaintiffs.  Viewed thus, this Court
finds that the contention of the learned senior counsel for the
defendants 2 and 4 that the suit is barred by limitation cannot be
countenanced being devoid of merit.  The said contention is accordingly
rejected.
11.     The next question raised is concerned with the issue of res
judicata.  In-fact a reading of the substantial questions would show that
no substantial question directly on the issue of res judicata is raised
though in the additional substantial question no.2, it is also urged as
under:  whether under the facts and circumstances certain findings in
an earlier suit after reaching its finality can be reversed in a
subsequent suit when the parties, the disputed property and the
documents relied upon are one and the same irrespective of the relief
sought for.
11.1    Dealing with this issue of res judicata, it is an admitted fact that
OS.No.338 of 1986 was earlier filed by the plaintiffs herein for a
perpetual injunction simpliciter.  The said suit was decreed by the trial
Court.  However, the first appeal suit in AS.No.26 of 1988 was allowed.
The second appeal preferred to this Court and the LPA preferred before
the Supreme Court were dismissed.  Subsequently, the present suit is
filed for declaration of plaintiffs title to the very same property and for
recovery of possession.  Therefore, the learned senior counsel for the
defendants 2 and 4 would contend that though the suit for perpetual
injunction was decreed by the trial Court, the first appeal suit was
allowed and that the decree and judgment of the trial Court were set
aside and that the judgment of the first appellate court were confirmed
by the High Court and also by the Supreme Court and that the findings
recorded in the judgments in the suit for perpetual injunction operate as
res judicata and that the plaintiffs herein are estopped by record from
claiming the reliefs in the present suit.  However, the learned senior
counsel for the plaintiffs would contend that though the suit was
decreed by the trial court, the first appeal suit was allowed and the
judgment and decree of the trial court were set aside on the ground that
the plaintiffs were not found to be in possession as on the date of the
filing of the suit and that the question of title to the suit property was
not decided in the said suit and, therefore, the findings, if any, in the
said suit do not operate as res judicata.  Indubitably, while dismissing
the first appeal suit-AS.26/1988 the learned Senior Civil Judge,
Anakapalli had observed that the plaintiffs are not entitled for perpetual
injunction but, are at liberty to file a suit for declaration of title and
possession of the plaint schedule property.  The learned senior counsel
for the plaintiffs also would point out that the observation of the
learned Senior Civil Judge would itself indicate that the question of title
was neither directly nor incidentally gone into as it was not necessary
for consideration and that the question of title was left open by giving
liberty to the plaintiffs to institute a suit for declaration of title and
recovery of possession.  He would further contend that had the Court
decided the issue of title either directly or incidentally, such a liberty to
institute a fresh suit would not have been given to the plaintiffs, by the
Court of the learned Senior Civil Judge.  He would also contend as
under: Even if there is an incidental finding on title in the earlier suit
for injunction, the same will not be binding in a later suit or proceeding
where title is directly in question unless it is established that it was
necessary in the earlier suit to decide the question of title for granting
or refusing injunction and that the relief for injunction was found or
based on the finding of title.  In a suit where res judicata was raised as a
defence, it is necessary for the Court deciding the subsequent suit to
investigate the facts in order to determine whether the requirements of
Section 11 of the Code have been fulfilled or not.  Therefore, the party
who is relying upon the plea of res judicata has to file the copies of the
pleadings of the earlier suit and also the copies of the issues and the
judgments in the former suit so that the Court can see whether the
required elements are present on record or not.  As the defendants 2
and 4 had not placed the relevant material before this Court, the
question of invoking the doctrine of res judicata does not arise.
Moreover, the issue of res judicata is not a pure question of law much
less a substantial question of law and it is a blend of fact and law.  Both
the Courts below have recorded concurrent findings of fact on the said
issue holding that the plaintiffs suit for declaration of title and recovery
of possession is not barred by the principle enunciated in the doctrine of
res judicata.  Hence, the contention of the learned senior counsel for
the defendants 2 and 4 is devoid of merit and is liable to be rejected.
11.2    Before proceeding further, it is necessary to refer to the decisions
relied upon by the learned senior counsel for the defendants 2 and 4.
      Tumu Srihari (1 supra).   In this decision this Court referred to
the decision of the Apex Court in Sunderbai v. Devaji Shankar
Deshpande (AIR 1954 SC 82] wherein the Supreme Court held as   
follows:
11.. where it was held that where the right claimed in both
suits is the same the subsequent suit would be barred as res
judicata though the right in the subsequent suit is sought to be
established on a ground different from that in the former suit.  It
would be only in those cases where the rights claimed in the two
suits were different that the subsequent suit would not be barred
as res judicata even though the property was identical.

      The learned senior counsel placing reliance on the observations in
the judgment of the Supreme Court in Ramchandra Dagdu Sonavane    
(dead) by LRs and others v. Vithu Hira Mahar (dead) by LRs and
others  had contended that to substantiate the plea of res judicata the
pleadings and issues in the former suit need not be filed and that in the
case on hand, in the judgment of the first appellate Court in the former
appeal suit a reference extenso has been made to the pleadings of the
parties and that, therefore, there is no requirement to file the
pleadings.  In the cited case, the Supreme Court held as follows:
The principle of res judicata comes into play when by judgment and
order a decision of a particular issue is implicit in it, that is, it must be
deemed to have been necessarily decided by implications even then
the principle of res judicata on that issue is directly applicable.  When
any matter which might and ought to have been made a ground of 
defence or attack in a former proceeding but was not so made, then
such a matter in the eye of the law, to avoid multiplicity of litigation
and to bring about finality in it, is deemed to have been constructively
in issue and, therefore, is taken as decided.(See Workmen v. Cochin
Port Trust [(1978) 3 SCC 119].

      In this cited case on facts of that case it was further held in
paragraphs 46 & 47 as follows:
46.  So far as the finding drawn in the suit for injunction in O.S.
No.104 of 1953, regarding adoption would also operate as a res-
judicata in view of the judgment of this Court in Sulochana Amma
Vs. Narayanan Nair [(1994) 2 SCC 14]. It is observed:
The decision in earlier case on the issue between the same
parties or persons under whom they claim  title or litigating under
the same title, it operates as a res-judicata. A plea decided even
in a suit for injunction touching title between the same parties,
would operate as res-judicata.
     9.. It is a settled law that in a Suit for injunction when
title is in issue, for the purpose of granting injunction, the issue
directly and substantially arises in that suit between the parties
when the same is put in issue in a later suit based on title
between the same parties or their privies in a subsequent suit,
the decree in injunction suit equally operates as a res-judicata.
47.  The same view is reiterated in Gram Panchayat Vs. Ujagar
Singh [AIR 2000 SC 3272]. This Court has stated that even in an
earlier suit for injunction, if there is an incidental finding on title,
the same will not be binding in the later suit or proceedings
where title is directly in question, unless it is established that it
was "necessary" in the earlier suit to decide the question of title
for granting or refusing injunction and that the relief for
injunction was found or based on the findings of title. Even the
mere framing of an issue may not be sufficient as pointed out in
that case.
It appears from the facts of this reported decision that the pleadings in
the former suit were not marked, however, in the copy of the judgment
that was exhibited, the trial Judge in extenso had referred to the
pleadings of the parties in the earlier suit and, therefore, the Court
found no necessity for marking of the copies of the pleadings in the
former suit.  Thus, this decision is also relied upon in support of the
proposition that a finding drawn and the plea decided in a suit for
injunction touching the title between the same parties would operate as
res judicata.
      Commissioner of Endowments and others v. Vittal Rao and
others .  This decision was relied upon in support of the proposition
that even though an issue is not formally framed but, such an issue is
material and essential for the decision of the case in the earlier
proceeding and when a finding was recorded though an issue was not 
framed, the said finding would operate as res judicata in a subsequent
proceeding.  The ratio in the decision is that failure to frame a formal
issue would not invalidate the findings of the binding judgment between
the parties.
      In Vithal Yeshwant Jathar v. Shikandarkhan Makhtumkhan
Sardesai  the Supreme Court observed as follows:
It is well settled that if the final decision in any matter at issue
between the parties is based by a court on its decisions on more than
one point  each of which by itself would be sufficient for the
ultimate decision  the decision on each of these points operates as
res judicata between the parties.
11.3    Per contra, the learned senior counsel for the plaintiffs relied
upon the following decisions.
      In Sajjadanashin Sayed Md.B.E. Edr.(D) by LRs v. Musa Dadabhai
Ummer and others  while dealing with the words directly and
substantially in issue in the provision of law the Supreme Court had
held as follows:
12.  It will be noticed that the words used in Section 11 CPC are
"directly and substantially in issue". If the matter was in issue directly
and substantially in a prior litigation and decided against a party then
the decision would be res judicata in a subsequent proceeding.
Judicial decisions have however held that if a matter was only
'collaterally or incidentally' in issue and decided in an earlier
proceeding, the finding therein would not ordinarily be res judicata
in a latter proceeding where the matter is directly and substantially
in issue.
14.     A collateral or incidental issue is one that is ancillary to a
direct and substantive issue; the former is an auxiliary issue and the
latter the principal issue. The expression 'collaterally or incidentally'
in issue implies that there is another matter which is 'directly and
substantially' in issue ( Mulla, CPC 15th Ed., p.104).

      In this cited case, the Supreme Court referred to the following
extract from 15th Edition, Page 104 Mulla wherein the learned author
said as follows:
18.     In India, Mulla has referred to similar tests (Mulla, 15th
Ed.p.104). The learned author says: A matter in respect of which
relief is claimed in an earlier suit can be said to be generally a
matter 'directly and substantially' in issue but it does not mean
that if the matter is one in respect of which no relief is sought it is
not directly or substantially in issue. It may or may not be. It is
possible that it was 'directly and substantially' in issue and it may
also be possible that it was only collaterally or incidentally in issue,
depending upon the facts of the case. The question arises as to
what is the test for deciding into which category a case falls? One
test is that if the issue was 'necessary' to be decided for
adjudicating on the principal issue and was decided, it would have
to be treated as 'directly and substantially' in issue and if it is clear
that the judgment was in fact based upon that decision, then it
would be res judicata in a latter case. (Mulla, p.104) One has to
examine the plaint, the written statement, the issues and the
judgment to find out if the matter was directly and substantially in
issue ( Ishwar Singh Vs. Sarwan Singh: AIR 1965 SC Mohd.S.Labbai   
Vs. Mohd. Hanifa: AIR 1965 SC 1569). We are of the view that the
above summary in Mulla is a correct statement of the law.
19.     We have here to advert to another principle of caution
referred to by Mulla (p.105). "It is not to be assumed that matters
in respect of which issues have been framed are all of them
directly and substantially in issue. Nor is there any special
significance to be attached to the fact that a particular issue is the
first in the list of issues. Which of the matters are directly in issue
and which collaterally or incidentally, must be determined on the
facts of each case. A material test to be applied is whether the
Court considers the adjudication of the issue material and essential
for its decision".
      In Gram Panchayat of Village Naulakha v. Ujagar Singh and
Others  the Supreme on the aspect of res judicata had held as follows:
10.     We may also add one other important reason which  
frequently arises under section 11 CPC. The earlier suit by the
respondent against the Panchayat was only a suit for injunction and
not one on title. No question of title was gone into nor decided. The
said decision cannot, therefore, be binding on the question of title.
See in this connection Sajjadanashin Sayed. Musa Dadabhai Ummer,   
[2000] 3 SCC 350, where this Court, on a detailed consideration of
law in India and elsewhere held that even if, in an earlier suit for
injunction, there is an incidental finding on title, the same will not
be binding in a latter suit or proceedings where title is directly in
question, unless it is established that it was 'necessary' in the earlier
suit to decide the question of title for granting or refusing injunction
and that the relief for injunction was found or based on the finding
on title. Even the mere framing of an issue on title may not be
sufficient as pointed out in that case.

11.4    I have carefully gone through the decisions.  There is no dispute
with the propositions of law relied upon by the learned senior counsel
for both the sides.  From the decisions cited by both the sides, the
following points emerge: (I) The plea of res judicata can be given
effect if four conditions, which are required, are proved.  They are - (i)
litigating parties must be the same; (ii) the subject matter of the suit
also must be identical; (iii) the matter must be finally decided between
the parties; (iv) the suit must be decided by a court of competent
jurisdiction.  (II) Framing of an issue or not framing of a formal issue is
immaterial.  But, the material test to be applied is whether the Court
considered in the former suit the adjudication of the issue material and
essential for its decision. (III) Which of the matters are directly in issue
and which are collaterally or incidentally in issue, must be determined
on the facts of each case.  (IV) Even though an issue is not formally
framed, but, it is material and essential in the earlier proceeding, a
finding on that issue would operate as res judicata in the subsequent
proceeding.  In other words, to determine whether an issue was directly
and substantially in issue, normally one has to examine the plaint, the
written statement, the issues and the judgment and then find out if the
matter was directly and substantially in issue and it is not to be assumed
that matters in respect of which issues have been framed are  directly
and substantially in issue nor is there any special significance to be
attached to the fact that a particular issue is the first in the list of
issues.   One of the tests is if the issue is necessary to be decided for
adjudicating on the principal issue and was decided, it would have to be
treated as directly and substantially in issue; and, if it is clear that the
judgment was in fact based upon the decision on such issue, then it
would operate as res judicata in a later case.
11.5    Now keeping in view the legal position, it is to be examined as to
whether the present suit of the plaintiffs is barred by the principle
enunciated in the doctrine of res judicata.  The trial Court had decreed
the former suit.  A reading of the judgment of the 1st appellate Court in
the earlier first appeal suit would show that the said court, which is the
last court of fact, had recorded a finding that the plaintiffs failed to
establish that they were in possession of the plaint schedule property as
on the date of the former suit.  Further, in this instant case, as rightly
pointed out by the learned senior counsel for the plaintiffs, the
pleadings in the former suit are not filed.  Further, ultimately the
appeal suit was allowed only on the ground that the plaintiffs were not
found to be in possession of the suit property, as on the date of that
suit. The said Court had further observed that the plaintiffs are at
liberty to file a (fresh) suit for declaration of title and recovery of
possession. Therefore, the contention that the present suit is barred by
res judicata is devoid of merit.  Be that as it may.  On facts, both the
Courts below, after referring to the decisions cited before the said
Courts, had concurrently held that the present suit for declaration of
title and recovery of possession is not barred by res judicata.  The law is
well settled that when the finding on the issue of res judicata arrived at
by the Courts below is possible and plausible, this Court is precluded
from substituting its view even if another view is possible.   Even
otherwise, any other view is not possible in this case, in the well
considered view of this Court.  Further, res judicata being a question of
fact and law and not a pure question of law, let alone, substantial
question of law, the said question cannot be permitted to be raised in
this second appeal, more particularly, when there was no perversity
either in the appreciation of facts and the evidence or in the application
of the law to the material facts or the findings recorded by the Courts
below.  Hence the contention that the present suit of the plaintiffs is
barred by res judicata is devoid of merit and is accordingly rejected.
12.1    This takes this Court to the next set of contentions of the learned
senior counsel for the defendants 2 and 4, which are as follows: The
plaintiffs had relied upon in the former suit, the very same documents
on which they are now relying upon in the present suit.  The same
property is involved in both the suits.  In the earlier suit, the Courts
have extensively dealt with the very same documents, which were also
pressed into service in that former suit.  Therefore, a competent civil
Court had an occasion to earlier deal with all the documents.  And,
hence on that ground also the principle of res judicata applies.  In
support of the said contentions, the learned senior counsel for the
defendants 2 and 4 had placed reliance on the decision in Mahaboob Bi
Saheb and others v. Shaik Abdul Razack Saheb (died) per LRs and  
others   wherein this court dealing with a similar line of contentions
had held as follows:
 A series of documents submitted by the plaintiffs herein are the
very same documents filed in the earlier suit, related to the entire
property.  It is not the case that the documents produced in the
present suit, in the lower Court, only related to the earlier suit and
that property is not the property involved in the present suit.  The
lower Court has extensively dealt with the issues at page No.10 of
its judgment and has held that the documents produced before the
trial Court in the earlier suit are by the plaintiffs herein and have
been pressed into service by them in the earlier suit and the Court
had the occasion to deal with all these documents.  Thus the lower
Court held that the principles of res judicata applies.
12.2    The learned senior counsel for the plaintiffs, in reply, would
contend as follows: - No doubt, it is true that some of the documents
exhibited in this suit were also exhibited in the former suit filed for
perpetual injunction simpliciter based on possession.  Naturally when
the relief of injunction claimed in the former suit and the relief of
declaration of title and recovery of possession claimed in the present
suit relate to the very same property, the plaintiffs are obliged to file in
both the suits their title documents as well as the other documents,
which are necessary to establish their case.  In fact, the documents were
accepted by the trial Court while decreeing the former suit for perpetual
injunction.  However, the documents were considered by the first
appellate Court only on a limited aspect and to find out as to whether
the plaintiffs in the former suit were in possession or not as on the date
of the institution of that former suit.  But, in this suit for declaration of
title and recovery of possession, a detailed consideration of the
documents as was necessary was done by the Courts below to arrive at a 
finding in regard to title.
12.3    In the present case, the plaintiffs were required to prove their
right, title and interest and also entitlement to recover possession of the
plaint schedule property.  Therefore, apart from the documents filed in
the former suit, the plaintiffs had further filed some more documents in
the present suit through PWs1 and 2.  In the former suit ryotwari patta
under exhibit A3 was not filed besides several other documents.  In-fact
it was contended before the Courts below that the documents that were
not filed in the earlier litigation were also filed in the present suit and
exhibited.  But, that contention was rejected by assigning valid and
cogent reasons  and by observing that the documents are not filed in the
former suit is no ground to disbelieve the said documents.  Having regard
to the said reasons and accepting the explanation of the plaintiffs that
the plaintiffs did not file the said documents in the earlier suit as the
said suit was a simple suit for injunction, it must be held that this
contention of the defendants 2 and 4 does not merit consideration.
13.     Before parting, it is to be noted that the learned senior counsel
for the defendants 2 and 4 had contended that insofar as a part of the
plaint schedule property admittedly the claim is based on mere entries
in revenue records and that the law is well settled that entries in
revenue records do not confer title and therefore, the courts below
ought not to have decreed the suit of the plaintiffs based on entries in
revenue records.  He would further contend that the burden is on the
plaintiffs to establish their case irrespective of the defendants proved
their case or not and that in the absence of establishment of the
plaintiffs title, the weakness of the case set up by the defendants
cannot be a ground to grant the relief.  In support of the contentions, he
placed reliance on a decision in Union of India v. Vasavi Co-operative
Housing Society Limited and others . The ratio in the decision is as
follows:
It is trite law that, in a suit for declaration of title, the burden
always lies on the plaintiff to make out and establish a clear case
for granting such a declaration and the weakness, if any, of the
case set up by the defendants would not be a ground to grant
relief to the plaintiff.

      The learned senior counsel for the plaintiffs would submit as
follows: The plaintiffs case is not based on mere entries in revenue
records.  The plaintiffs had filed title deeds in respect of Ac.1.49 
cents of land out of Ac.5.25 cents.  Apart from filing the said title deeds,
the plaintiffs had inter alia claimed that the Government gave full rights
to the 1st plaintiff after the abolition of the Inams on the
commencement of the Inams Estates Abolition Act during the year 1958  
to 1960 as by then the 1st plaintiff has been in possession and enjoyment
of the same since more than 55 years under the Inamdar-Vemparala  
Suryanarayana.  Thus, the basis for the claim is the bestowing or
conferment of full rights on the 1st plaintiff by the Government on the
commencement of the above said enactment and also based on long   
adverse possession and prescriptive title by long continuous possession
for more than 55 years under the inamdar. Nonetheless, the concurrent
finding recorded by the courts below that the plaintiffs had established
title, being a finding on a question of fact and as no substantial question
of law was raised, formulated and involved for consideration on this
aspect, the defendants 2 and 4 are precluded from raising this plea
before this Court in view of the narrow compass of Section 100 of the
Code. 
14.     Keeping in view the facts of the present case and the scope of
Section 100 of the Code, it is necessary to refer to the decision of the
Supreme Court in Kondiba Dagadu Kadam v. Savitribai Sopan Gujar and  
others  wherein it was held as follows: The second appeal cannot be
decided on merely equitable grounds. It is not within the domain of the
High Court to investigate the grounds on which findings were arrived at,
by the last court of fact, being the first appellate court. In a case
where from a given set of circumstances two inferences are possible,
one drawn by the lower appellate court is binding on the High Court in
second appeal. Adopting any other approach is not permissible. The High
Court cannot substitute its opinion for the opinion of the first appellate
court unless it is found that the conclusions drawn by the lower
appellate court were erroneous being contrary to the mandatory
provisions of law applicable or its settled position on the basis of
pronouncements made by the apex Court, or was based upon in   
inadmissible evidence or arrived at without evidence.  The law is well
settled that concurrent findings of fact based on evidence, which was
accepted by the trial Court as well as the first appellate court, cannot
be disturbed more particularly when the first appellate court has given
satisfactory reasons for accepting the same evidence which was
accepted by the trial Court.  In the case on hand, the
appellants/defendants 2 and 4 had not raised a substantial question of
law on this aspect and also could not show that the conclusions drawn by
the Courts below, which are concurrent, were erroneous on any ground.
15.     Having regard to the reasoned findings on the substantial
questions of law raised in S.A.No.1140 of 2003 of the defendants 2 and
4, this Court finds that there is no substance in the substantial questions
of law and that the said second appeal is devoid of merit and is liable for
dismissal.
16.     Now the substantial questions of law raised by the plaintiffs in
their second appeal are taken up.  The said questions relate to the
plaintiffs entitlement to the mesne profits, which are not granted by
both the Courts below.  Be it noted that the Court below had dismissed
the cross objections of the plaintiffs filed in that regard.
16.1    No serious resistance is made to the claim of the plaintiffs in this
regard.  The learned senior counsel for the plaintiffs had contended that
the suit filed for recovery of possession was decreed by the Courts below
and that award of mesne profits follow the event and hence, the Courts
below ought to have granted future mesne profits to the plaintiffs
instead of refusing to grant the same.  He had placed reliance upon the
decision of the Supreme Court in R.S.Maddannappa (deceased) by LRs   
v. Chandramma and another .  The facts of the case disclose that the
plaintiff brought a suit against her sister for possession of half share of
the suit property.  The High Court had awarded mesne profits to the
successful first defendant even though she was not transposed as a
plaintiff.  It was contended before the Supreme Court that mesne profits
cannot be awarded to the successful party to a suit for possession unless
a claim was made in respect of them.  In this backdrop of facts and
contentions, the Supreme Court held as follows:
The learned counsel is right in so far a mesne profits prior to the suit are
concerned but in so far as mesne profits subsequent to the date of the
institution of the suit, that is future mesne profits are concerned, the
position is governed by Order XX, rule 2, C.P.C. which is as follows :
"(1) Where a suit is for the recovery of possession of immovable property
and for rent or mesne profits, the Court may pass a decree 
(a) for the possession of the property;
(b) for the rent or mesne profits which have accrued on the property during
a period prior to the institution of the suit or directing an inquiry as to such
rent or mesne profits;
(c) directing an inquiry as to rent or mesne profits from the institution of
the suit until :-
(i) the delivery of possession to the decree holder,
(ii) the relinquishment of possession by the judgment debtor with notice to
the decree-holder through the Court, or
(iii) the expiration of three years from the date of the decree,
whichever event first occurs.
(2) Where an inquiry is directed under Clause (b) or Clause (c) a final decree
in respect of the rent or mesne profits shall be passed in accordance with
the result of such inquiry."
The Supreme Court having referred to the earlier decisions had upheld
the decree of the High Court and had dismissed the appeal.  From the
settled legal position, it is clear that in a suit for recovery of possession,
the claim for future mesne profits can be granted.  Therefore, the
Courts below are not justified in refusing to grant the relief of future
mesne profits to the plaintiffs.  Viewed thus, this Court finds that there
is acceptable merit in the questions raised in this second appeal of the
plaintiffs and that accordingly this second appeal of the plaintiffs
deserves to be allowed.
17.     In the result, S.A.No.1140 of 2003 is dismissed.  S.A.No.1305 of
2003 of the plaintiffs is allowed granting a decree additionally for future
mesne profits from the date of institution of the suit until the delivery of
possession of the plaint schedule property to the plaintiffs; the
plaintiffs, however, are directed to move an application under Order XX
Rule 12 of the Code before the trial Court requesting to direct an
enquiry as to the mesne profits from the date of the institution of the
suit until the delivery of possession and pass a decree in respect of
future mesne profits in accordance with the result of such enquiry.  The
appellants in SA.No.1140 of 2003 are granted four months time from the
date of receipt of a copy of this judgment to vacate and handover
vacant peaceful possession of the plaint schedule property to the
plaintiffs.  Failing compliance, the plaintiffs are at liberty to obtain
possession of the property by following the procedure established by
law.
      There shall be no order as to costs.
      Miscellaneous petitions p                           ending, if any, in
these
appeals, shall stand closed.
______________________    
M. SEETHARAMA MURTI, J      
7th December, 2015
