
THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE  M. SEETHARAMA MURTI          

Criminal Revision Case No.864 of 2008

30-01-2015 

Smt.A.D.Rita Kumari.Petitioner 

N.Ravi Manohar and 4 others. Respondents   

Counsel for the petitioner:Sri M.A.S. Narasimha Rao

Counsel for Respondent Nos.1 to 4: Sri Murali Lincoln
Counsel for Respondent No.5: STATE  

<Gist :

>Head Note: 

? Cases referred:


THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE M.SEETHARAMA MURTI           

Criminal Revision Case No.864 of 2008

ORDER:  


                This Criminal Revision Case under Sections 397 and 401 of
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (the CrPC for brevity) by the
petitioner/de facto complainant/first informant (petitioner for
brevity) is directed against the judgment dated 03.03.2008 of the
learned Judicial Magistrate of First Class, Kurnool in CC.No.53 of 2007.
1.              (a)     The said Calendar Case was taken on file against the
respondents 1 to 4/accused 1 to 4 (A1 to A4 for brevity) for the
offences punishable  under Sections 498-A and 506 of the Indian Penal
Code, 1860 (the IPC for short) and Sections 3 and 4 of the Dowry
Prohibition Act.  In fact, charges were framed for the offences
punishable under Sections 498-A and 506 of the IPC and the accused were 
tried for the said offences with which they were charged.  And, no
charges were framed for the offences punishable under Sections 3 and 4
of the Dowry Prohibition Act.  By the said judgment, which is impugned
in this criminal revision case, the Court below found the accused not
guilty of the offences punishable under Sections 498-A and 420 of the IPC
and had acquitted them of the said offences.
2.              I have heard the submissions of the learned counsel for the
petitioner, the learned counsel for the A1 to A4 and the learned
Additional Public Prosecutor appearing for the 5th respondent/State.  I
have perused the material record.

3.      Now the points that arise for determination in this revision are:       
        Whether the judgment impugned is liable to set aside in
the facts and circumstances of the case and in the light of
the submissions made on behalf of the petitioner?
And, if so, what shall be the appropriate order to be made
in this revision case?
4.      POINTS:  
4.       (a)    The case of the prosecution and the facts necessary for
consideration, in brief, are as follows: - On 15.06.2005 at about
05:00 PM, PW1-Rita Kumari went along with her parents to IV Town 
Police Station, Kurnool and had presented a written report inter alia
alleging as follows: She is the 2nd daughter of her parents.  Her marriage
was performed with A1 on 16.08.2003.  At the time of marriage, dowry in
a sum of Rs.1.50 lakh besides 6 tolas of gold and other gold ornaments
were given.  Household articles were also presented.  A sum of
Rs.70,000/- was spent towards marriage expenses.  A1 was working as a  
Record Assistant on temporary/part time basis in Balasiva Degree
College.  After the marriage, the petitioner had joined her husband and
they had lived together happily for about one year in Bababrindavan
Nagar of Kurnool.  While so, A1 had developed illicit intimacy with one
Hemalatha.  After the said woman gave birth to a boy, A1 had brought
the said Hemalatha and her one month old boy to his house and had 
directed the petitioner to attend on them and serve them.  Whenever
the petitioner used to refuse to serve them, A1 used to indiscriminately
beat her by saying that he would send her dead body to her house in case
she ventured to say anything against the said Hemalatha.  On 18.11.2004,
A1 came to the house in a drunken state.  As there was no money in the
house he had forcibly taken the gold necklace of the petitioner and
pledged it on 19.11.2004 with Deep finance.  Again, A1 came to the
house on the night of 08.12.2004 in a drunken state and demanded the
petitioner to get money from her house and beat her and necked her out
of the house.  The petitioner informed about the same to her parents on
telephone.  On that her parents sent a DD for Rs.3,150/- dated
11.12.2004 favouring A1.  A1 had spent away that amount.  On 
21.12.2004 A1 having demanded for money had taken away the gold   
bangles of the petitioner and pledged them.  With that money, A1 and
his friends had consumed drinks in the house.  Again as there was no
money for spending on the drinks of A1, he had again taken the golden
bangles of the petitioner on 01.01.2005 and pledged them.  In February
2005, A1 beat the petitioner and sent her away to Kambham of Prakasam  
District to get money from her house.  She had accordingly brought
Rs.2,000/- from her house in the same month and gave it to A1.  From
then onwards, A1 had started insisting that the petitioner should bring
Rs.2 lakhs from her parents and used to ill treat her and abuse her in
filthy language.  He used to say that he will see the face of the petitioner
only if she brings Rs.2 lakhs from her house and used to say that her
presence is not necessary in the house and she can leave the house.  On
31.03.2005 at about 08:00 PM A1, Hemalatha and his friends (in all four
persons) had entered the house and threatened the petitioner for not
getting Rs.2 lakhs from her house by saying that they will see her end.
At that time, Hemalatha (A2) held the right hand while one Das (A4) held
the left hand of the petitioner.  One Mani (A3) picked the stick of an easy
chair and in the meanwhile the husband of the petitioner (A1) held her
neck.  Then the petitioner had raised hue and cry.  Hearing the cries of
the petitioner, A1 to A4 were taken aback.  Taking advantage of the
same, the petitioner had unbolted the doors and had escaped from the
house.  In stead of proceeding to the bus stand she had proceeded to
C.Camp Centre and then to Kambham Centre and from there to Nandyal.   
She had caught hold of a train and reached Kambham.  She had informed  
about the incident to her parents.  The father of the petitioner tried to
inform about the incident to the elder sister of the A1 by name Lalitha
Santha Kumari.  But he could not do so.  Hence, a report was lodged with
the police.  The said report which was registered as case in Cr.No.141 of
2005 of Kurnool IV Town Police Station set the criminal law in motion.
After investigation, the police laid a charge sheet and the learned
Magistrate has taken the CC on file against A1 to A4.  During the course
of the trial, the petitioner and her supporting witnesses were examined
as PWs1 to 5.  The investigating Officers were examined as PWs6 and 7. 
Exhibits P1 to P8 were marked on the side of the prosecution.  During the
cross examination of PW1, exhibit D1 was marked.  No oral and 
documentary evidence was adduced on the side of the accused. 
4.      (b)             The learned counsel for the petitioner had contended
as follows: The trial court had erred in acquitting the accused despite
the fact that sufficient evidence was adduced showing the complicity of
the accused for the offences punishable under Sections 498-A and 420 of
the IPC.  The trial court erroneously failed to place reliance on the
evidence of PW1 and the other witnesses who had supported the case of 
the prosecution and had erroneously held that the prosecution had failed
to prove the guilt of the accused beyond all reasonable doubt.  The trial
court ought to have accepted the evidence adduced and ought to have
found the accused guilty of the offences with which they were charged.
When admittedly exhibits P2 to P4 pawn tickets were issued in the name 
of A1, the trial court ought not to have brushed aside the said
documentary evidence which fully corroborated the version of PW1.  The
trial court ought not to have brushed aside the credible and legally valid
evidence and ought to have seen that in cases involving matrimonial
disputes and offences relating to marriage, the evidence of the victim
woman if reliable and credible is by itself sufficient to base a conviction.
The trial court had framed two charges namely one under Section 498-A
and another under Section 506 of the IPC and examined the accused with 
reference to the said charges on 19.10.2006.  But in the impugned
judgment, there was no reference to the charge under Section 506 of the
IPC against the accused; and, strangely the court below had dealt with a
charge under Section 420 of the IPC though no charge was framed against 
the accused for the said offence.
4.      (c)             Per contra, the learned counsel for A1 to A4 had
submitted as under: - The alleged incident had occurred on 31.3.2005.
But, as per the evidence of PW6 the police officer, the first information
with the police was lodged on 15.06.2005. There is inordinate delay in
lodging the report. The accused are falsely implicated after
deliberations.  The accused are innocent. Admittedly there is no
relationship either by blood or consanguinity between the A2 to A4 on
one hand and the petitioner and her husband (A1) on the other and that
in the absence of such relationship as contemplated under law, the said
accused (A2 to A4) ought not to have been prosecuted for the offence
punishable under Section 498-A of the IPC.  The ingredients of Section
420 of the IPC are not attracted.  The trial court had rightly appreciated
the evidence on record and held that there is no credible and legal
evidence to bring home the guilt of the accused beyond all reasonable
doubt and therefore, had rightly acquitted the accused.  When a view
which is plausible is taken by the court below, this court while exercising
revisional jurisdiction need not substitute its view even if another view is
possible. The well reasoned findings in the well considered judgment of
the court below do not call for interference. The revision is devoid of
merit and is liable to be dismissed.
5.      There is no need to go into the merits of the matter in view of the
following facts and circumstances.  The two charges which were framed
by the trial court against A1 to A4 are for the offences punishable under
Sections 498-A and 506 of the IPC.  However, no charge was framed at
least against A1 under Sections 3 and 4 of the Dowry Prohibition Act
though there are necessary averments in the exhibit P1-report, the
charge sheet and the evidence collected by the investigating agency in
support thereof.           The law is well settled that the Judge while
considering question of framing the charges has the undoubted power to
sift and weigh the evidence for the limited purpose of finding out
whether or not a prima facie case against the accused has been made 
out; where the material placed before the Court discloses grave suspicion
against the accused, which has not been properly explained, the Court
will be fully justified in framing a charge and proceeding with the trial.
The law is also well settled that at the time of framing charges, there is
no need to deeply examine the evidence and that if the uncontroverted
averments in the charge sheet and the evidence collected by the
prosecution make out a case and create a grave suspicion that by itself is
sufficient to frame charges.
Section 498-A of the IPC reads as under:
498A.  Husband or relative of husband of a woman subjecting her
to cruelty  Whoever, being the husband or the relative of the
husband of a woman, subjects such woman to cruelty shall be 
punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three
years and shall also be liable to fine.
Section 506 of the IPC reads as follows:
        506.  Punishment for criminal intimidation  whoever commits, the
offence of criminal intimdation shall be punished with imprisonment
of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or
with fine, or with both.
Section 503 of the IPC reads as under:
        503.  Criminal intimidation  whoever threatens another with any
injury to his person, reputation or property, or to the person or
reputation of any one in whom that person is interested, with intent to
cause alarm to that person, or to cause that person to do any act which
he is not legally bound to do, or to omit to do any act which that person
is legally entitled to do, as the means of avoiding the execution of such
threat, commits criminal intimidation.
Section 3 of the Dowry Prohibition Act reads thus:
3.      Penalty for giving or taking dowry:-- (1) If any person, after the
commencement of this Act, gives or takes or abets the giving or taking
of dowry, he shall be punishable, [with imprisonment for a term which
shall not be less than [five years, and with fine which shall not be less
than fifteen thousand rupees or the amount of the value of such
dowry, whichever is more;]
     Provided that Court may, for adequate and special reasons to be
recorded in the judgment, impose a sentence of imprisonment for a
term of less than [Five years]
(2)     Nothing in sub-section (1) shall apply to, or in relation to --
 (a) presents which are given at the time of a marriage to the bride
(without any demand having been made in that behalf):
   Provided that such presents are entered in a list maintained in
accordance with the rules made under this Act;
(b) presents which are given at the time of a marriage to the
bridegroom (without any demand having been made in that behalf
        Provided that such presents are entered in a list maintained in
accordance with the rules made under this Act;
        Provided further that where such presents are made by or on
behalf of the bride or any person related to the bride, such presents
are of a customary nature and the value thereof is not excessive
having regard to the financial status of the person by whom, or on
whose behalf, such presents are given]
Section 4 of the Dowry Prohibition Act reads thus
[4.  Penalty for demanding dowry:- If any person demands,
directly or indirectly, from the parents or other relatives or guardian
of a bride or bridegroom, as the case may be any dowry he shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than
six months, but which may extend to two years and with fine which
may extend to ten thousand rupees: 
        Provided that the Court may, for adequate and special reasons
to be mentioned in the judgment, impose a sentence of imprisonment 
for a term of less than six months]

6.      Be it noted that the prosecution adduced evidence in support of its
case by examining PW1 and other supporting witnesses.  As already  
noted, no charges under Sections 3 and 4 of the Dowry Prohibition Act
were framed.  Though a charge under Section 506 of the IPC was framed,
there was no discussion in the judgment impugned in that regard and no
finding against the accused either acquitting or convicting them was
recorded by the trial Court.  There is nothing on the material record to
show that the charge under Section 506 of the IPC was subsequently 
deleted or altered.  When there is a specific charge under Section 506 of
the IPC, no reasons are forthcoming as to why the trial court did not
advert to the said charge and the evidence, if any, adduced by the
prosecution attracting the ingredients of the said penal provision of law.
The trial court proceeded in its judgment as if there was no charge at all
framed under Section 506 of the IPC and completely ignored the case of
the prosecution on the said charge.  Further, even though no charge
under Section 420 of the IPC was framed, the trial Court had dealt with
the said charge and found the accused not guilty of the said offence.
Therefore, the way the trial Court dealt with the matter is totally
unsatisfactory and not in accordance with the facts and the law.
Therefore, this court is of the well considered view that the judgment of
the trial court is unsustainable and is liable to be set aside.
7.                Indisputably, this case arises out of a police report.  By the
judgment impugned, the trial court recorded a finding of acquittal
against the accused.  The State did not prefer any appeal.  The present
revision case under Sections 397 and 401 of the CrPC is preferred by the
informant/victim who is the wife of A1.  The informant/petitioner did
not seek leave of this court for preferring an appeal and had not
preferred any appeal.  Under Section 372 of the CrPC, no appeal shall lie
from any judgment or order of a Criminal Court except as provided for by
the Code or by any other law for the time being in force.  By the time
this criminal revision was instituted in the year 2008, the proviso which
was introduced by Act 5/09 with effect from 31.12.2009 was not on the
statute book. Therefore, since the case arises from a police report and as
the calendar case was taken on file pursuant to the police report, a
revision is maintainable.  However, Section 401(3) of the CrPC says
nothing in this section shall be deemed to authorise a High Court to
convert a finding of acquittal into one of conviction while exercising the
powers of revision.  Therefore, in the light of the legal position and the
facts peculiar to the case, the only course open to this court is to remit
the matter to the trial court for disposal of the matter afresh in
accordance with the procedure established by law.  In view of the said
decision of this court to remit the matter to the trial court for fresh
consideration of the case on merits in all respects, this court did not
examine the credibility and reliability and adequacy or otherwise of the
evidence in regard to the charge under Section 498-A of the IPC.
8.              Accordingly, the criminal revision case is allowed and the
judgment of the court below is hereby set aside and the matter is
remitted to the trial court for fresh disposal of the case on merits in
accordance with the procedure established by law having regard to the
charges specifically framed against the accused.  It is made clear that
the trial Court is at liberty to frame any other additional charges, if
necessary, against all or any one of the accused by following the
procedure established by law.  However, it is also made clear that the
prosecution as well as the accused are at liberty to recall any witness
already examined either for examination in chief or cross examination as
the case may be and also to adduce further evidence, if any, which the
law permits.  The trial court shall consider the entire evidence on record
in proper perspective while disposing the case afresh on merits.
        Miscellaneous petitions pending, if any, in this CrlRC shall
stand closed.
____________________   
M.SEETHARAMA MURTI, J      
30th January 2015
