
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE SANJAY KUMAR AND THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE M.SEETHARAMA  MURTI                      

CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1418 OF 2010       

08-09-2016 

S.K.Musthaq Ahmed @ Goremiyan and others---Appellant    

The State of Andhra Pradesh rep. by its Public Prosecutor.. Respondent


Counsel for the Appellant:S.V./Bhuvaneswari

Counsel for respondent:  Public Prosecutor

<Gist:

>Head Note:     


? CASES REFERRED:      

1.2008 (8) Supreme 178 
2.1989 Supp (2) Supreme 706  

THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE SANJAY KUMAR         

AND  

THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE M. SEETHARAMA MURTI           

Criminal Appeal no.1418 of 2010
JUDGMENT    
(per Honble Sri Justice M. Seetharama Murti)

        This appeal under Section 374(2) CrPC is directed against the judgment,
dated 24.11.2009, of the learned V Additional Sessions Judge, Mahabubnagar, 
in SC.No.260 of 2006 whereby the learned Additional Sessions Judge found the
sole accused guilty of the offences punishable under Sections 457, 302 and 404
IPC and imposed sentences of imprisonment for life and a fine of Rs.1,000/- for
the offence of Murder, rigorous imprisonment of two years and a fine of
Rs.500/- and simple imprisonment for one month in default of payment of fine
for the offence punishable under Section 457 IPC and rigorous imprisonment for
a period of two years and a fine of Rs.500/- and simple imprisonment for one
month in default of payment of fine for the offence punishable under Section
404 IPC.
2.      We have heard the submissions of the learned counsel for the
appellant/accused and the learned Public Prosecutor appearing for the
respondent/State.  We have perused the material record.
3.      Based on the material available before the learned Additional Sessions
Judge, the following charges were initially framed against the accused.
FIRSTLY: That you on or about the 4th day of February, 2006 about 3.00
a.m., (mid night) at Kanmanoor village committed house trespass by
entering into the house of the deceased Askani Ashamma through skylight 
(POGASOTTAM) by removing the stick and the deceased is in the   
possession of gold ear tops and black and white portable T.V all worth
Rs.5,000/- (Rupees Five thousand only) and the said place for the custody
of the property in order to commit the offence of punishable with
imprisonment for life and you thereby committed an offence punishable
under Section 450 IPC and within my cognizance. 

SECONDLY: That you at the same time and place committed murder     
intentionally causing the death of Askani Ashamma by throttling her neck
and thereby committed an offence punishable under Section 302 IPC and 
within my cognizance. 
THIRDLY: That you at the same time and place dishonestly 
misappropriated or converted to your own use certain movable properties
namely gold ear tops and black and white portable T.V all worth
Rs.5,000/- (Rupees Five thousand only) belonging to Askani Ashamma  
deceased person at the time of the death and had not since been in the
possession of any person legally entitled and that you were at the time of
the death of the said person a nephew of the deceased and that you have
committed an offence punishable under Section 404 IPC and within my 
cognizance. 
[Reproduced verbatim] 

4.      However, as per orders dated 29.09.2009, the learned Additional
Sessions Judge framed the following Altered charges:
Firstly: that in the intervening night of 4/5, February, 2006 in between 12
midnight and 0300 hours, you-accused committed lurking house tress into
the house of Askani Ashamma at Kanmanoor village through skylight 
(Pogasottam) by removing the stick in order to commit an offence and
that your thereby committed the offence punishable under Section 457
IPC and within my cognizance. 
Secondly: that you-accused on the same day and same time during the  
course of same transaction, you committed murder intentionally causing
death of the deceased-Askani Ashamma, who is your mother-in-law, by  
throttling her neck and that you thereby committed the offence
punishable U/s 302 of IPC and within my cognizance.
Thirdly: That you-accused, on the same day and same time during the 
course of same transaction, dishonestly misappropriated certainly
movable property namely gold ear tops and black and white portable T.V,
all worth of Rs.5,000/- belonging to deceased-Askahani Ashamma knowing  
that such property was in the possession of a deceased person at the time
of that persons deceased and has not since been in the possession of any
person legally entitled to such possession and that you thereby committed
the offence U/s 404 of IPC and within my cognizance.
[Reproduced verbatim] 

5.      To begin with, it is pertinent to mention that the learned counsel for the
accused would contend that no de novo trial was conducted by the learned
Additional Sessions Judge after the altered charges/fresh charges were framed
at the stage of arguments and that the evidence that was recorded prior to the
framing of the altered charges stands eschewed and is not available for
consideration and that for lack of any evidence on record the accused is
entitled to be acquitted.  In the light of the said contentions it is necessary
to
refer to Section 217 of the CrPC, which reads thus:
Recall of Witnesses when charge altered:
Whenever a charge is altered or added to by the Court after the
commencement of the trial, the prosecutor and the accused shall be
allowed-
(a)     to recall or re-summon, and examine with reference to such
alteration or addition, any witness who may have been examined,
unless the Court, for reasons to be recorded in writing, considers
that the prosecutor or the accused, as the case may be, desires to
recall or re-examine such witness for the purpose of vexation or
delay or for defeating the ends of justice;
(b)     also to call any further witness whom the Court may think to be
material.

5.1     Perusal of the record reflects that at the stage of arguments, the
learned Additional Sessions Judge noticed that the charges initially framed are
not correctly framed and therefore framed the afore-stated charges after
hearing both the sides and thereafter examined the accused yet again and
recorded his plea and then gave an opportunity to both the sides to recall and
re-summon and examine, with reference to such altered charges, any witness 
already examined.  An opportunity was also given to call and examine any
further material witness, not already examined.  Such opportunity afforded by
the Court of Session was availed by both the sides.  The said facts borne out by
record are not in dispute.  In the light of the undeniable facts and the
provision
of law and its due compliance, the preliminary contention that the learned
Additional Sessions Judge ought to have held de novo trial is devoid of merit
and is accordingly rejected.
6.      At trial, the prosecution examined PWs 1 to 11 and exhibited P1 to P7
and marked MOs 1 to 3.  No evidence was adduced on the side of the defence. 
7.      Now it is necessary to examine and evaluate the evidence adduced by 
the prosecution to bring home the guilt of the accused for the offences with
which he is charged.    
 7.1    The gist of evidence of PWs1 to 3, in brief, is this:
        PW1, Gaddameedhi Bhagyalaxmi, is the wife of G.Venkateswarlu, the  
accused.  The deceased, Askani Ashamma, is the mother of PW1 and the    
mother-in-law of the accused.  PW1, the accused and their children used to
reside in the house of the elder brother of PW1 at Kanmanoor village.  The
mother of the accused also used to reside with them.  The deceased, who is
the mother of PW1, used to reside in a separate house in the same village.  The
accused used to harass and beat PW1 as her mother, the deceased, has given  
him less dowry.  About 5 or 6 days before the incident of murder of deceased,
the accused threatened PW1 that he would kill PW1 and her mother.  On the 
day of the incident of the murder of the deceased, the accused quarrelled with
PW1 and went away from the house at 08:00 PM.  He returned to the house  
around 03:00 AM, the early morning hours, of the next day.  On enquiry by
PWs1s brother, the accused stated that he went to the house of the deceased.
As the brother of PW1 questioned the accused as to where he has gone on that 
night, the accused, in a hurried manner, took his mother, children and luggage
at 03:00 AM and left the house of the brother of PW1, where they all used to
reside.  In the morning hours, PW2, Kothakapu Kalamma, and PW3, Kothakapu    
Venkatram Reddy, came to PW1 and informed that her mother is not  
responding from the house to their calls.  Therefore, PW1 along with others
went to the house of her mother.  They found that the doors of the house of
the deceased were closed from inside.  The doors were broken open with the
help of villagers.  On entering the house of the deceased, they noticed the
dead body of the deceased.  They further noticed that there are bleeding
injuries on both the ears of the deceased indicating that her ear studs (ear
tops) were snatched away forcibly by someone.  They also noticed a mark on 
the neck of the deceased indicating that her neck was pressed by someone.  On 
examination of the house, they further noticed that the TV and the purse which
belonged to the deceased were also missing and that the culprit/s gained entry
into the house through poga sottum (chimney).  Hence, PW1 got scribed a
report by a villager and lodged the same with the police.
7.2     It is apt to now refer to the gist of the evidence of the remaining
witnesses and the details of the other witnesses examined by the prosecution.
PW10, B. Anuradha, the Sub-Inspector, Peddamandadi police station, received 
Exhibit P1, report, from PW1 and registered the crime and issued FIR.  The
copy of the FIR is Exhibit P6.  She forwarded the original FIR to the Court of
the
Judicial Magistrate of First Class, Wanaparthy, which is at a distance of 25
K.Ms 
from the said police station.  PW4, who knows the deceased, the accused and 
PWs1 to 3 testified as under:  When he, PW3 and others were sitting in front of
Anjaneyaswamy temple in their village, PW2 came there and informed that the
deceased was not responding to her call when she went to her house to pay
labour charges and that the house doors of the deceased were closed.
Immediately, they went to the house of the deceased.  He, PW3 and others 
opened the doors of the house of the deceased forcibly and found the dead
body of the deceased.  He also stated that when police examined him he
opined that the neck of the deceased was pressed by someone and that he  
knows that there are disputes between the deceased and PW1 on one hand and   
the accused on the other.  PW5 and PW6 are said to be panch witness in whose  
presence the police held inquest over the dead body of the deceased and
prepared Exhibit P2, inquest Panchanama, and Exhibit P3, scene of offence
observation panchanama with rough sketch.  PW5 stated that he does not know  
the contents of Exhibits P2 and P3.  In his cross examination he stated that PW1
is his sister by courtesy.  PW7 who deposed that he knows PW1, the deceased,  
and the accused, further testified that the marriage between PW1 and the
accused was solemnized about 10 to 12 years prior to his giving evidence and
that the accused did not look after PW1 well and that the accused used to
always quarrel with PW1 and that several times panchayats were held and he 
acted as an elder during such panchayats and advised the accused to treat PW1 
well and asked PW1 to live with the accused.  He further deposed about the
accused coming to their village and the accused residing with PW1 and his
knowledge about the death of the deceased.  He also stated that on coming to
know of the death of the deceased he accompanied the villagers to the house
of the deceased and that they sent a message to the police.  According to his
further testimony, the accused absconded from the village after the incident
and that they all found that the gold ear studs and a TV belonging to the
deceased were found missing from her house.  PW8 is said to be a mediator in
whose presence the police were said to have recovered MO1, pair of gold ear
studs (ear tops), and MO2, portable black and white TV, from the accused on
his arrest at Kothakota RTC bus stand.  PW8 did not support the case of the
prosecution.  PW9 is the Doctor who held Post Mortem Examination on the dead  
body of the deceased and issued Exhibit P5, Post Mortem Examination Report.  
PW11 is the CI of police, who took up investigation, collected evidence and
filed the charge sheet.
8.      We have carefully gone through the entire evidence.  Scrutiny of the
evidence brought on record would show that there are no eyewitnesses to the
incident of murder.  Hence, the prosecution relies upon circumstantial
evidence to prove the complicity of the accused.  Therefore, before we
proceed further, it is profitable to refer to the precedential guidance dealing
with appreciation of circumstantial evidence.
        In Chattar Singh and Anr. V. State of Haryana , the law on the
appreciation of circumstantial evidence is stated as follows:  There is no
doubt that conviction can be based solely on circumstantial evidence but it
should be tested by the touch-stone of law relating to circumstantial evidence
laid down by this Court as far back as in 1952 in Hanumant Govind Nargundkar
and Anr. V. State of Madhya Pradesh (AIR 1952 SC 343), wherein it was 
observed thus:
It is well to remember that in cases where the evidence is of a
circumstantial nature, the circumstances from which the
conclusion of guilt is to be drawn should be in the first instance
be fully established and all the facts so established should be
consistent only with the hypothesis of the guilt of the accused.
Again, the circumstances should be of a conclusive nature and
tendency and they should be such as to exclude every hypothesis 
but the one proposed to be proved. In other words, there must
be a chain of evidence so far complete as not to leave any
reasonable ground for a conclusion consistent with the innocence
of the accused and it must be such as to show that within all
human probability the act must have been done by the accused.

Further, in Padala Veera Reddy v. State of A.P.  the Supreme Court laid down
the principle that when a case rests upon circumstantial evidence, such
evidence must satisfy the following tests:
 (1) the circumstances from which an inference of guilt is sought
to be drawn, must be cogently and firmly established; (2) those
circumstances should be of a definite tendency unerringly
pointing towards guilt of the accused; (3) the circumstances,
taken cumulatively, should form a chain so complete that there is
no escape from the conclusion that within all human probability
the crime was committed by the accused and none else; and (4) 
the circumstantial evidence in order to sustain conviction must
be complete and incapable of explanation of any other hypothesis
than that of the guilt of the accused and such evidence should
not only be consistent with the guilt of the accused but should be
inconsistent with his innocence.
9.      Keeping in view the legal position, the evidence needs to be evaluated in
the light of the contentions advanced on behalf of the prosecution and the sole
accused. The learned Public Prosecutor while supporting the findings of the
learned Additional Sessions Judge submitted that the evidence firmly
established the circumstances, which point towards the guilt of the accused,
and that the prosecution successfully proved the guilt of the accused. Per
contra, the learned counsel for the accused submitted that the evidence is
unsatisfactory, weak and scanty and is not sufficient to sustain the findings of
conviction recorded by the learned Additional Sessions Judge and that the
accused is entitled to be acquitted.
9.1     Firstly, the evidence of PW1 and the version of the prosecution reveal
that the mother of PW1, the deceased, who is no other than the mother-in-law
of the accused, was residing in a separate house in the same village.  According
to the evidence of PW1, the deceased was alone residing in that house.  PW2
who went to the house of the deceased to pay labour charges first noticed that
she was not responding to her call and that the doors of the house of the
deceased are bolted from inside.  Therefore, she along with her husband, PW3,
went to the house of PW1 and informed her that the deceased did not respond
to her call.  Later, they and some other villagers went to the house of the
deceased and broke open the doors of the house of the deceased and found the 
dead body of the deceased inside the house.  They noticed that there are
bleeding injuries on the earlobes of the deceased indicating that her ear tops
were forcibly snatched away by someone.  They also found that Portable TV
and purse of the deceased were missing from the house. 
9.2     Admittedly the purse of the deceased, if any lost, is not recovered.
Therefore, to link the accused with the crime and to show his complicity, the
prosecution relies upon the recovery of MO1, pair of ear studs, said to be of
the
deceased, and MO2, portable TV said to be missing from the house of the
deceased.  Since the doors of the house of the deceased are found bolted from
inside, the prosecution also relies upon a theory that the accused, who is the
culprit, entered the house of the deceased through a poga sottum (chimney)
of the house and killed her and escaped with the lost articles MOs1 and 2 and a
purse through the poga sottum (chimney).  What is to be noted is that though
the poga sottum (chimney) is also referred to in the charge as a skylight (a
window placed in the roof to admit day light) it is not in dispute and it is
also
borne out by evidence that it is only a chimney [poga sottum] and not a
skylight.
9.3     Dealing first with the recovery, it is necessary to refer to the evidence
of
the panch witness, PW8, who was said to have been present when the alleged  
recovery (discovery) of MO1, ear tops, and MO2, portable black and white
colour TV, was made pursuant to the arrest of the accused and disclosure of
fact by him.  The said panch witness, PW8, deposed that he knows the accused  
and that about three years back on one day at around 01:00 PM, PW11, the CI 
of police, called him and one Rammohan Reddy, LW11, to RTC bus stand   
Kothakota, where the accused was present with the police and that on the
request of the said Inspector, he enquired with the accused as to why he killed
Ashamma and that the accused made a confession and stated further that he  
forcibly snatched gold ear studs from the ears of the deceased and took away
TV and that police also showed the TV and gold ear studs to him (PW8) and that
police drafted confessional and recovery Panchanama and obtained his
signature on Exhibit P4.  His evidence on a plain reading does not show that the
said articles were discovered at the instance and on a disclosure of fact made
by the accused.  Further, subsequent to alteration of the charges and after
PW 8 was recalled, he stated in his further cross examination that on the date
of the Panchanama he and the other mediator, Rammohan Reddy, went to the   
office of the CI of police and that the accused was in the custody of the said
Inspector and that he does not know since how long the accused was in the
custody of the police and that on the request of the CI he made an enquiry
with the accused and that by the time he and the said other mediator went to
the said Inspector, MO1, pair of gold studs, and MO2, TV, were on the table of
the CI and that he saw the accused handing over the said MOs on the said day
to the CI.  This witness was not declared hostile and was not cross-examined by
the learned Public Prosecutor.  The other mediator was not examined and no
explanation is forthcoming for the non examination of the said witness.  For
the confession of an accused to be admissible under Section 27 of the Indian
Evidence Act, it is necessary that such part of the confession should lead to
the
discovery of a fact referred to by the accused in his confession.  That is not
so
in the case instant.  Thus, in the absence of any reliable evidence, the case of
the prosecution based on the alleged recovery/discovery of MOs1 and 2 is not
worthy of trust and is therefore of no avail.  Further, it is the case of the
prosecution that the accused has a grudge against his mother-in-law.  It is not
the case of the prosecution that the murder was committed for gain.  In such
an event, as rightly contended by the learned counsel for the accused, if really
the accused committed the murder of the deceased out of grudge and not for
gain, he would not have resorted to committing theft of ear tops from the
person of the deceased and TV from the house of the deceased, which, if found
in his possession at any later point of time, would, in all probability, give a
chance to others to point out an accusing finger against him.
9.4     Secondly, dealing further with the aspect of loss of ear tops of the
deceased during the incident of murder, it is to be noted that the witnesses
who entered the house, after force opening the house doors, and saw the dead
body of the deceased, stated that they noticed that there are bleeding injuries
on both the ears of the deceased indicating that her ear studs (ear tops) were
snatched away forcibly by someone.  It is trite to note that the Doctor who
conducted post mortem examination on the dead body of the deceased noted   
the following ante mortem injuries: (i). Abrasion  black in colour over right
side of upper neck  2 nos each about 1  cm x 1 cm in size; (ii). 4 nos.
abrasion  black in colour over left lateral side and upper part of neck (a) 1
cm 
x  cm; (b) 1 cm x  cm; (c) 2 cm x  cm; (d) 3 cm x  cm;  (iii).  abrasion
over 4th toe  1 cm x 1 cm; and (4) abrasion over left little toe  1 cm x 1 cm.
It
is significant to note that the Doctor did not note any injuries on the lobules
of
the ears indicating that the ear tops of the deceased were forcibly snatched
away.   In a case based solely on circumstantial evidence, this aspect, which is
of significance, cannot be ignored.
9.5     Thirdly, the next set of circumstances which the prosecution relies upon
is as follows:  The accused, PW1, their children and the mother of the accused
used to reside in the house of the brother of PW1.  As per the evidence of PW1,
on the night of the incident, accused left the house at 08:00 PM and returned
at 03:00 AM on the next day.  And, when questioned by the brother of PW1 as 
to where he had gone, the accused replied that he has gone to the house of the
deceased and then hurriedly took away at that hour of the night (03:00 AM) his
mother, children and also luggage and left the house of the brother of PW1
where they all used to reside.
9.6     The accused leaving the house with his mother, children and luggage,
even if true, is not a circumstance of essence to establish the complicity of
the
accused.  Moreover, the brother of PW1, who was said to have questioned the
accused on that night, was not examined, though he is a material witness to
corroborate the version of PW1. When the case rested on circumstantial
evidence, the prosecution ought to have left no stone unturned and ought to
have examined the material witness by making necessary efforts to secure his
presence.  When PW1 was admittedly living in the house of her brother, the
reason assigned by the prosecution that her brothers where abouts are not
known cannot be countenanced.  
9.7     Fourthly, had the accused left the house at 8:00 PM and returned to the
house after committing the murder of the deceased by entering her house
through poga sottam (chimney), there is every possibility of his clothes getting
stained with either blood or soot/smoke marks or both.  PW1 did not state in
her evidence that she noticed any such stains or marks on the clothes of the
accused on his return to the house.
9.8     Fifthly, the prosecution case as is borne out by the charge itself is that
the culprit entered the house of the deceased through the poga sottum
(chimney) after removing a stick.  The said stick, though a vital piece of
material evidence, was not seized during the course of investigation and was
not marked.  Had that stick been seized and produced there would have been
some evidence at least to show the circumference or width of the poga
sottum (chimney) at its openings on both the sides.  Even in the rough sketch
of the scene, Exhibit P3, which is a part of scene of offence observation
panchanama, the measurements of the chimney are not noted.  As rightly 
contended by the learned counsel for the accused, no evidence is brought on
record as to the physique of the accused as on the date of the alleged offence
and the size/width of the poga sottum (chimney) at its openings at both ends
to show that it is possible for a person like the accused to enter the house of
the deceased through the poga sottum (chimney) and also escape through it
that too along with a portable TV.  The conspicuous absence of such evidence
of vital importance casts a deep-seated shadow of doubt on the veracity of the
prosecution case.
9.9     It is also contended by the learned counsel for the accused that if really
the accused was involved in the murder of the deceased, the investigating
officer ought to have made efforts to recover the clothes of the accused and
that no such recovery was made.  Having so contended, the following
statement from the evidence of PW11 was pointed out: There was possibility
of person coming through the chimney to have the smoke marks on his clothes. 
Witness voluntarily says that due to lapse of time the accused washed the
clothes and therefore no such marks were found on his clothes.  Therefore,
the submission that though the Inspector collected the clothes of the accused,
the same were not produced and marked merits consideration for what ever it
is worth.
9.10    Lastly, it is to be noted that there is also no reliable evidence as to
abscondance of the accused.  The contention of the accused that if he was the
culprit and if he wanted to abscond, he would not have returned to the house
of the brother of PW1, where his wife, PW1, and his children are residing with
him, appears to be plausible.   Further the evidence of PW1 is to the effect
that the accused left the house with his children and mother.  This
circumstance that the accused did not leave the house all alone but,
admittedly left the house with his mother and children would not shore up the
case of the prosecution that the accused absconded.  The mother of the
accused was not examined.  No investigation was done to show where the  
mother and the children of the accused were available immediately after the
incident and to prove that the accused was not with them and was absconding.
10.     Thus, the evidence brought on record and the circumstances relied upon
by the prosecution are not only not established but also not conclusive in
nature.  No circumstances having a definite tendency to unerringly point out
towards the guilt of the accused are established.  In the absence of cogent
evidence to prove the circumstances relied upon, the evidence adduced taken
cumulatively is not even sufficient to make out a prima facie case against the
accused leave alone proving the case against the accused beyond reasonable 
doubt.  Since the circumstances from which the conclusion of the guilt of the
accused is to be drawn are not at all established much less fully established
and do not probablise the commission of the crime by the accused and none 
else, the contention of the prosecution that the murder must have been
committed by the accused cannot be accepted.  The learned Additional 
Sessions Judge inspite of lack of reliable evidence, placed reliance erroneously
on the alleged disclosure statement of the accused and alleged recovery of the
stolen property and the alleged absence of the accused from the house during
the relevant period and came to a conclusion that the accused might have
committed the murder of the deceased who was admittedly residing in a
separate house in the same village.  Such conclusion was arrived at even in the
absence of credible and conclusive evidence.  On the above analysis, we are of
the view that the judgment of the Court below brooks interference and that
the appeal of the accused deserves to be allowed.
11.     In the result, the Criminal Appeal is allowed and the conviction of the
appellant/accused for the offences punishable under Sections 457, 302 and
404 IPC and the sentences for the said offences imposed upon him by the
learned Additional Sessions Judge in S.C.No.260 of 2006 are accordingly set
aside.  The appellant/accused is accordingly acquitted of the said offences.  He
shall be set at liberty forthwith, if his confinement is not required in any
other
case.  The fine amounts, if any, paid by him shall be refunded to him after the
time for preferring further appeal/revision is over.
_____________________    
JUSTICE SANJAY KUMAR      
____________________________     
JUSTICE M. SEETHARAMA MURTI        
08.09.2016
