
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE SANJAY KUMAR AND THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE M.SEETHARAMA                    

WRIT PETITION NO.20709 OF 2015     

21-10-2016 

Arvind Gopal Krishna Chawda .. Petitioner

The State of Telangana rep. by its Principal Secretary, Home Department and
others .. Respondents

Counsel for the Petitioner:  Sri Prabhijit Jauhar and
                              Sri T. Anirudh Reddy

Counsel for 1 to 5 respondents: Additional Advocate
                                 General (Telangana)

Counsel for the 6th respondent: Sri K.Vivek Reddy

<Gist:

>Head Note:     


? CASES REFERRED:      

1. (1951) Appeal Cases 352 
2. (1973) 2 SCC 674 
3. (1984) 3 SCC 698 
4. (1987) 1 SCC 42 
5. (1991) 3 SCC 451 
6. (2000) 3 SCC 14 
7. (2001) 5 SCC 247 
8. (2003) 7 SCC 250 
9. (2010) 1 SCC 174 
10. (2010) 1 SCC 591 
11. 163 (2009) DLT 627 (DB) 
12. 113 (2004) DLT 823 (DB) 
13. (2010) 4 SCC 409 
14. (2011) 6 SCC 479 
15. (1998) 1 SCC 112 
16. (2013) 15 SCC 790 
17. (2015) 5 SCC 450 

THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE SANJAY KUMAR         
AND  
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE M.SEETHARAMA MURTI           

WRIT PETITION NO.20709 OF 2015     

O R D E R 
(Per Honble Sri Justice Sanjay Kumar)
        
        Arvind Gopal Krishna Chawda, the petitioner herein, was
hitherto married to Pulla Sunita Rani, the 6th respondent.  He
presently seeks a writ of habeas corpus for production of their minor
children, Kashvi Chawda and Krish Chawda, citizens of the United
States of America (USA), from her custody and to cause their return
to the jurisdiction of the courts in New Jersey, USA, in compliance
with the orders dated 20.03.2013, 13.08.2013, 31.10.2013 and
23.01.2014 passed by the Superior Court of New Jersey, Chancery 
Division, Family Part, Middlesex County, USA (hereinafter, the
American Court).  In the alternative, he seeks a direction to the 6th
respondent to hand over the custody of the minor children to him so
that he can take them back to the jurisdiction of the American Court.
A further direction is sought to the 6th respondent to deliver to the
petitioner the required documents which are in her custody, such as
the passports and other travel related documents of the children, to
facilitate their return to the USA.
        The petitioner and the 6th respondent were married at
Hyderabad on 27.04.2002 as per Hindu rites.  The petitioner was
residing in the USA since 1996 and after their marriage; the 6th
respondent joined him there in December, 2002.  Kashvi, their
daughter, was born on 12.07.2005 in the USA, and was therefore an
American citizen by birth.  The 6th respondent completed her
internship as a pharmacist in the USA at this time.  Krish, their son,
was born on 11.04.2011 in the USA and was also an American citizen 
by birth.  The 6th respondent left the USA with both the children on
17.03.2013 and came to India.  Whether the petitioner had
knowledge of this is disputed.  According to him, he had no such
information and came to know of it only when he called the school on
18.03.2013 to find out about the children and was told that they had
not come to school.  He claimed that he filed a Missing complaint
with the National Centre of Missing and Exploited Children.  He filed
a petition for divorce and custody before the American Court on
19.03.2013.  Thereupon, the American Court passed order dated 
20.03.2013 for production and return of the children to its
jurisdiction.  The petitioner claimed that the 6th respondent received
the summons from the American Court but suppressing the same,   
she filed a complaint under Section 498-A IPC at Hyderabad.
        The petitioner asserted that, without disclosing that an interim
order of custody had already been granted to him in relation to their
children, the 6th respondent filed O.P.No.440 of 2013 before the
Family Court, Hyderabad, for divorce and custody, wherein she filed
I.A.No.195 of 2013, and obtained an ad-interim injunction dated
02.04.2013 restraining him and his family members from removing
the minor children from her custody. The petitioner further asserted
that the 6th respondent submitted to the jurisdiction of the American
Court and faxed letter dated 11.04.2013, through her counsel, to the
American Court seeking time to file her counter.  The 6th
respondents counsel in the USA informed the American Court, by 
letter dated 18.04.2013, that the 6th respondent was still finalizing
her reservations to return to the USA.  A similar plea was taken by
the 6th respondents counsel under letter dated 22.04.2013.
        The petitioner stated that the 6th respondent also filed an
application before the American Court on 24.04.2013 to dissolve its
restraint as to the childrens custody as turning over the children to
the petitioner was not in their best interest. The American Court
passed order dated 06.06.2013 holding that it had competence and
jurisdiction to deal with the custody and parenting time in relation to
the children.  The petitioner claimed that the 6th respondent again
submitted to the jurisdiction of the American Court by filing
applications on 29.06.2013 and 03.09.2013.  He also claimed that a
consent order was passed by the American Court on 13.08.2013,  
recording that the 6th respondent had agreed to return to the USA on
29.08.2013 along with the children and directing the petitioner to
purchase their air tickets.  The petitioner claimed that he purchased
the tickets as directed, but the 6th respondent flouted the order and
did not return.  He further claimed that he filed contempt
proceedings against the 6th respondent in this regard.
        While so, the American Court passed order dated 31.10.2013 
granting sole legal and residential custody of the children to the
petitioner.  Thereafter, the American Court granted a decree of
divorce on 23.01.2014 and also granted sole legal and residential
custody of the minor children to the petitioner pursuant to its earlier
order dated 31.10.2013.  As the 6th respondent refused to comply
with the orders of the American Court, the petitioner stated that he
came to Hyderabad, India, in the last week of October, 2014, but
found them unavailable at the address furnished to the American
Court.  The petitioner stated that he submitted a complaint to the
police authorities on 17.11.2014 but no action was taken thereupon.
The petitioner stated that he approached the Supreme Court of India
under Article 32 of the Constitution, seeking a writ of habeas corpus
in relation to the children, but the same was dismissed by the
Supreme Court, vide order dated 18.12.2014, granting him liberty to
approach this Court for the said relief.  The petitioner thereupon filed
this writ petition asserting that the 6th respondent had unlawfully
detained their children in India contrary to the orders passed by the
American Court and prayed for relief.
        In her counter-affidavit, the 6th respondent asserted that by
virtue of the order dated 02.04.2013 passed by the Family Court,
Hyderabad, in I.A.No.195 of 2013 in O.P.No.440 of 2013, her custody
of the children could not be categorized as unlawful.  She stated that
the petitioner was contesting the said case and had also filed a
petition under Order 7 Rule 11 CPC to dismiss it.  Adverting to their
matrimonial disputes at length, the 6th respondent stated that she
left the USA on 17.03.2013 and returned to India along with both the
children, after informing the petitioner and all concerned, including
her daughters school, her place of work and her babysitter.  She
further stated that upon her return to India, she filed O.P.No.440 of
2013 for divorce on the ground of cruelty and sought permanent
custody of her children.  Therein, interim order dated 02.04.2013
was passed protecting her custody of the children.  She stated that
she also filed a complaint against the petitioner and others under
Sections 498-A and 406 IPC read with Section 34 IPC along with
Sections 4 and 6 of the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961, before the
Central Crime Station, Hyderabad.  Crime No.151 of 2013 was 
thereupon registered and a charge sheet was eventually laid before
the learned XIII Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Hyderabad,
in C.C.No.283 of 2013.  The petitioners family members filed
Criminal Petition No.15183 of 2013 before this Court to quash the
said criminal proceedings and it was allowed only in relation to the
father and brother of the petitioner, against whom the charges were
quashed, but A5, the sister of the petitioner, was directed to face trial
and prove her innocence, as specific overt acts were attributed to her.
        The 6th respondent stated that she came to India on
17.03.2013 because her father was admitted to a hospital owing to a
heart problem. She stated that she had packed her luggage in the
presence of the petitioner and his friends, including his friends wife,
who came to help her pack.  She further stated that the petitioner
himself sent her an e-mail informing her of the flight details in this
regard and therefore denied his claim that she had taken away the
children clandestinely.  She denied the petitioners claim that she did
not disclose the receipt of summons from the American Court while
filing a criminal complaint.  She said that she had referred in her
criminal complaint to the filing of a false complaint by the petitioner.
She further stated that she intended to go back to the USA but due to
a fall in the bathroom, she had to cancel her tickets as she had
suffered a lumbar spine injury.  She denied that she brought away
the children without the petitioners knowledge and that her custody
of the children was unlawful by virtue of this fact and the subsequent
developments in the form of the orders of the American Court.
        Sri Prabhijit Jauhar, learned counsel representing Sri
T. Anirudh Reddy, learned counsel for the petitioner, would contend
that be it on application of the first strike principle or the comity of
courts principle, the petitioner would be entitled to custody of the
children.  Learned counsel would point out that the interlocutory
order of custody secured by the petitioner on 20.03.2013 was earlier
in point of time to the order secured by the 6th respondent on
02.04.2013 from the local Court, so as to justify application of the
first strike principle.  He would further state that as the children are
American citizens and as the 6th respondent has also filed an
application before the Family Court, Hyderabad, for securing the
signatures of the petitioner to renew their American passports, her
intention to continue with their American citizenship is clear and
therefore, the American Court alone would have jurisdiction over
them as it would have the most intimate contact with them. He would
submit that the 6th respondent can take the benefit of the liberty
given to her by the American Court, in the final order dated
23.01.2014, and approach the American Court for resolution of her
visitation issues in relation to the children.
        Per contra, Sri K.Vivek Reddy, learned counsel for the 6th
respondent, would contend that a writ of habeas corpus is not the
proper remedy for the petitioner.  Learned counsel would point out
that the petitioner has already obtained a final order of custody from
the American Court and therefore, the distinction drawn between an
interlocutory order and a final order of a foreign court, in matters of
this nature, would come into play and contend that the only remedy
for the petitioner is to seek execution of the said final order of the
American Court by way of suitable proceedings instituted before a
local court of competent jurisdiction.  Learned counsel would further
contend that in the light of the interim order dated 02.04.2013
passed by the Family Court, Hyderabad, in relation to the custody of
the children, the 6th respondent cannot be said to be in unlawful
custody, whereby the petitioner could take recourse to the procedural
writ of habeas corpus.  He would further contend that even if the
order dated 02.04.2013 passed by the Family Court, Hyderabad, is
unsustainable in law, it is for the petitioner to get it set aside as per
the due procedure and the status of the said order cannot be decided
by this Court in exercise of writ jurisdiction and at that, in relation to
the procedural writ of habeas corpus.  Learned counsel would assert
that the children were brought to India by the 6th respondent with
the knowledge and consent of the petitioner and before the passing of
the first order dated 20.03.2013 by the American Court and
therefore, the charge that she kidnapped them or brought them away
unlawfully is not proper. Learned counsel would further contend that
this Court is not divested of its parens patriae jurisdiction because of
the orders passed by the American Court and that it would be well
within the power of this Court to  determine and decide as to what is
in the best interest and welfare of the minor children.
        In reply, Sri Prabhijit Jauhar, learned counsel, would contend
that the Supreme Court has, time and again, pointed out that it
would be the court which has the most intimate contact with the
children that would have jurisdiction and in the present case, the
American Court must invariably be declared to be the court with the
most intimate contact, as the children are American citizens. Learned
counsel would point out that though the 6th respondent was aware of
the order dated 20.03.2013 passed by the American Court, she filed
O.P.No.440 of 2013 without disclosing it and merely mentioned the
fact that the petitioner had filed a case for custody before the court at
New Jersey. He would further point out that Kashvi, the daughter,
spent over 7  years in the USA and therefore, her brief stay of over
3  years in India cannot outweigh the same.  Learned counsel
would assert that once the 6th respondent submitted to the
jurisdiction of the American Court, it is not open to her to simply
ignore the mandate of the said court, as embodied in the various
orders passed by it, and that the petitioner cannot be driven through
a lengthy legal process locally to secure custody of the children
pursuant to the American Courts order.  Learned counsel would
conclude by stating that the petitioner is willing to pay for the tickets
and stay of not only the children but also the 6th respondent, so that
she may come back and seek resolution of her issues before the
American Court. He would further assure this Court that the
petitioner will take all necessary steps for withdrawal of the criminal
processes set in motion at his behest against the 6th respondent in
the USA and that he would not pursue any coercive measures. 
        Abundance of case law was pressed into service by both the
learned counsel in support of their respective contentions. However,
before analyzing precedential edicts, it would be apposite for this
Court to consider the factual perspective.
        The contents of the pleadings exchanged by the parties
demonstrate in no uncertain terms that the relations between the
couple were exceedingly bitter and acrimonious even by the time of
the departure of the 6th respondent to India on 17.03.2013. So much
so that the petitioner got drafted the petition seeking divorce and
custody one day after her leaving and filed it on 19.03.2013 itself.
The 6th respondent, upon her arrival in India, filed the petition for
divorce and custody in the Family Court, Hyderabad, shortly
thereafter, on 02.04.2013, but this may have been a counter-blast to
the petitioners case, as the 6th respondent mentioned the filing of the
said case in her petition. At this stage, this Court must make it clear
that the differences between the couple and their allegations and
counter-allegations against each other do not fall for independent
consideration or resolution in this writ petition. This Court is
concerned only with the custody of the minor children at the moment
and to the extent the conflict between the parents has an impact on
the said issue, it would be of limited relevance.
        At the outset, it is patent that the 6th respondent did not violate
any court order by bringing the children with her to India. The
petitioner approached the American Court only thereafter and
secured the first order dated 20.03.2013. Her action in bringing the
children to India in the capacity of their natural guardian cannot
therefore be said to be unlawful. The question is whether her
continued custody of the children after passing of the orders by the
American Court would assume that status. In this regard, it would be
fitting to understand the scope and import of the relevant orders
passed by the American Court. 
        Perusal of the order dated 31.10.2013 passed by the American
Court reflects that as the 6th respondent failed to appear before it on
03.10.2013 and again on 09.10.2013, the American Court inferred
that she would not be returning to the USA despite having been
ordered to do so under the order dated 20.03.2013. The American
Court accordingly granted the petitioner sole legal and residential
custody of the children after considering the case.
        Thereafter, by Final Judgment of Divorce dated 23.01.2014,
the American Court dissolved the marriage between the petitioner
and the 6th respondent and confirmed that the petitioner would have
sole legal and residential custody of the children pursuant to the
earlier order dated 31.10.2013, while leaving it open to the 6th
respondent to propose a schedule to exercise parenting time with
them and until such time that the petitioner was prepared to agree to
such a schedule, all and any parenting time for the 6th respondent
was subject to discussion and written agreement with the petitioner.
The American Court further recorded that failure to comply with the
custody provisions of the order would subject the 6th respondent to
criminal penalties, including imprisonment, probation and fines.
        The judgment also records that the petitioner was at liberty to
sell the residential property at New Jersey which stood in his name
and appropriate the complete sale proceeds thereof and also 50% of
the sale proceeds of the residential property situated in Kamalapuri
Colony, Hyderabad, India, which stood in the name of the 6th
respondent.  The petitioner was also held entitled to 50% of the sale
proceeds of the property jointly held by the parties at Plot Nos.48 and
49, Dubbacherla Village and Gram Panchayat, Maheshwaram    
Mandal, Ranga Reddy District.  The petitioner was held entitled to
take sole ownership of all assets which were currently in his name
and also the joint bank accounts, apart from the life insurance policy
of the 6th respondent, the jewellery of the 6th respondent. Her Rite Aid
Plan and her Scottrade IRA were directed to be split up equally
between them.  The 6th respondent was also held liable to pay child
support to the petitioner to the tune of $240 per week and also
maintain at least $250,000 in life insurance, naming the petitioner as
the trustee, for the benefit of the children until such time they
became emancipated.  She was also held liable for 50% of the medical
expenses of the children, apart from the legal fees of the petitioner, to
the tune of $55,008.37. This Court is informed that the petitioner
thereafter moved the American Court seeking to appropriate 100% of
the amount payable to the 6th respondent under the her Rite Aid
Plan, instead of the 50% that he was held entitled to.
        To understand the scope, applicability and import of the legal
principles relied upon in this case, it would be appropriate at this
stage to study the decisions cited in relation thereto:
1). MARK T. McKEE V/s. EVELYN McKEE  : The Privy Council      
observed that the welfare and happiness of an infant is the
paramount consideration while deciding questions of custody and to
this paramount consideration, all others must yield.  The order of a
foreign court of competent jurisdiction is no exception.  Such an
order has not the force of a foreign judgment; comity demands not its
enforcement but its grave consideration.  This distinction rests on the
peculiar character of the jurisdiction and on the fact that an order
providing for the custody of an infant cannot, in its nature, be final.
In this case, the father took the child out of the USA in violation of a
court order but despite the same, it was held that the interest of the
child would prevail over his conduct in doing so.
2). KANU SANYAL V/s. DISTRICT MAGISTRATE, DARJEELING  :         
The Supreme Court observed that a writ of habeas corpus is
essentially a procedural writ and deals with the machinery of justice
and not substantive law.  The object of the writ was to secure the
release of a person who is illegally restrained of his liberty and is a
command to a person who is alleged to have that person unlawfully
in his custody requiring him to bring such person before the court.
3). SMT.SURINDER KAUR SANDHU V/s. HARBAX SINGH SANDHU :             
The child, a British citizen, was brought to India by the father
without the knowledge of the mother.  On the same day, the mother
obtained an order from the foreign court declaring the child as a ward
of the said court.  The order required the father to hand over the
custody of the minor child to the mother.  The mother approached
the Supreme Court aggrieved by the order of the Punjab and Haryana
High Court dismissing her writ petition for production and custody of
her minor son. The Supreme Court observed that jurisdiction was not
attracted by the operation or creation of fortuitous circumstances
such as the circumstance as to where the child, whose custody is in
issue, is brought or, for the time being, lodged.  To allow assumption
of jurisdiction by another State in such circumstances, per the
Supreme Court, would only result in encouraging forum-shopping.
In matters relating to matrimony and custody, the law of that place
must govern which has the closest concern with the well-being of
the spouses and the welfare of the offspring of the marriage.  The
Supreme Court noted the following principles regarding custody of
minor children:
      (1) The modern theory of the conflict of laws recognizes and
prefers the jurisdiction of the State which has the most intimate
contact with the issues arising in the case;
      (2) Though the Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act, 1956,
constitutes the father as the natural guardian of a minor son, it
cannot supersede the paramount consideration as to what is
conducive to the welfare of the minor;
        (3) The domestic court would consider the welfare of the child
as of paramount importance and the order of a foreign court is only a
factor to be taken into consideration.
        Taking note of the fact that the matrimonial home was in
England, establishing sufficient contact or ties with that State, the
Supreme Court ordained that it would be just and reasonable for the
court of that State to assume jurisdiction to enforce obligations which
were incurred therein by the spouses.  The custody of the child was
therefore directed to be handed over to the mother.
4). MRS ELIZABETH DINSHAW V/s. ARVAND M.DINSHAW  : The           
Supreme Court observed that a parent doing wrong by removing 
children out of the country should not be permitted to gain advantage
of such wrongdoing and the court should pay regard to the order of
the foreign court in relation to the childs custody, unless satisfied
beyond reasonable doubt that to do so would inflict serious harm on
the child.  The Supreme Court further observed that quite
independent of the above consideration, whenever a question arises
before a court pertaining to the custody of a minor child, the matter
is to be decided not on consideration of legal rights of the parties but
on the sole and predominant criterion of what would best serve the
interest and welfare of the minor.
5). Y.NARASIMHA RAO V/s. Y.VENKATA LAKSHMI  : The Supreme          
Court observed that the rule for recognizing a foreign matrimonial
judgment in this country is as under:  The jurisdiction assumed by
the foreign court as well as the grounds on which the relief was
granted must be in accordance with the matrimonial law under
which the parties are married.  The exceptions to this rule are:
        (1) where the matrimonial action is filed in the forum where the
respondent is domiciled or habitually and permanently resides and
the relief is granted on a ground available in the matrimonial law
under which the parties were married;
        (2) where the respondent voluntarily and effectively submits to
the jurisdiction of the forum as discussed above and contests the
claim which is based on a ground available under the matrimonial
law under which the parties were married;
      (3) where the respondent consents to the grant of the relief
although the jurisdiction of the forum is not in accordance with the
provisions of the matrimonial law of the parties.
6). SARITA SHARMA V/s. SUSHIL SHARMA  :  In this case, a     
District Court in Texas, USA, passed an order for the care and
custody of the children of a couple of Indian origin.  The children
were however both American citizens.  The children were placed in
the care of the father, Sushil Sharma, and only visiting rights were
given to the mother, Sarita Sharma.  However, Sarita Sharma
brought the children to India without informing the Texas Court.
Sushil Sharma thereafter obtained a divorce decree from the foreign
court and also an order that the sole custody of the children should
be with him.  He then moved the Delhi High Court for a writ of
habeas corpus seeking custody of the children.  The writ petition was
allowed and the passports of the children were directed to be handed
over to the father who was given liberty to take them back to the USA
without hindrance.  Aggrieved thereby, Sarita Sharma appealed to
the Supreme Court.  On merits, the Supreme Court held that it was
not proper for the Delhi High Court to allow the writ petition and
direct the mother to hand over custody of the children to the father
so as to enable him to take them to the USA.  What was in the
interest of the children required a full length thorough inquiry and
the Supreme Court therefore opined that the High Court should have
directed the father to initiate appropriate proceedings in which such
an inquiry could be held. The Supreme Court opined that ordinarily,
the mother would be better suited to care for and bring up a
daughter as opposed to the father.
7). SYED SALEEMUDDIN V/s. DR. RUKHSANA  : The Supreme          
Court reiterated that on an application seeking a writ of habeas
corpus for custody of minor children, the principal consideration for
the court is to ascertain whether the custody of the children is
unlawful and whether the welfare of the children required that the
present custody should be changed so that the children should be
left in the care and custody of somebody else.
8). SAIHBA ALI V/s. STATE OF MAHARASHTRA  : The Supreme         
Court observed that custody of minor children, once awarded to the
paternal grandmother by a competent court, could not be held to be
illegal custody unless and until the said order is set aside and
therefore, the mother of the children could not maintain a petition for
a habeas corpus to seek custody. 
9). V.RAVI CHANDRAN (DR.) V/s. UNION OF INDIA  :  In this case,   
the mother removed her minor child, a foreign national, from the USA
in violation of a custody order passed by the Family Court, State of
New York.  This custody order was passed with her consent and the 
consent of the father, who was also a foreign national.  The father
applied for modification of the custody order and was granted
temporary sole legal and physical custody of the minor child and the
mother was directed to immediately turn over the minor child and his
passport to the father. Her custodial time with the child was
suspended.  The foreign court also ordered that the issue of custody
of the child would be heard by the jurisdictional family court in the
USA.  On these facts, the father moved a petition for a writ of habeas
corpus in the Supreme Court for production of the child and for his
custody.  The Supreme Court, upon considering a large number of
decisions, concluded that the comity of nations does not require a
court to blindly follow an order made by a foreign court and only due
weight has to be given to the views formed by the court of the foreign
country, of which the child was a national.  The Supreme Court
observed that the comity of courts demands not the enforcement of a
foreign courts order but only its grave consideration, and the weight
and persuasive effect of a foreign judgment would ultimately depend
on the facts and circumstances of the case.  The Supreme Court
reiterated that the welfare of the child is the first and paramount
consideration, whatever be the orders that may have been passed by
the foreign court, and the domestic court was bound to consider as to
what was in the best interest of the child and the order of the foreign
court would be only one of the circumstances to be taken into
account, though it is not conclusive one way or the other.  The
Supreme Court cautioned that one of the considerations that a
domestic court should keep in mind is that there should be no
danger to the moral or physical health of the child in repatriating him
or her to the jurisdiction of the foreign country.  The Supreme Court
stated that while considering whether a child should be removed to
the jurisdiction of the foreign court or not, the domestic court may
either conduct a summary inquiry or an elaborate inquiry.  On facts,
it was held that an elaborate inquiry was not required to be
conducted in that case as there was nothing on record which could
remotely suggest that it would be harmful for the child to return to
the native country. Further, though the child was found to have been
in India for almost two years since he was removed from the USA by
the mother, the Supreme Court took note of the fact that the
application for return of the child was made promptly after his
removal.  The Supreme Court further observed that one of the factors
to be kept in mind in exercise of summary jurisdiction in the interest
of the child is that the application for custody/return of the child
should be made promptly and quickly after the child is removed as
delay may result in the child developing roots in the country to which
he has been removed. However, on facts, the Supreme Court found 
that he had been moved from school to school and therefore, the said
eventuality also did not arise.
10). SHILPA AGGARWAL V/s. AVIRAL MITTAL  : The parents in      
this case were both British citizens of Indian origin.  They had a
minor child who was also a foreign national.  They had matrimonial
differences as a result of which, the mother came to India with the
minor child and refused to return.  The father thereupon initiated
proceedings before the High Court of Justice, Family Division, United
Kingdom, and the foreign court directed the mother to return the
minor child to its jurisdiction.  Soon thereafter, the father filed a writ
petition in the Delhi High Court seeking custody of the child.  In its
decision reported in AVIRAL MITTAL V/s. STATE , the Delhi High 
Court observed that the interest of the child would always be to have
the benefit of the company of both parents but where such an ideal
situation is not possible, the question would arise as to which of the
parents is in a better position to look after the child.  Observing that
normally a female child, as observed in SARITA SHARMA6 and the   
earlier judgment of the Delhi High Court in PAUL MOHIMDER  
GAHUN V/s. STATE OF NCT OF DELHI , would be better taken care     
of by the mother, the Delhi High Court cautioned that this would
again depend upon the conduct of the parents. In its final conclusion,
the Delhi High Court effectively dismissed the writ petition and
granted time to the mother to take the child on her own to the United
Kingdom and participate in the proceedings before the foreign court,
failing which the child was to be handed over to the father to be
taken to the United Kingdom as a measure of interim custody,
leaving it open to the foreign court to determine which parent would
be best suited to have custody of the child.  Aggrieved thereby, the
mother appealed to the Supreme Court.  The Supreme Court  
observed that there were two contrasting principles of law, namely,
comity of courts and welfare of the child and that in matters of
custody of minor children, the sole and predominant criterion is the
interest and welfare of the minor child.  It was further pointed out
that the domestic court could not be guided entirely by the fact that
one of the parents violated an order passed by a foreign court.  On
these principles, the Supreme Court agreed with the view of the High
Court that the foreign court had not directed that the custody of the
child should be handed over to the father but that the child should
be returned to its jurisdiction so as to enable it to determine as to
who would be best suited to have the custody of the child.
11). VIKRAM VIR VOHRA V/s. SHALINI BHALLA  : The Supreme       
Court observed that in a matter relating to custody of a child, the
court must remember that it is dealing with a very sensitive issue
concerning the care and affection that a child requires in the growing
stages of his or her life.  The Supreme Court stated that this was the
reason why custody orders were always considered interlocutory
orders and by the nature of such proceedings, custody orders cannot
be made rigid and final and would always be capable of being altered
and moulded keeping in mind the needs of the child.
      12). RUCHI MAJOO V/s. SANJEEV MAJOO  :  The wife came     
to India with her child consequent to some differences with her
husband.  All the members of the family were foreign nationals.  After
the mother came to India with the child, the father approached the
Superior Court of California, County of Ventura in the USA, seeking a
divorce and obtained a protective custody warrant order which
required the mother to appear before the foreign court.  She however
did not obey it and instituted proceedings before the Guardian Court
at Delhi.  The Guardian Court passed an ex parte ad-interim order  to
the effect that the father should not interfere with the custody of the
mother over her minor child.  Aggrieved by this order, the father
challenged the same under Article 227 of the Constitution before the
Delhi High Court and succeeded on the ground that the Guardian
Court had no jurisdiction to entertain the matter as the child was not
ordinarily resident in Delhi.  The Delhi High Court further observed
that it was the foreign court that had to decide the childs custody, as
the child and the parents were American citizens.  Aggrieved thereby,
the mother went before the Supreme Court. 
      The Supreme Court culled out the following principles:
      (1) The welfare of the child is of paramount consideration and
simply because a foreign court had taken a particular view
concerning the welfare of the child, it was not enough for the courts
in this country to shut out an independent consideration of the
matter, as the principle of comity of courts simply demanded
consideration of a foreign courts order and not necessarily its
enforcement. 
      (2) One of the factors to be considered whether a domestic
court should hold a summary inquiry or an elaborate inquiry for
repatriating the child to the jurisdiction of the foreign court is the
time gap in moving the domestic court for repatriation.  The longer
the time gap, the lesser the inclination of the domestic courts to go in
for a summary inquiry.
      (3) An order of foreign court is one of the factors to be
considered for the repatriation of a child to the jurisdiction of the
foreign court.  But that would not override the consideration of the
welfare of the child.  Therefore, even where the removal of the child
from the jurisdiction of the foreign court goes against the order of the
foreign court, giving custody of the child to the parent who
approached the foreign court would not be warranted if it were not in
the welfare of the child.
      (4) Where a child has been removed from the jurisdiction of a
foreign court in contravention of an order passed by that foreign
court where the parties had set up their matrimonial home, the
domestic court must consider whether to conduct an elaborate or
summary inquiry on the question of custody of the child.  If an
elaborate inquiry is to be held, the domestic court may give due
weight to the order of the foreign court depending upon the facts and
circumstances in which such an order has been passed. 
      (5) A constitutional court exercising summary jurisdiction for
the issuance of a writ of habeas corpus may conduct an elaborate
inquiry into the welfare of the child whose custody is claimed and a
Guardian Court (if it has jurisdiction) may conduct a summary
inquiry into the welfare of the child, depending upon the facts of the
case.
      (6) Since the interest and welfare of the child is paramount, a
domestic court is entitled and indeed duty-bound to examine the
matter independently, taking the foreign judgment, if any, only as an
input for its final adjudication.

        On facts, the Supreme Court held that the repatriation of the
minor to the USA on the principle of comity of courts did not appear
to be an acceptable option worthy of being exercised at that hour and
his custody was directed to be continued with his mother.  The
Supreme Court observed that the comity of courts principle normally
ensures that foreign judgments and orders are unconditionally
conclusive of the matter in controversy, but interest and welfare of
the minor being paramount, a competent court in this country would
be entitled and indeed duty-bound to examine the matter
independently, taking the foreign judgment, if any, only as an input
for its final adjudication.  The decisions of the Supreme Court in
DHANWANTI JOSHI V/s. MADHAV UNDE  and SARITA SHARMA6             
were stated to support this proposition.  The Supreme Court
observed that the duty of a court exercising parens patriae
jurisdiction, involving custody of minor children, would be to treat
the welfare of the minor as of paramount consideration.  The court
would therefore approach the issue regarding the validity and
enforcement of a foreign decree or order carefully and simply because
a foreign court has taken a particular view on any aspect concerning
the welfare of the minor, it would not be enough for the courts in this
country to shut out independent consideration of the matter.  The
Supreme Court was of the opinion that objectivity and not abject
surrender is the mantra in such cases but that would not mean that
the order passed by a foreign court is not even a factor to be kept in
view, though it is one thing to consider the foreign judgment to be
conclusive and another to treat it as a factor or consideration that
would go into the making of a final decision.  The Supreme Court
further observed that though proceedings in the nature of habeas
corpus were summary in nature, nothing prevents the High Court
from embarking upon a detailed enquiry in cases where the welfare of
a minor was in question, which is the paramount consideration for
the Court while exercising parens patriae jurisdiction.  The High
Court was therefore held to have power, in exercise of its
extraordinary jurisdiction, to determine the validity of such custody
in cases that fall within its jurisdiction and also issue orders as to the
custody of the minor depending upon how the Court views the rival
claims, if any, to such custody. The Supreme Court therefore
condemned the practice of repatriating a minor child to a foreign
country on the comity of courts principle simplicitor.
13). ARATHI BANDI V/s. BANDI JAGADRAKSHAKA RAO  : The         
mother and father were ordinarily residents of the USA and they had
a minor child.  Their matrimonial differences had already taken
shape as a lis before a Seattle court in the USA.  In violation of the
order passed by the foreign court, the mother brought the child to
India.  As she did not return the child to the jurisdiction of the
foreign court, bailable warrants were issued for her arrest by the
foreign court.  The father initiated proceedings in this Court for a writ
of habeas corpus seeking production and custody of the child to
enable him to take the child back to the USA.  This Court passed
quite a few orders in the case but the mother did not abide by some
of them resulting in this Court issuing non-bailable warrants for her
arrest.  Aggrieved thereby, the mother went before the Supreme
Court.  Observing that the mother had come to India in defiance of
the order passed by the foreign court and had also ignored the orders
passed by the High Court, the Supreme Court opined that no relief
could be granted to her.  The Supreme Court further culled out the
following principles:
        (1) It is the duty of courts in all countries to see that a parent
doing wrong by removing a child out of the country does not gain any
advantage of his or her wrongdoing.
        (2) In a given case relating to the custody of a child, it may be
necessary to have an elaborate inquiry with regard to the welfare of
the child or a summary inquiry without investigating the merits of
the dispute relating to the care of the child on the ground that such
an order is in the best interests of the child.
        (3) Merely because a child has been brought to India from a
foreign country does not necessarily mean that the domestic court
should decide the custody issue.  It would be in accord with the
principle of comity of courts to return the child to the jurisdiction of
the foreign court from which he or she has been removed.
        
14). SURYA VADANAN V/s. STATE OF TAMIL NAIDU  : In this case,      
the Supreme Court was dealing with custody of children who were
British citizens.  The father, Surya Vadanan, was also a resident and
citizen of the United Kingdom but at the time of her marriage, the
mother, Mayura, was an Indian citizen.  She thereafter joined her
husband in the United Kingdom and acquired British citizenship.  In
effect, the parents as well as the children were all citizens of the
United Kingdom.  The mother, Mayura, had matrimonial problems  
and came to India along with her two daughters on 13.08.2012.  She
thereafter refused to go back and filed for divorce before the Family
Court, Coimbatore, on 23.08.2012.  She also filed an application for
custody of her daughters but no orders were passed thereon.  Upon
coming to know of her intention not to return with his daughters,
Surya tried to solve the issue by coming to India but having failed in
this exercise, he returned to the United Kingdom.  He thereafter
received summons from the Family Court, Coimbatore, in the divorce
petition filed by Mayura and decided to initiate legal action.  He
petitioned the High Court of Justice in the United Kingdom to make
his children wards of the Court.  On 13.11.2012, the High Court of
Justice in the United Kingdom passed an interlocutory order making
the children wards of the court and requiring Mayura to return them
to its jurisdiction.  Mayura filed a written statement in response to
this petition and Surya filed his rejoinder thereto.  Thereupon, the
High Court of Justice in the United Kingdom passed order dated
29.11.2012 reiterating its earlier order and renewing its direction for
repatriation of the wards to England, the county of their habitual
residence.  As Mayura failed to comply with this order also, Surya
filed a writ petition in the Madras High Court seeking a writ of
habeas corpus on the ground that Mayuras custody of the children
was illegal.  This writ petition was effectively dismissed by the High
Court on the ground that it could not be said that the custody of
Mayura was illegal as she was their legal guardian.  Aggrieved
thereby, Surya approached the Supreme Court.  The Supreme Court   
observed that the comity of courts principle is essentially a principle
of self-restraint applicable when a foreign court is seized of the issue
of the custody of a child prior to the domestic court.  The Supreme
Court observed that there may be a situation where the foreign court,
though seized of the issue, does not pass any effective or substantial
order or direction and in such an event, if the domestic court were to
pass an effective or substantial order or direction prior in point of
time, then the foreign court ought to exercise self-restraint and
respect the direction or order of the domestic court, unless there are
very good reasons not to do so.  The Supreme Court observed that
there was complete unanimity amongst judicial precedents that the
best interest and welfare of the child are of paramount importance.
The Supreme Court however cautioned that it must be clearly
understood that this is the final goal/objective to be achieved and
that, it is not the beginning of the exercise but the end.  The Supreme
Court opined that the principles of comity of courts and best
interest and welfare of the child were not contrasting, in the sense of
one being the opposite of the other, but were contrasting in the sense
of being different principles that need to be applied on the facts of a
given case.  The Supreme Court opined that the most intimate
contact doctrine and the closest concern doctrine are very much
alive and cannot be ignored only because their application might be
uncomfortable in certain situations.  The Supreme Court further
opined that it would not be appropriate that a domestic court, having
much less intimate contact with a child and having much less close
concern with a child and his or her parents, as against a foreign
court in a given case, should take upon itself the onerous task of
determining the best interest and welfare of the child.  A foreign
court, having the most intimate contact and closest concern with the
child, would be better equipped and perhaps best suited to
appreciate the social and cultural milieu in which the child had been
brought up rather than a domestic court.  This, according to the
Supreme Court, is a factor that must be kept in mind.  Secondly, the
Supreme Court was of the opinion that the principle of comity of
courts should not be jettisoned, except for special and compelling
reasons.  This is more so in a case where only an interim or an
interlocutory order had been passed by a foreign court.  Referring to
MCKEE1, wherein the Privy Council was not dealing with an 
interlocutory order but a final adjudication, the Supreme Court
observed that the applicable principles would be entirely different in
such cases.  The Supreme Court specifically pointed out that it was
not concerned with a final adjudication by a foreign court in relation
to which the principles laid down in Section 13 CPC would have
application.  The Supreme Court was of the opinion that in the event
an interlocutory order has been passed by a foreign court, it must be
given due respect and disregarding the same must be only for some
special reason.  Dealing with situations in which an interlocutory
order of a foreign court may be ignored, the Supreme Court stated
that very few such situations would arise and that it is of primary
importance to determine first, whether the foreign court has
jurisdiction over the child whose custody is in dispute, based on the
fact of the child being ordinarily resident in the territory over which
the foreign court exercises jurisdiction, and if it does, the
interlocutory order of the foreign court should be given due weight
and respect.  In the event jurisdiction of the foreign court is not in
doubt, the first strike principle would be applicable.  That is to say
that due respect and weight must be given to a substantive order
prior in point of time to a substantive order passed by another court
(foreign or domestic).  Finally, dealing with the issue of holding an
elaborate inquiry to decide whether the child should be repatriated to
the foreign country or whether a summary inquiry should be gone
into in relation to the best interest and welfare of the child, the
Supreme Court observed that if there was a pre-existing order of a
foreign court of competent jurisdiction and the domestic court
decides to conduct an elaborate inquiry, it must have special reasons
to do so as such elaborate inquiry should not be ordered as a matter
of course.  While deciding whether a summary or an elaborate inquiry
should be conducted, the Supreme Court observed that the domestic 
court must take into consideration the following factors:
        (1) The nature and effect of the interim or interlocutory order
passed by the foreign court.
        (2) The existence of special reasons for repatriating or not
repatriating the child to the jurisdiction of the foreign court.
        (3) The repatriation of the child should not cause any moral or
physical or social or cultural or psychological harm to the child, nor
should it cause any legal harm to the parent, with whom the child is
in India.  There are instances where the order of the foreign court
may result in the arrest of the parent on his or her return to the
foreign country.  In such cases, the domestic court is also obliged to
ensure the physical safety to the parent.
        (4) The alacrity with which the parent moves the foreign court
concerned or the domestic court concerned is also relevant.  If the
time gap is unusually large and is not reasonably explainable and the
child has developed firm roots in India, the domestic court may be
well advised to conduct an elaborate inquiry.

      Dealing with the facts of the case before it, the Supreme Court
observed that the parents and the children were all foreign nationals
and that the children had grown up in that different milieu.  It was
also noted that the mother had not taken steps to give up her foreign
citizenship and had not taken such steps even in relation to her
children.  That being so, the Supreme Court was of the opinion that
there was no reason why the courts in India should not encourage
her and the children to submit to the jurisdiction of the foreign court
which had the most intimate contact with them and closest concern
apart from being located in the country of their citizenship.  Further,
as the orders passed by the foreign court were only interlocutory in
nature, no finality attached to them and nothing prevented the
mother from contesting the correctness of the interlocutory orders
and to have them vacated or modified or even set aside.  The
Supreme Court further found that there was nothing on record to
indicate that any prejudice would be caused to the children if they
were taken to the United Kingdom and subjected to the jurisdiction of
the foreign court as the said foreign court had the most intimate
contact with them and also the closest concern with their well being.
Another crucial aspect that was considered by the Supreme Court 
was the fact that the children had been in Coimbatore for about two
years and the question arose whether they had adjusted to life in
India and had taken root in India, whereby their repatriation to the
United Kingdom would not be in their interest.  The Supreme Court
observed that it is always difficult to say whether a person has taken
root in a country other than that of his or her nationality and in a
country other than where he or she was born and brought up.  From
the material on record, the Supreme Court held that it could not be
said that life had changed so much for the children that it would be
better for them to remain in India than to be repatriated to the United
Kingdom.  The Supreme Court accordingly directed the father to
arrange for the return of the wife and children to the United Kingdom
and also pay maintenance to the wife and children until a decision
was taken by the foreign court.  He was also directed to ensure that
all coercive processes that may result in penal consequences against
the mother should be dropped or should not be pursued.  In the
event the mother did not comply with the directions, the father was
held entitled to take the children back with him to the United
Kingdom for further proceedings.
        Before proceeding to consider the factual milieu of the present
case in the aforestated legal backdrop, it may be noted that the
parens patriae jurisdiction of this Court is traceable to Clause 17 of
the Letters Patent which endows this Court with jurisdiction over the
person and estates of all infants within its territory.  That apart, the
common thrust of all the judgments hereinabove is that the welfare
and interest of the children should be the paramount consideration
that should weigh with this Court while deciding custody battles
between parents over their children.
        Considering the tender age of Krish, the son, who is just about
five years and odd as on date, this Court only met and interacted
with Kashvi, the daughter, who is about 11 years of age, in camera.
She came across as a warm and friendly child, comfortable in her
surroundings.  She stated that she is presently studying in Oakridge
International School at Hyderabad, while her brother, Krish, is a
student of Little Angels School.  Kashvi would have been about seven
years and three months by the time she left the USA on 17.03.2013
and was brought to India by the 6th respondent.  She has hazy
memories of her life in the USA but stated with confidence that she is
very happy in India.  When pointedly asked as to whether she felt
happier here or had better memories of the USA, she stated that she
feels happier here and that she is doing well in school and has
several friends.  When asked whether she wanted to have contact
with her father, the petitioner herein, she said that she had some
recollection of him but showed no particular interest in rebuilding
her relationship with him.  Speaking for her brother, she stated that
he has no recollection whatsoever of his life in the USA.  This would
be so as he was less than two years of age when he came away to  
India.  She further stated that her mother, the 6th respondent, takes
good care of her and that she also has the love and affection of her
maternal grand parents.  She specifically said that she has no
interest in returning to the USA, leaving her life here. This Court
found no evidence of tutoring and the childs earnestness and
sincerity came through in clear terms.
        In the light of the material placed on record and our personal
interaction with Kashvi, the older child, we now undertake
examination of the legal principles applicable to this case.  It is fairly
well settled that the fact that a foreign court of competent jurisdiction
has passed an order in relation to the custody of the minor child
would not, by itself, be a decisive factor for this Court to hold in
favour of the party to the dispute who secured such an order.  This
Court would still have to undertake an enquiry as to what would be
in the best interest and welfare of the children.  This Court finds that
the American Court had no occasion to actually have any interaction
with the children, as the American Court was approached only after
the children left to India.  The order dated 31.10.2013 passed by the
American Court puts this beyond doubt, as it observed therein that it
could not make any findings as to the childrens preferences because
it had not spoken with them and that they were too young to have
the capacity and maturity to make an intelligent decision on that
issue.  As Kashvi is now nearly 11 years of age and appears to be a
well-balanced child of good intellect, the latter observation of the
American Court may no longer hold good. 
      As regards the first strike principle, this Court finds that the
said principle would have application only between interlocutory
orders of custody passed by two different Courts and as per the
principle, the first such order, in point of time, would normally
prevail.  In the present case, the petitioner has already secured a
final custody order from the American Court on 23.01.2014.  It is
therefore not a fit case to apply the first strike principle at this stage
in relation to the interlocutory order dated 20.03.2013 passed by the
American Court.  The said interlocutory order is deemed to have
merged in the final order dated 23.01.2014 and therefore does not
survive for independent consideration now. Strong reliance placed on
SURYA VADANAN17 is therefore of no avail as that was a case dealing  
with an interlocutory custody order and not a final one, as pointed
out specifically by the Supreme Court itself.
      Further, once the final custody order was passed by the
American Court, it is for the petitioner to take recourse to appropriate
proceedings in terms of Indian law for securing execution thereof.
Such an exercise cannot be undertaken by this Court in exercise of
writ jurisdiction and more particularly, by way of the procedural writ
of habeas corpus. The provisions of Section 13 CPC may also have 
application in this regard and the 6th respondent cannot be denied
the benefit thereof by permitting the petitioner to seek execution of
such an order through writ proceedings.
        No doubt, the American Courts interlocutory orders and final
order would normally be taken into consideration by this Court in its
enquiry as to the custody of the children.  However, one crucial factor
which dilutes the strength of those orders in the present case, in
terms of what the Supreme Court ordained time and again, is that
the petitioner, having secured custody orders from the American
Court, failed to act upon them immediately.  The first such custody
order secured by him is dated 20.03.2013 but it appears that the
petitioner was under the impression that the 6th respondent would
appear before the American Court and contest his claim.  This
understanding and expectation on his part however stood
extinguished by 31.10.2013, when the American Court passed an  
order giving him sole legal and residential custody over the children
duly noting the fact that the 6th respondent showed no inclination to
return to the USA despite being ordered to do so.  In spite of the
illusions that he may have had in this regard being dispelled by
31.10.2013, the petitioner did nothing in the matter till December,
2014, when he approached the Supreme Court under Article 32 of 
the Constitution.  This is despite the fact that the petitioner secured
the final custody order as long back as in January, 2014.  No
reasonable explanation whatsoever is forthcoming as to why the
petitioner did not choose to take steps immediately and more
particularly, after January, 2014.
      In the meanwhile, the stay of the children in India continued
and as matters stand today, Krish, the son, has no inkling of his life
or his roots in America, while Kashvi, the daughter, has settled down
comfortably in her life at Hyderabad and is happy with her schooling
and her activities under her mothers tutelage.  The failure on the
part of the petitioner to move with alacrity and the consequential
delay would therefore have to count against him.  As pointed out by
the Supreme Court time and again, this is a vital factor while
assessing the best interest of the children. In this regard it may be
noted that no hard and fast rule can be laid down as to what length
of time would be sufficient for a displaced child to develop roots in
and affinity towards the country to which he or she has been
removed. Even a year during the formative years would be sufficient
in this regard as opposed to several years in an older child. In the
present case, Krish, the son, has developed a bond with his mother
and his maternal grandparents apart from having no roots
whatsoever in the country of his birth. To separate him from those
with whom he has such strong emotional bonds and send him to a  
father, who is a complete stranger to him, would neither be in his
best interest nor good for his emotional well-being. Kashvi, the
daughter, spent over seven years, a major part of her life, in the USA
but her formative years, when she developed consciousness and 
bonding towards her surroundings and people, were after she left the
USA and came to India. Her schooling is taking place in one of the
better known schools of Hyderabad and she is clear in her mind as to
where and with whom she wants to stay. It is therefore too late in the
day for the petitioner to seek to uproot these children on the strength
of the American Courts orders secured by him long ago.
      That apart, when posed a query by this Court, Sri Prabhijit
Jauhar, learned counsel, stated that the petitioner was residing alone
in the USA after he divorced the 6th respondent and that he is
presently employed.  When asked by the Court as to how he proposes  
to take care of the children, if they are returned to his custody, the
learned counsel stated that the petitioner would take his mother to
the USA and that she would care for the childrens well-being.
However, the material placed on record indicates that the petitioners
father is very much alive and it is not known as to how long he can
expect his mother to leave her husband and her life here and devote
herself to the care and well-being of his children in the USA.
      On the above analysis, this Court finds that despite the first
interlocutory order of custody having been passed by the American
Court as long back as on 20.03.2013, three days after the departure
of the children from American soil, the delay on the part of the
petitioner in seeking implementation thereof and the later final order
of custody dated 23.01.2014, has resulted in the children
acclimatizing themselves to Indian life and conditions.  Krish, the
son, has no contact whatsoever with American life as he came away 
to India when he was less than two years of age.  Kashvi, the
daughter, was just over seven years of age when she came to India
and has now adjusted comfortably to her life here and is happy and
secure with her school, friends and family in India.  This Court is
therefore of the considered opinion that it is not in the interest or
welfare of these children to be displaced from their settled life in India
and be transported back to what would now be an alien life in the
USA.  This Court however leaves it open to the petitioner to seek
suitable orders from the competent court for visitation rights, if he is
interested, so that the children are not denied the love and affection
of a father, once he establishes such a bond.
      Subject to the above observation, the writ petition is dismissed.
Pending miscellaneous petitions, if any, shall also stand dismissed.
No order as to costs.

______________________    
SANJAY KUMAR, J    
____________________________     
M.SEETHARAMA MURTI, J      
21st OCTOBER, 2016   
