
THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE C.V.NAGARJUNA REDDY & THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE               

CRIMINAL APPEAL No.836 of 2010 AND BATCH        

21-03-2016 

Yerramsetti Satish..... Appellant/Accused No.1

State of A.P., rep.by Public Prosecutor,High Court, Hyderabad.....Respondent

Counsel for the Appellant: Sri T.NIRANJAN REDDY for Sri T.NAGARJUNA REDDY       

Counsel for the Respondent: PUBLIC PROSECUTOR (AP)      


<Gist  :

>Head Note: 

?Cases Referred: 

CRIMINAL APPEAL No.836 of 2010 & CRIMINAL REVISION CASE No.806 of 2011          

COMMON JUDGMENT: (per Honble Sri Justice M.S.K.Jaiswal)     

        Crl.A.No.836 of 2010 is filed by the appellant/A1 against judgment
dated 23.06.2010 in Sessions Case No.190 of 2007 on the file of the I
Additional Sessions Judge, Nellore, challenging his conviction for the offences
punishable under Sections 498-A and 302 IPC. 
        2. Crl.RC.No.806 of 2011 is filed by the de facto complainant/PW.1
against the same judgment aggrieved by the acquittal of A2 & A.3 of the
charges under Sections 498-A, 304-B and 302 IPC and under Sections 3 & 4  
of Dowry Prohibition Act.  During the pendency of this revision case, A.2 died
on 22.10.2012.
        3. The case of the prosecution in brief is that the deceased Lakshmi is
the daughter of PWs 1 and 2.  The marriage of A1 and the deceased was 
performed on 26.10.2001 and at the time of marriage, PWs 1 and 2 gave
Rs.1 lakh and 12 sovereigns of gold as dowry.  Both the deceased and A1
lived for some time happily and they were blessed with one male child.  A1,
to eke out his livelihood, opened a provisions shop and could not run it
successfully and sustained loss and closed the same shortly.  A1 got addicted
to bad vices.  It is alleged that A1 and his parents A2 & A3 subjected the
deceased to cruelty for additional dowry and threatened her to kill her if she
failed to meet their unlawful demands.
        4. On 27.01.2007 the deceased telephoned her sister (PW 3) and 
informed her about the ill-treatment of A1 to A3 and requested her to pass
the information to her parents (PWs 1 & 2).  On the same day, PW 5, who is
the husband of PW 3, received a phone call from A1 that the deceased died.
On receiving the said information, PWs 2, 3, 5 and one Balaji went to the
house of A1 and found the deceased kept in an auto and she was shifted to
Bollineni Hospital, where she was declared dead.  On 27.01.2007 at 6.30
p.m, PW 1, the father of the deceased, went to the I Town police station,
Nellore and lodged a complaint under Ex.P1, basing on which, PW 10-Sub  
Inspector of Police registered a case in Cr.No.15/2007 under sections 302
and 304-B IPC initially against A1 to A3 and two others.  On receipt of a copy
of the First Information Report, PW 11-Sub-Divisional Police Officer, Nellore
took up investigation, went to the scene of offence at 7.30 p.m and prepared
Ex.P5-scene observation report in the presence of PW 7, seized MOs.1 and 
2, drawn rough sketch under Ex.P20 and got the scene of offence
photographed through PW 8.  On requisition, PW 6-the Mandal Executive  
Magistrate, Nellore conducted inquest over the dead body of the deceased
on 28.01.2007 in the presence of PWs 1, 2 & 7.  Thereafter, the body of the
deceased was forwarded to the Government Hospital and PW 9 conducted    
autopsy on 28.01.2007 and she opined that the deceased died of asphyxia 
due to smothering. After completion of the investigation, PW 11 filed charge
sheet against A1 to A3 stating that the deceased committed suicide by
hanging due to harassment for dowry.
        5. The learned Sessions Judge, on appearance of A1 to A3, framed 
charges under sections 498-A, 304-B and 302 IPC and under sections 3 & 4 
of the Dowry Prohibition Act against them, for which, A1 to A3 pleaded not
guilty.
      6. In order to bring home the guilt of the accused, the prosecution
examined PWs 1 to 11 and marked Exs.P1 to P21 and MOs.1 & 2.  On behalf     
of defence, DWs 1 to 8 are examined and Exs.D1 to D10 are marked.  
      7. On appreciation of the oral and documentary evidence adduced on
either side, the learned Sessions Judge, arrived at a conclusion that the
death of the deceased was a homicidal death due to smothering and it was
not a suicidal death due to hanging, and further observed that the
prosecution failed to establish the charges under section 304-B IPC and
under sections 3 & 4 of the Dowry Prohibition Act against the accused, and
accordingly, passed the following sentences:
i)      A1 found not guilty of the charge under Section 304-B IPC and
the charges under sections 3 & 4 of the Dowry Prohibition Act and
he is acquitted for the said charges;

ii)     A2 & A3 found not guilty of the charges under sections 498-A,
304-B and 302 IPC and the charges under sections 3 & 4 of the
Dowry Prohibition Act and they are acquitted for the said charges;

iii)    A1 found guilty of the charges under sections 498-A and 302 IPC
and he is convicted and sentenced to undergo rigorous
imprisonment for a period of one year for the offence under
section 498-A IPC and he is further convicted and sentenced to
undergo imprisonment for life and to pay a fine of Rs.200/-
(Rupees two hundred only) in default, to undergo simple
imprisonment for one month, for the offence under section 302
IPC.  It is ordered that both the sentences shall run concurrently.

      8. Against his conviction, as aforesaid, A1 filed the criminal appeal and
against the acquittal of A2 & A3, the de facto complainant/PW 1 filed the
criminal revision case.
      9. Sri T.Niranjan Reddy, learned senior Counsel appearing for the
accused submits that having acquitted the accused of the charges
punishable under Sections 3 and 4 of the Dowry Prohibition Act and also
having acquitted A.2 and A.3 of the charges under Sections 302 and 498-A
of I.P.C., the learned trial Judge erred in convicting the appellant/A1 for the
offences punishable under Sections 302 and 498-A I.P.C.  It is further
submitted that in order to convict the appellant/A1 for the offence
punishable under Section 302 I.P.C., the evidence that is required is not
forthcoming in the instant case and basing solely upon the medical opinion
that the death of the deceased might have been caused by smothering, the
learned Judge has convicted the appellant/A1.  Learned senior counsel
further submits that even the medical evidence which is not always a
conclusive proof of the cause of death, suffers from serious infirmities and
that cannot be made the basis for holding that the appellant/A.1 has caused
the homicidal death of the deceased wife.  He has further submitted that
having disbelieved the case of the prosecution witnesses with regard to the
charge under Section 304-B I.P.C., the appellant/A1 ought not to have been
convicted in the absence of there being any specific evidence with regard to
the motive for the appellant/A1 to have caused the death of his wife.  The
learned senior counsel further submitted that the case rests only on the
circumstantial evidence and in the absence of strong motive, one of the
essential links in the chain of circumstantial evidence will affect the case of
the prosecution and that even there is no satisfactory evidence on record to
show that it is the appellant/husband who was last seen in the company of
the deceased when she was found lying dead due to hanging, that the
material evidence of the witnesses examined on behalf of the defence has
not been properly appreciated and the same was discarded on the grounds 
which are untenable, that the Court below ought to have seen that at the
time when the deceased died, none of the accused were present in the room 
where A1 and the deceaed were living and even the husband/A.1 came there 
on being alerted and immediately having found that there is still some life
left in the deceased, they have immediately brought down the deceased
from second floor and have shifted her in an auto to Bollineni Hospital where
she was declared dead.  In the process of removing the body from the
hanging position and bringing it on to the road from a portion which is in the
second floor of the building and being shifted in an auto, the deceased has
sustained abrasions on the right and left elbow joints, left shoulder and over
the lower border of mandible on right side.  The Medical Officer having found
the above injuries opined the same to be ante-mortem in nature.  Learned
senior counsel submits that if the deceased was done to death by A1 as
alleged by the prosecution, she ought to have sustained injuries and her face
would not have been as was noticed afterwards.  Learned Counsel submits 
that in the absence of there being conclusive evidence, that the deceased
died due to smothering, the conviction of the appellant cannot be sustained
under Section 302 I.P.C.
        10. Learned Counsel appearing for the de facto complainant/PW.1
who filed the Criminal Revision Case submits that having accepted the case
of the prosecution insofar as A1 is concerned, the learned Sessions Judge
has acquitted A2 and A3 of all the charges without appreciating the evidence
on record in proper perspective.  Therefore, the acquittal of A.2 (who, since
died) and A3 needs to be set aside.
        11. Learned Public Prosecutor while admitting the fact that the State
has not challenged the acquittal of A1 for the offence punishable under
Section 304-B I.P.C., and Sections 3 and 4 of the Dowry Prohibition Act and
acquittal of A2 and A3 of all the charges, vehemently submits that the
evidence on record has established that it is the husband/A1 who killed the
deceased by smothering and the Court below has properly considered the 
material on record warranting no interference with the conviction and
sentence of the appellant/A1.
        12. We have carefully considered the respective submissions of the
learned counsel for the parties and perused the material on record.
        13. The point for consideration is whether the prosecution proved its
case against A1 to A3 beyond reasonable doubt so as to sustain the
conviction and sentence recorded against A1, and whether there are any
grounds to interfere with the acquittal of A2 & A3 of the charges alleged, or
whether the same need to be set aside, modified or varied.
        Point:  
      14. The facts that the deceased  Lakshmi was married to A1 on
26.10.2001, that they were blessed with a son and that the said Lakshmi
died an unnatural death in her matrimonial home on 27.01.2007 are not in
dispute.  It is on record that the house where A1 and the deceased were
living was a building with different floors and that the parents of A1 viz., A2
and A3 and another brother of A1 along with his wife  Jyothi, were all living
in different portions of the same building.  The Court below has also found
as of fact that the accused were not having any financial problems as such
and basing upon the evidence on record, both oral and documentary, it held
that the ingredients constituting the offence punishable under Section 304-B
I.P.C., so also under Sections 3 and 4 of the Dowry Prohibition Act were not
established.  In that view of the matter, the motive that is alleged for A1 to
cause the death of the deceased, which is non-fulfilment of the demand for
dowry cannot be believed and there is no other evidence on record to show
that the husband/A1 had any other motive to kill his wife.  It is no doubt true
that since the deceased was found lying almost dead in the portion of the
building in which she was living along with her tender aged son and
husband, it is for the husband to put up a probable defence about the
circumstances in which his wife died the unnatural death.  According to the
accused, the deceased was a woman of short temper and used to get  
worked up for trivial issues and as a matter of fact, on one occasion, when
the mother of the deceased has scolded her for some reason, the deceased 
jumped from the two wheeler and sustained injuries.  It is further the
specific plea of the husband/A1 that there were no disputes in between them
and that on the date of the incident, he went out on his work and on being
informed over phone, he rushed to his house and all of them have shifted his
wife to hospital since she was still alive by then.
        15. The presumptions that are available under Section 113-B of the
Evidence Act cannot be invoked when the husband or his people are charged 
with an offence punishable under Section 302 I.P.C. For determining the
guilt or otherwise of the accused for the offence punishable under Section
304-B I.P.C., such presumptions are permissible.  Once the prosecution
establishes the primary facts, it is for the husband or his relations to show
the probable cause for a woman to have died an unnatural death and in the
absence of such a probable defence, the Court can presume that the death
of the woman is the dowry death punishable under Section 304-B I.P.C.
        16. In the instant case, as already stated, all the accused including
the appellant/A1 have been acquitted by the trial Court for the offence
punishable under Section 304-B I.P.C., and also under Sections 3 and 4 of
the Dowry Prohibition Act.  The State did not challenge the said acquittals.
Therefore, what is required to be seen is as to whether the evidence on
record is sufficient for holding that it is the appellant/A1 who has committed
the offence of murder.
        17. On behalf of the prosecution, out of 11 witnesses examined, PWs
1 to 5 are the kith and kin of the deceased.  They are the parents, three
sisters and the brother-in-law of the deceased.  The prosecution has not
examined any independent witness during course of trial even though
several of the neighbouring residents were examined by the police during
the course of investigation.  The charge sheet discloses that the investigating
officer has recorded the statements of LW 3-Yerramsetti Ravi, LW 4-
Agnihothram Veeraswamy, LW 8-Allahari Srinivasa, Lw 9-Thangisetti Balaji,
LW 10-Botlagudur Lakshmi and LW 11-Botlagudur Chakradhar.  All these   
listed witnesses are the residents of the immediate neighbourhood, but the
learned public prosecutor has given up these witnesses and did not examine
even a single witness from the immediate neighbourhood.  It is no doubt
true that it is the prerogative of the prosecution to examine or give up a
particular witness but that does not mean that the prosecutor will not
examine any independent witness merely because that such witness is not 
likely to support and help the case of the prosecution.  The duty of the
prosecution is to place all relevant evidence before the Court for proper
appreciation of the entire case based on record and it cannot withhold the
examination of material witnesses, whose evidence may help the Court in
determining the guilt or otherwise of the person in the dock.  Out of the
above listed witnesses, who have not been examined by the prosecution,
LWs 3 & 4-Ravi and Veeraswamy were examined as DWs 2 and 5 on behalf     
of the accused.
        18. Be that as it may, it shall now be seen as to whether the evidence
of the parents, three sisters and the brother-in-law of the deceased in any
way establish that it is A1-husband who was in the company of the deceased
wife immediately before she was found hanging from ceiling hook with the
help of a saree.  It may be recalled that it is the specific contention of the
accused that the deceased is a woman of short temper and might have 
resorted to commit suicide for unknown reasons at the time when her
husband-A.1 was not in the house.  The incident took place between 10.00
a.m to 01.00 p.m on 27.01.2007 in the absence of inmates of the house.
      19. On a careful perusal of the evidence of PWs 1 to 5, it is noticed
that none of them spoke about the presence of A.1 in the house when the
deceased was found hanging.  PW 1, the father of the deceased stated that
on the date of the incident at about 1.30 of 2 p.m when he was on duty, he
was informed about the death of the deceased and he came back and by the  
time he reached the house, the dead body of his deceased daughter was 
being taken to Bollineni Hospital from the house.  He further deposed that
the family members of the accused harassed his daughter as she has no job 
and her husband (A.1) was keeping idle, whereas the second son of A.2 and
A.3 and the wife of A.2 were earning members and therefore, they used to
abuse his deceased daughter saying that if she dies, they would perform
another marriage to A.1 by getting more dowry and hence she was 
murdered for dowry.  From this part of the statement of PW 1, it is difficult
to hold that it is A.1 who has caused death of the deceased and on the other
hand, what appears from his evidence is that the deceased was being
subjected to harassment and therefore, she died.  Absolutely, nothing is
spoken to by PW 1 to prove that it is A.1 or any other accused who have
caused the murder of the deceased, as alleged.  Certain admissions made by 
PW.1 in his cross examination tend to show that A.1 cannot be said to be the
person who caused the death of the deceased.  It is admitted by PW 1 that it
is A.1 who informed him over phone about the death of the deceased and
the witness further clarified that A.1 has informed his wife (PW 2) about the
death of the deceased over phone and thereafter, PW 2 informed him and
he came back from his duty.  He also admits that he has mentioned in the
complaint Ex.P1 that by the time he reached the scene of offence, A.1 was
bringing the dead body of the deceased in an auto, pretending as if he is
innocent.  He further admits that in his statement recorded by the Executive
Magistrate (PW 6), he stated that by the time he went there, his son-in-
law/A.1 is available and they found that it is A.1 who was bringing the dead
body of the deceased from the second floor portion to the ground and being
taken to the hospital, since it was found that the deceased was still having
some life.
      20. On the same lines is the evidence of PWs 2, 3, 4 and 5, who are
mother and two sisters and husband respectively of PW.3.  According to PW 
2, on being informed about the death of the deceased, they all went there
and she asserts that unable to bear the harassment and acts of the accused,
her daughter died.  She does not say that it is A.1 who has caused the death
of the deceased.  She did not even say that they came to know that A.1 was
inside the house at the time when the deceased was found hanging to the
hook with the help of a saree.  PW 2 appears to be sufficiently worldly-wise
woman for the reasons that she admits that she is doing business in sarees.
Therefore, it cannot be said that she does not know the difference between
a person being killed or having committed suicide.  If the evidence of PW 2
is carefully perused, according to her, the deceased has committed suicide,
allegedly due to harassment at the hands of the accused.
      21. PW 3 is the elder sister of the deceased who incidently resides
very close to the house of the accused and the deceased.  She is the wife of
PW 5, who is working as a constable in the police department.  PW 5 was 
the person who was first informed about the death of the deceased.
According to PW 3, her deceased sister told her over phone that her husband
(A.1) and her in-laws are harassing her and demanding money.  On the date
of the incident, PW 3 claims that in the morning the deceased telephoned
her and said that her husband is demanding Rs.1 lakh and is harassing her
and was threatening her that they will kill her if the additional dowry of Rs.1
lakh is not given.  She further stated that in the morning of 27.01.2007 her
mother, brother and others were discussing in her house as to what has to
be done about it and in the meantime phone call from A.1 was received by
PW 5 that the deceased is dead and immediately all of them rushed to the
house of the deceased and found that the deceased was kept in an auto and 
that A.1 was present there at that time.  PW.3 further deposed that they
along with A.1 took the deceased to Bollineni hospital where she was
declared dead.  In the cross examination, PW 3 denies having stated before
the police as in Ex.D6 to the effect that she learnt from the neighbours that
the deceased bolted the doors from inside.  The Investigating Officer asserts
that PW 3 told him as such during his investigation and therefore, the
statement is recorded to that effect under section 161 Cr.P.C.
      22. PW 4 is another sister of the deceased and her evidence does not
in any way further the case of the prosecution.  Similar is the evidence of PW
5, the brother-in-law of the deceased.  He also admits that it is A.1 who
telephoned him and informed about the death of the deceased and 
immediately he went there and found A.1, PWs 2, 3 and his brother-in-law
taking the deceased in an auto to the hospital. Such information could not
have been given by A.1 since it is admitted case that the deceased was
declared dead on reaching the Hospital and all the witnesses including A.1
found some life in her.  In the cross examination, he feigns ignorance as to
whether he informed the police in his statement recorded during course of
enquiry that he learnt from the neighbours that the deceased bolted the
door from inside.
      23. The evidence of PWs 1 to 5 shows one fact viz., at the time when
they went to the scene within minutes of being informed over phone, they all
rushed there and they found that it is A.1 who was bringing the deceased
wife from the second floor portion to the ground floor for taking her to
hospital.  Their evidence do not however show that A.1 was present in the
house before the incident.  Their evidence however establishes that the day
when the deceased died, son of the deceased aged 1 year 3 months was in  
the room and was crying.  They also admitted that just three months prior to
the death of the deceased, both A.1 and deceased have celebrated the first
birthday of their son on grand scale and took photographs and Ex.D1 is the
album.  It is also admitted by PWs 1 to 3 that about 6 months prior to the
death of the deceased, the Seemantham function of the deceased was  
performed in the house of the accused on a grand scale and they
participated and took photographs which are Ex.D2 (album).  It is also
admitted by PWs 1 and 2 that A.2 and A.3 used to go on pilgrimage and PW  
2, the mother of the deceased used to accompany them.  It is also in their
evidence that when the deceased had two abortions prior to the birth of the
surviving child,  A.2 and A.3 went to Kasi pilgrimage and thereafter, the boy
was born and therefore, they named the boy as Kasi.
      24. As against the above evidence, the accused has produced the
evidence of neighbouring witnesses who were in fact examined by the police
and were given up by the prosecution during the trial.
      25. DWs 1, 7 & 8 are the bank officials where A.1 was having the
bank account.  They are examined to say and show that both at the time of
marriage between A.1 and the deceased and around the period when she  
died, there was substantial balance in the account of A.1.  The bank officials
produced the bank statements in support of their evidence.  This evidence is
relied upon by the accused to establish that absolutely there was no need
whatsoever for the accused to harass the deceased for want of additional
dowry.  Even at the time he married the deceased, A.1 was having balance
in his bank account in the range of 5 to 6 lakhs and at the time when the
deceased committed suicide, A.1 was having balance of more than Rs.3  
lakhs in his bank account.  It is submitted by A.1 that he was doing business
in real-estate and had sufficient income and the marital life of A.1 and the
deceased was going on very smoothly and A.1 and his family members have   
celebrated Srimantham of the deceased and the first birthday of the son on a
grand scale as admitted by the prosecution witnesses and also borne out
from Exs.D1 and D.2. 
      26. DW 2 is the listed witness No.3 in the charge sheet, DW 3 is the
father of the second daughter-in-law of A.2 and A.3, DW 4, a neighbouring
resident, DW 5 is cited as listed witness in the charge sheet and DW 6 is
another neighbouring resident.  They all gave consistent evidence which is to
the effect that on the date of incident they heard shouts from the house of
A.2 and they all rushed there and they were told that the deceased was
inside the room which was bolted from inside and that the boy was crying
inside.  From their evidence, it is clear that they opened the door forcibly and
found the deceased hanging with the help of a saree to the ceiling hook.
They brought down the body of the deceased, telephoned to A.1 and all of
them shifted the deceased to the hospital as they found that the deceased
was having some breath.  These independent witnesses have given detailed
account as to what happened on the date of incident.  It is not even
suggested to any of these witnesses that A.1 was present in the house when
the deceased was found hanging.  It is asserted by DWs 2 and 5 that A.1
came there only on receiving phone call and immediately all of them took the
deceased to the hospital.  The witnesses examined on behalf of the accused
are the residents of immediate neighbourhood and they are independent
witnesses.
      27. Upon a careful perusal of the evidence of the prosecution
witnesses and the defence witnesses, we have no hesitation in holding that
at the time when the deceased died in the house, A.1 was not there and
therefore, it cannot be said that it was A.1 who caused the death of the
deceased.  Their evidence no doubt show that the deceased committed  
suicide by hanging herself in the room in the absence of her husband and
when A.2 and A.3 were in a different floor.
      28. As a matter of fact, even the learned Sessions Judge has believed
the evidence of the witnesses which is to the effect that the marital life of
the deceased was going on happily and there was no reason whatsoever for 
the accused to have harassed the deceased for want of additional dowry.
However, the learned Sessions Judge by placing reliance on the evidence of
Medical Officer PW 9 and post mortem certificate Ex.P16 came to the 
conclusion that it was A.1 who caused the death of the deceased by
smothering and thereafter hanged the body of the deceased to make it
appear that the deceased committed suicide.  Therefore, what is now
required to be seen is the medical evidence on record so as to arrive at a
conclusion whether the deceased was done to death by smothering or 
whether it was a case of suicidal death due to hanging.
      29. PW 9 is Dr.P.Aparna, who was working as Civil Assistant Surgeon
in the Government Hospital, Nellore and she was pursuing her post-
graduation in medicine.  She along with another Civil Assistant Surgeon were
said to have conducted post mortem examination on the dead body of the 
deceased at 4 p.m. on 28.01.2007.  They opined that the deceased died
more than 24 hours prior to the commencement of the post mortem  
examination.  The Medical Officer PW 9 found the following external
appearances on the dead body of the deceased: 
1)      Rigor mortis passed off all over the body;
2)      Face swollen and congested; 
3)      Bleeding from both nostril present;
4)      On opening eyes congestion present; 

She also found the following external injuries on the dead body of the
deceased: 
1)      Contusion and congestion of 2 x 2 c.m over both upper and lower lips
inner aspects;
2)      Three abrasions of about  x 1/4th c.m posterior aspect of right elbow
joint;
3)      Two abrasions of about  x 1 c.m over posterior aspect of left elbow
joint;
4)      An abrasion of about 4 x  c.m in size over lower border of mandible on
right side.
5)      An abrasion of about 1 x 1/4th c.m over left shoulder
6)      All the above injuries are anti mortem in nature;

PW 9 further found the following internal injuries in the post mortem
examination;
        Scalp layers intact and congested.  Skull bone intact.  Brain and meninges
congested.  Trachce, Pharynx and Laryne on cut section congested. 
        Hyoid Intact.  Lungs on cut section congested
        Heard: Normal 
        Stomach: Empty  
        Liver: on cut section congested
        Spleen: cut section congested
        Kidneys: congested 
        Urinary blodder: Empty
        Spine: Normal 

After obtaining the report of the Forensic Science Laboratory, PW 9, the
Doctor, opined that the deceased might have died due to Asphyxia due to
smothering.  In the cross examination, PW 9 admitted that Asphyxia can be
caused by pressing the chest with force or squeezing the neck or by closing
the mouth and nose.  She further deposed that she cannot say as to what
was the method adopted in the instant case for smothering.  The ribs of the
deceased were found to be intact and there was no injury on the nose of the
deceased.  However, there was an injury on the lower border of mandible,
but the Doctor could not say whether the said injury is a ligature mark or
not.  The Medical Officer further stated that the injury that was noticed on
the lower mandible could have been caused by applying pressure with the
help of any blunt object like, stick, rod etc.  The Doctor did not notice any
froth coming out of the mouth and did not also observe any blood bisters
(carbo marks) on the face or in the lungs or in the eyes.  It is further noticed
from the evidence of PW 9 that smothering can be caused by closing the
mouth and nasals with a plastic bag or injection of any foreign body into
laryx or inhalation of poisonous gasses and by caf coronary.  PW 9 further
certified that the deceased was an able bodied woman and she cannot say 
whether a single person can cause smothering by closing the mouth and 
nostrils of an able bodied person.  PW 9 further clarifies that generally the
death by smothering will be caused of infants, old or sick persons.  PW 9
found that the eyes of the deceased were closed and did not find any injury
on the waist.  She further stated that if the dead body was laid on the
ground for some time, the post mortem stains will be there under the lower
portion of the body.  It is further in the evidence of PW 9 that she has not
noted the fracture of septum and flatend note.  She admits that in majority
of cases ecchymosed with lividity of limbs will occur in the case of
smothering which was not noted in this case.  PW 9 admits about the
opinion expressed by Dr.K.S.Narayan Reddy in his Book Forensic Medicines  
and Toxicology.
        30. Dr.K.S.Narayana Reddy in his Book  Medical Jurisprudence and 
Toxicology described smothering as under:
        Smothering: This is a form of asphyxia which is caused by
closing the external respiratory orifices either by the hand or by other
means, or blocking up the cavities of the nose and mouth by the
introduction of a foreign substance, such as mud, paper, cloth, etc.
Smothering has been used synonymously with suffocation by some   
authors.

The author further says  that homicide is possible by smothering where the
victim is incapacitated by drink or drugs, very weak, child or old person, in
ill-health and when the victim is stunned by a blow.  The author further says
that usually the mouth and nose are closed by a hand or cloth or the face
may be pressed into a pillow.  The author further gives the following
symptoms of homicidal smothering which can be detected on autopsy.  
        Autopsy: Obstruction by bed clothing, a pillow, a cushion,
etc., applied with skill, may not leave any external signs of violence,
especially in the young and the old.  When the face is pressed into a
pillow, the skin around the nose and mouth may appear pale or white
due to pressure.  Petechiae and congestion are rarely seen unless the
victim struggles and fights for breath.  Saliva, blood and tissue cells
may be found on the pillow.  If the orfices are closed by the hand,
there may be scratches, distinct nail marks, or laceration of the soft
parts of the victims face.  The lips, gums and tongue may show
bruising or laceration.  Slight bruising may be found in the mouth and
nose, which should be confirmed by microscopy.  The asphyxial signs 
and symptoms are severe, because death usually results due to slow 
asphyxia and often the fatal period is three to five minutes.  The head
and face may show intense congestion and cyanosis with numerous   
petechial  haemorrhages in the skin of the face and beneath the
conjunctivae.  Blood may ooze out from the mouth and nose.  The
tongue may be protruded and may have been bitten.  The air-passages 
contain bloodstained frothy fluid, with red blood cells and
desquamated respiratory epithelial cells.  The lungs are congested,
oedematous and show areas of haemorrhage and collapse with areas   
of emphysema.  Petechiae are usually present, eve in cases where 
hypoxic changes are slight.  Often, the head and face enclosed in a
plastic bag are pale, with few potechial enclosed in a plastic bag are
pale, with few petecfhial haemorrhages in the eyelids and pericardium
or there may be no asphyxial signs.  In some cases death is rapid due
to reflex cardiac arrest, and asphyxial signs are absent.
        Internal: Blood-stained frothy fluid is present in air-passages.
Mucus may be found at the back of the mouth.  Slight acute
emphysema and oedema of the lungs with scattered areas of  
atelectasis, petechiae and congestion are the major findings.  The
internal organs are deeply congested and sometimes show small  
haemorrhages.  In the absence of localizing signs at autopsy, the
background to the death and the circumstances in which the body was 
found are of help.  The finding of the material from the victim such as
mucus, squamous epithelium on the smothering material is also of
help.  If a person is buried alive, earth and sand will be found in the
respiratory tract.
        Homicidal smothering is extremely difficult to detect.  The
autopsy may reveal asphyxia, but there may not be any corroborative
medical evidence to prove foul play.  The pathological changes must
be interpreted keeping in view the medical history of the deceased,
the scene of death, and the specific circumstances surrounding the
death.

        31. If the opinion of Dr.K.S.Narayan Reddy, who is an expert in the
field is compared with the evidence on record, it is difficult to say that the
death of the deceased could have been caused due to asphyxia or due to
smothering.
        32. From the evidence of PW 9, the Doctor, and the post mortem 
certificate Ex.P16, it cannot be said that the medical evidence which is not
corroborated by any other evidence whatsoever on record supports the
opinion that the cause of death of the deceased was Asphyxia due to
smothering, as the signs which usually are supposed to be noted on a body
in such cases were not found by the Medical Officer.
        33. We have also perused the photographs and also the inquest
panchanama.  As per the evidence of PW 8, he had taken photographs at  
about 7.30 p.m. on 27.01.2007, whereas the post mortem was held at 4 
p.m. on 28.01.2007.  The photos do not show any of the symptoms which  
are usually found in the case of death due to smothering, as opined by
Dr.K.S.Narayan Reddy in the passage, extracted above.  Absolutely, there
are no injuries on the nose or on the lips of the deceased.  There are no
marks or lacerations on any soft parts of the face of the victim.  The lips,
gums and tongue did not bear any signs of bruising.  Blood was not oozing
from the mouth or nose.  The tongue had not protruded or bitten.
        34. Upon careful perusal of the evidence of the Medical Officer PW 9,
the other evidence on record and the opinion of the expert, we have no
hesitation in holding that from the material on record, it cannot be said that
the deceased was done to death violently due to smothering, as has been
held by the learned Sessions Judge.  Nothing incriminating has been seized
from the place where the dead body was lying, which suggests that any kind
of pressure was applied on the neck of the deceased who admittedly was an
able bodied strong woman, as found by PW 9, the medical officer, and also
as noticed from the photographs.  If such a person is done to death violently
by one person, several incriminating objects are to be found at the place
where the said act was committed.  Admittedly, even according to the
prosecution witnesses, they reached the scene within minutes after the
incident and none of them noticed anything in the room which suggests that
any pressure with any material object was applied on the deceased which
incapacitated her and was thereafter smothered to death.  Therefore, we are
unable to concur with the view expressed by the learned Sessions Judge that
the medical evidence conclusively established that the deceased was killed
by A.1 by smothering her.
        35. The evidence of the prosecution witnesses on record do not even
show that the deceased was subjected to any harassment or cruel treatment 
at the hands of the accused.  On the other hand, as noticed above from
Exs.D1 and D.2 which are photographs taken just two or three months 
before the death of the deceased, it cannot be said that the accused
subjected the deceased to any cruel treatment or harassment.  It is also on
record that for the well being of the deceased and for her begetting children,
A.2 and A.3, being father-in-law and mother-in-law, worshipped the God and
went on pilgrimage to Kasi along with PW 2, the mother of the deceased.
Thereafter, when the deceased conceived and was blessed with a son, they 
named the child as Rama Kasi.  All these circumstances do not show that
the deceased was subjected to any cruelty or harassment so as to convict
the appellant/A.1 for the offence punishable under section 498-A I.P.C.

        Criminal Revision Case No.806/2011: 
        36. With regard to the revision filed by PW 1, it is noticed that the
evidence on record has been properly appreciated by the learned Sessions
Judge in so far as acquittal of the accused of certain charges is concerned.
It is found that the evidence on record does not establish that there was any
demand for dowry at the time of marriage or subsequent thereto nor was
there any harassment for additional dowry.  As a matter fact, it is admitted
by PW 1 that major part of expenses even for the marriage were met by A.1
by himself.  There is also documentary evidence to show that around the
period when A.1 and the deceased were married, A.1 was having bank  
balance of more than Rs.6 lakhs.  Nearly 6 years after the marriage also the
bank balance of A.1 was in the range of Rs.3 lakhs as spoken to by DWs 1, 7
and 8, who are the Bank Officials and who produced the Bank statements 
Exs.D8, D9 & D10.  The evidence of the prosecution witnesses does not also
show that the deceased was killed by A.1.  None of the prosecution
witnesses even remotely say that it is A.1 who has violently killed the
deceased.  On the other hand, the evidence of the prosecution witnesses as
well as the defence witnesses clearly goes to show that the deceased
committed suicide by hanging and since the child in the room cried, A.2 and
A.3 and several neighbours assembled there and after forcibly opening the
door, they found the deceased hanging, brought her down and having found
her still alive, immediately called A.1 and all of them took the deceased to
Bollineni hospital where she was declared dead.  Therefore, acquittal of A.2
& A3 by the learned Sessions Judge cannot be said to suffer with any
irregularity or illegality or that the findings suffer from any perversity
warranting interference therewith under the revisional jurisdiction of this
Court.
      37. In the result, Criminal Appeal No.836 of 2010 filed by A.1 is
allowed.  The conviction and sentence recorded against the appellant/A.1 of
the charges under Section 498-A and 302 IPC are set aside.  Consequently,
the appellant/A1 shall be set at liberty forthwith, if he is not required in any
other case or crime and the fine amount, if any, paid by him shall be
refunded to him.
      38. Criminal Revision Case No.806 of 2011 filed by the de facto
complainant/PW.1 against acquittal of A.2 & A.3 is dismissed.

_________  
C.V.NAGARJUNA REDDY,J      
__________________   
M.S.K.JAISWAL,J   
Date:21.03.2016
