

HIGH COURT OF JAMMU AND KASHMIR AT JAMMU             
Cr Appeal No. 07 of 2004 AND Cr Acq Appeal No. 46 of 2004   

Gharu Ram & Ors                                                 
 Petitioner
State of J&K & Ors 
 Respondent 

!Mr. C. M. Gupta, Advocate.
^Mr. B. S. Salathia, Addl. Advocate General.

Coram : 
Justice Virender Singh
Justice Mansoor Ahmad Mir  

Date: 17/09/2007 

:JUDGMENT:   
        

Per: Virender Singh-J.
        Vide this judgment, we intend to dispose of the aforesaid two Criminal
Appeals and Confirmation reference sent under Section 374 Cr.P.C.
     In all there were three accused in this case. Appellant- Gharu Ram (for
short hereinafter to be referred to as the 'Accused') has suffered conviction
under Section 302 Ranbir Penal Code vide impugned judgment of learned Ist
Additional Sessions Judge, Jammu, dated 06.08.2004 and has been sentenced to   
imprisonment for life and a fine of Rs.5,000/- and in default to further undergo
simple imprisonment for six months.  His two co-accused namely Som Nath and   
Shielo Devi (respondents in State appeal), however, stand acquitted of all the
charges. Accused- Gharu Ram also stands acquitted for Sections 498-A/201 Cr.P.C.  
Therefore, Cr. Appeal No.07/2004 by Gharu Ram and Cr. Acquittal Appeal 
No.46/2004 by the State against the acquittal earned by Som Nath and Shielo Devi
with regard to all offences and qua Gharu Ram-accused with regard to Sections
498-A/201 Cr.P.C. only. Confirmation No.06/2004 was ordered to be heard with
these two appeals.
        Gita Devi (since deceased) was the wife of the accused.  She received burn
injuries on 27.09.2000 in her matrimonial home and was removed to Medical
College Jammu.  On 28.09.2000, Police Station Satwari received a message from 
Police Post Chatha after  admission of injured -Gita Devi in Medical College
Jammu,  (Medical College Jammu falls within the jurisdiction of Police Post
Chatha), upon which the Incharge Police Post Chatha, approached Medical Officer
on duty and moved an application knowing as to whether the injured was fit to
make the statement or not.  Dr. Abdul (not examined) opined the injured as
unfit.  Thereafter on 29.09.2000, Sh. Anil Kumar Katoch Dy. SP (not examined)
who was also officiating as SHO of Police Station, Satwari, accompanied by PW-
ASI Gh. Mohd. Giri went to the hospital and again moved an application (EXPW-GG) 
for obtaining the opinion about the fitness of the patient for recording her
statement.  Dr. Kirti Bhushan (not examined) who was attending to the patient,
opined the injured to be fit to make the statement.  Thereafter her statement
(EXPW-GG/1) was recorded in the hospital at 8.30 p.m.  It was attested by
aforesaid Dr. Kirti Bhushan and on the basis of said statement, the F.I.R.
initially registered under Sections 307/498-A RPC on 29.09.2000.  Subsequently,
on the death of Gita Devi on 02.10.2000, it was altered to Section 302 RPC.
     We feel the necessity of reproducing the Statement of Gita Devi (in
vernacular) and when reproduced in English, reads as under:-
"Stated that I am the resident of Chatha Mill, Tehsil Jammu.  My parents are
residing at Chack Morh, Tehsil Bishnah.  I was married with Sonu S/o Kartar
Chand, caste Bhagat R/o Chatha Mill for the last 1 = years with the consent of
my parents.  After 4-5 months, my husband, mother-in-law and brother of my
husband, used to harass me and were telling that the dowry brought by me has
been kept at my parental house.  In case that dowry including Fridge, Cooler
etc. is not brought, they will set her on fire.  My parents are very poor.  They
are unable to maintain themselves, so the question of bringing Fridge and Cooler
does not arise.  On Wednesday, her husband came to her room and threatened her  
of death.  Her husband alongwith her mother-in-law and brother of her husband
came there alongwith a gallon containing kerosene oil.  My husband poured the
kerosene oil upon me and set me on fire with a match stick.  I cried a lot, but
my husband shut my mouth, I became unconscious due to burn injuries.  At night I
was brought to hospital in a matador.  It is my statement, which is correct."


        During the investigation, the police seized the can of  kerosene oil and
partly burnt bed-sheet into possession.  It revealed during investigation that
Shielo Devi (since acquitted) had destroyed the evidence of crime by washing the
floor of the room to wipe out traces of the kerosene oil.  It also revealed that
the accused had removed the bed-sheet, which had got partly burnt.  For this
reason, Section 201 RPC was also inserted. 
     All the three accused were charged under Sections 498-A, 302, 201/34 RPC.
     The prosecution, in order to substantiate the charge, has examined as many
as eighteen (18) witnesses, but in our view and as agreed by learned counsel for
both the sides the main witnesses   for the purposes of deciding the present
case are PW1-Chetru Ram, the father of the deceased; PW3-Bachno Devi, the mother   
of the deceased; PW7- Sharda Devi, the wife of Som Nath accused (since 
acquitted); PW14- Gh. Mohd. Giri, the Investigating Officer; and PW18- Dr. Sunil
Gupta, who conducted the autopsy. 
        It needs to be mentioned that PW Lavo Rani (wife of the brother of the
deceased), Baldev Raj, Surinder Kumar, Rattan Lal, Kewal Krishan and Bishan 
Dass, who were mainly with regard to the dowry demand and partly qua the
occurrence, did not support the case of the prosecution and were declared
hostile.
        It would also not be out of place to mention that the prosecution had
produced one Dr. Kirti Bhushan, but he denied the issuance of any fitness
certificate by him with regard to injured Gita Devi.  He in fact was wrongly
reflected in the list of witnesses. The concerned doctor was some other Dr.
Rishi. Thereafter, an application was moved by the prosecution under Section 540
Cr.P.C. for examining Dr. Kirti Bhushan, who in fact had issued fitness
certificate and Dy.SP Anil Kumar as earlier to it the prosecution evidence was
closed by the order of the Court.  Despite the said application being allowed by
the Court, the prosecution did not bother to examine those witnesses.  There is
a reference to this effect in the impugned judgment also.
        We would now like to discuss the evidence of the aforesaid main witnesses
in brief.
        PW1-Chetru Ram is the father of the deceased.  He deposed that after the
marriage, his daughter was well settled in the matrimonial home and her husband
never demanded for dowry.  He came to know about the occurrence after the
deceased was admitted in the hospital.  He further stated that his daughter was
saying that all the accused had set her ablaze by pouring kerosene oil on her
body, but she did not disclose the reason for the same.  He then stated that the
police had recorded her statement  and seized certain articles in his presence.
He also stated that the dead body was delivered to her in-laws with his consent.
     In his cross-examination, this witness stated that the deceased had told
him that the accused had sprinkled kerosene oil on her body and at that time
nobody else was around her. 
        PW3-Bachno Devi is the mother of the deceased.  She also stated that her
daughter (since deceased) never complained that her in-laws had been harassing
her for dowry.  She then stated that the deceased had visited her parental home
and on 3rd day of her return to her in-laws house they learnt that the deceased
had died while lighting a stove and this information was given to them by Som
Nath-accused (since acquitted). This witness was declared hostile by the
prosecution and in her cross-examination by Public Prosecutor, she stated that
police recorded the statement of her daughter in the presence of certain
witnesses and she did not nominate anybody except her husband, who came at 8.30   
O' clock to the house and set her ablaze.
        PW7-Sharda Devi is the wife of co-accused Som Nath (since acquitted).  She
stated that on the date of occurrence, she was in her room and did not know as
to how the deceased got fire and by the time, she reached the room of the
deceased, the flames had already engulfed the deceased and then she was removed  
to the hospital.  She then stated that the police visited the house, seized the
stove, bedding in her presence and she attested the seizure memo.
        Dr. Sunil Gupta had conducted the postmortem examination on the dead body  
of Gita Devi on 02.10.2000 and found the following injuries on her person:-
"II. External and internal injuries:- Antemortem partially healed dermo-
apidermal burn wound (infected) covering 65% of body surface area, parts spared,
part of back of trunk, parts of both legs below knee, scalp and perianal area.
On internal examination lungs were found congested.  Stomach contains small 
amount of fluid and mucose was congested." 

        According to this witness, the cause of death was shock as a result of
burn injuries covering 65% of body surface area.  This witness had preserved
hair from the back of the head, sealed it and handed over to the Investigating
Officer for detection of the petroleum hydrocarbons.  He proved the postmortem
report.
        PW14-Gh. Mohd. Giri is the Investigating Officer, who on 29.09.2000 had
accompanied Dy.SP Anil Kumar Katoch the then SHO to the hospital. He has proved   
the application (EXPW-GG) for obtaining opinion regarding the fitness of the
deceased.  He further deposed that after the patient (Gita Devi) was declared
fit to record the statement, he recorded her statement (EXPW-GG/1) in presence
of  Dr. Kirti Bhushan.  Dy.SP Anil Kumar Katoch was asking the injured about the
occurrence and whatever was stated by her, he (Gh. Mohd. Giri) recorded the
same. 
        In his cross-examination, this witness had admitted that when the
statement was being recorded, the relatives and the parents of the deceased were
present in the hospital.  He, however, stated that the deceased was semi
conscious and could speak had put her thumb impression on the dying declaration.
        On incriminating evidence put to the accused under Section 342 Cr.P.C. all
the three accused had denied the allegation regarding their involvement in the
occurrence and pleaded their innocence.
        In defence, one Subash Chander son of Charan Dass resident of Chatha Mill,
who was Panch of the local Panchayat, was brought into the witness box.  He
deposed that he lived just 2-3 houses away from the house of the accused and was
on visiting terms to the accused.  According to him the husband and the wife
were residing happily and there was no quarrel between them. He then stated that
soon after the occurrence he visited the house of the accused and there was
nobody present in the house.  The deceased was already removed to the hospital.
        After appreciating the entire evidence, learned Trial Court convicted
accused, Gharu Ram, for Section 302 RPC only and acquitted his other two co- 
accused namely Som Nath & Shielo Devi of all the charges as stated above.
        We have heard Mr. C. M. Gupta, learned counsel for the appellant and Mr.
B. S. Salathia, learned Additional Advocate General, representing the State.
With their assistance, we have rescanned the entire case of the prosecution very
minutely.
        Mr. Gupta contends that no doubt the 'dying declaration' can be made the
sole basis of conviction in case it is said to be reliable and free from any
suspicion.  The present case also revolves round the statement of Gita Devi only
which has been made the basis of the conviction of accused- Gharu Ram, the 
husband.  But the same, if appreciated in right perspective, it can be safely
concluded that it was not her pure and honest statement and, therefore, it
cannot be made the basis for maintaining the conviction.
        Dwelling upon his arguments, Mr. Gupta submits that the learned Trial
Court while believing the dying declaration sought corroboration from the
evidence of parents of the deceased, but  their evidence instead of lending any
corroboration to it, dents it to a great extent so as to create doubt in
totality.  Mr. Gupta submits that the very case set up by the prosecution is
that the husband and the other two co-accused being 'Jaith' and mother-in-law
respectively, were harassing the deceased on account of dowry demand and this 
was the reason that she was set on fire on 27.09.2000.  The presence of the
aforesaid two persons alongwith the husband accused is also shown at the time of
occurrence.  Father and mother of the deceased, who are the main witnesses with
regard to the dowry demand, demolish the case of the prosecution on this aspect.
They have rather categorically stated that there was no demand of dowry from the
side of the accused at all.  According to learned counsel this material aspect
cannot be just ignored while appreciating the dying declaration on the test of
reliability.
     Mr. Gupta then submits that even otherwise the 'dying declaration' deserves
to be rejected for the reason that Dr. Kirti Bhushan, who had declared the
injured fit to make the statement has not been brought into the witness box.  He
is also the attesting witness to the statement of the deceased.  The best
evidence in this regard has been withheld by the prosecution.  In the same
stress, the learned counsel submits that not only aforesaid Dr. Kirti Bhushan
has not been produced by the prosecution, even Dy.SP Anil Kumar Katoch, who was   
also a very material witness has also not been produced.  The evidence of Gh.
Mohd Giri, who was recording the statement on the asking of aforesaid Dy.SP Anil
Kumar Katoch, cannot be said to be enough to say that the said statement is true
account of the main occurrence.
        Mr. Gupta, in order to create doubt in the mind of the Court vis-a-vis the
sanctity of the 'dying declaration', submits that it is  either maneuvered one
by the police in its own way or she was tutored by some outer agency to depose
accordingly.  From both the angles, it can be said to be not a pure dying
declaration.  To strengthen his arguments on this aspect, the learned counsel
submits that before the statement of Gita Devi was recorded by the police, her
parents had already contacted her in the hospital.  The father stated that he
had talked to his daughter prior to the recording of her statement by the
police. On the other hand the mother of the deceased altogether demolishes the
case of the prosecution with regard to the manner in which the statement was
recorded.  Even Gh. Mohd Giri had also admitted that the parents and other
relatives were present in the hospital when the statement was being recorded.
From this, the learned counsel develops that the chances of tutoring the
deceased may be by her parents or as a matter of fact by any one could not be
ruled out.
        Mr. Gupta lastly submits that not only the 'dying declaration' is to be
discarded on the basis of aforesaid flaws in it, even the medical evidence on
record also creates doubt in it and  projects a more probable story of receiving
the injuries accidentally by lighting a Stove.  To strengthen this aspect, Mr.
Gupta takes us to the statement of Dr. Sunil Gupta, who noticed that certain
portion of the body, which was spared by burn was; part of back of trunk, parts
of both legs below knees, scalp and perianal area.  From this the learned
counsel submits that possibility of Gita Devi receiving injuries at the time of
lighting of Stove, could not be ruled out.  He submits that the accused is not
supposed to set up a specific plea of defence if he is otherwise able to
demolish the case of the prosecution on inherent flaws crept in it, but he being
a husband is discharging his onus by projecting plausible plea, which gets
support from the prosecution case itself as the evidence on record is suggesting
the theory of accidental burn injuries and creating doubts in its very case.  In
this regard the learned counsel has also read the statement of Mrs. Sharda Devi
(wife of Som Nath-accused), who is a witness to the recovery memo of a stove
from the room.
        On the basis of aforesaid submissions, Mr. Gupta not only prays for
acquittal of accused, Gharu Ram, but asks for dismissal of the appeal filed by
the State against acquittal of two co-accused also.
        Mr. B. S. Salathia, learned Addl. Advocate General, on the other hand,
submits that simply that doctor who had attested the 'dying declaration' is not
produced, that by itself would not be a ground to throw the 'dying declaration'
in its totality when all other attending circumstances are indicative of the
fact that the statement of Gita Devi is a true account of occurrence, which
deserves to be accepted in its entirety.  To strengthen his argument, Mr.
Salathia relies upon a judgment delivered by a Constitution Bench of Apex Court
in case 'Laxman v. State of Maharashtra' AIR 2002 SC 2973.
        Mr. Salathia then submits that may be Dy.SP Anil Kumar Katoch, who was   
officiating as Incharge Police Station, Satwari, has not stepped into the
witness box, this would again not demolish the case of the prosecution for the
reason that he had not recorded the statement of the deceased in his own hand.
It was scribed by PW-Gh. Mohd Giri, who was accompanying him in the hospital. 
It has also come in the statement of PW- Gh. Mohd. Giri that Dy.SP Anil Kumar
Katoch was asking Gita Devi about the occurrence and whatever she was stating,
he had recorded the same.  Therefore, according to Mr. Salathia, there is no
reason to doubt the statement of aforesaid Mohd. Giri.  He then contends that
Som Nath and Shielo Devi (since acquitted) had also played on active role in
this occurrence and there was no reason to disbelieve the 'dying declaration' in
part.  Therefore, the acquittal earned by them deserves to be disturbed and they
may also be convicted alongwith accused Gharu Ram.  
     Mr. Salathia, however, very fairly states that there is no evidence led by
the prosecution with regard to the charge of Section 201 RPC or even in respect
of Section 498-A RPC. 
     Nemo moriturus praesumitur mentire: No one at the time of death is presumed
to tell lie is the philosophy underlying admittance in evidence of dying
declaration.  This is the reason that dying declaration enjoys a sacrosanct
status as a piece of evidence being in the shape of last words coming from the
mouth of the deceased (victim).  On the basis of this principle, in 'Khushal Rao
Vs. State of Bombay' AIR 1958 SC 22, their Lordships of Apex Court held that it
is not a rule of law or even the rule of prudence that 'dying declaration'
cannot be made the sole foundation of conviction.
        What is the evidentiary value of a dying declaration, the law has been
summed up once again in a very recent judgment of Hon'ble Apex Court in case 
'Dayal Singh Vs. State of Maharashtra' 2007 (3) A.I.C.L.R (All India Criminal
Law Reporter) (S.C.) Page 346, wherein their Lordships while referring to
Khushal Rao's case (supra) has observed in para 11 as under:-
"11.    The law regarding the dying declaration and the value which is to be
attached to it has been examined in considerable detail  in State of Karnataka
v. Shariff, (2003) 2 SCC 473: 2003(2) All India Criminal LR (S.C.) 533, by a
Bench of which one of us was a member and paragraphs 18, 19, 20, 22 and 23 of 
the decision are being reproduced below:-
18.     The earliest case in which the law on the point of dying declaration was
considered in detail by this Court in Khushal Rao v. State of Bombay AIR 1958 SC
22.  The Court ruled that it cannot be laid down as an absolute rule of law that
a dying declaration cannot form the sole basis of conviction unless it is
corroborated; each case must be determined on its own facts seeping in view the
circumstances in which the dying declaration was made; it cannot be laid down as
a general proposition that a dying declaration is a weaker kind of evidence than
other pieces of evidence; a dying declaration stands on the same footing as
another piece of evidence and has to be judged in the light of surrounding
circumstances and with reference to the principles governing the weighing of
evidence.  It has been further held that in order to pass the test of
reliability, a dying declaration has to be subjected to a very close scrutiny,
keeping in view the fact that the statement has been made in the absence of the
accused who had no opportunity of testing the veracity of the statement by
cross-examination.  But once the Court has come to the conclusion that the dying
declaration was the truthful version as to the circumstances of the death and
the assailants of the victim, there is no question of further corroboration.
19.     In State of Uttar Pradesh v. Ram Sagar Yadav, (1985) 1 SCC 552 the Court
speaking through Chandrachud, C.J. held as under:
"It is well settled that, as a matter of law, a dying declaration can be acted
upon without corroboration.  See Khushal Rao v. State of Bombay, AIR 1958 SC 22; 
Harbans Singh v. State of Punjab, AIR 1962 SC 439, Gopal Singh v. State of M.P.,
1972 (3) SCC 268.  There is not even a rule of prudence which has hardened into
a rule of law that a dying declaration cannot be acted upon unless it is
corroborated.  The primary effort of the Court has to be to find out whether the
dying declaration is true.  If it is  no question of corroboration arises.  It
is only if the circumstances surrounding the dying declaration  are not clear or
convincing that the Court may, for its assurance, look for corroboration to the
dying declaration." 
20.     In K. Ramachandra Reddy and Anr. v. The Public Prosecutor, (1976) 3 SCC  
618 it was held that a great solemnity and sanctity is attached to the words of
a dying man because a person on the verge of death is not likely to tell lies or
to concoct a case so as to implicate an innocent person yet the Court has to be
on guard against the statement of the deceased being a result of either
tutoring, prompting or a product of his imagination.  It was further held that
the Court must be satisfied that the deceased was in a fit state of mind to make
the statement after the deceased had a clear opportunity to observe and identify
his assailants and that he was making the statement without any influence or
rancour.  Once the Court is satisfied that the dying declaration is true and
voluntary it can be sufficient to found the conviction even without any further
corroboration.  In Pothakamuri  Srinivasulu v. State of A.P., (2002) 6 SCC 399
it has been held that if the deceased made statement to the witnesses and their
testimony is found to be reliable the same is enough to sustain the conviction
of the accused.  In Mafatbhai Nagarbhai Raval  v. State of Gujarat, (1992) 4 SCC
69 it was held that the Doctor who has examined the victim was the most
competent witness to speak about her condition.
22.     The other reason given by the High Court is that the dying declaration was
not in question-answer form.  Very often the deceased is merely asked as to how
the incident took place and the statement is recorded in a narrative form. In
fact such a statement is more natural and gives the version of the incident as
it has been perceived by the victim.  The question whether a dying declaration
which has not been recorded in question answer form can be accepted in evidence
or not has been considered by this Court on several occasions.  In Ram Bihari
Yadav v. State of Bihar and ors., (1998) 4 SCC 517, it was held as follows:
"It cannot be said that unless the dying declaration is in question answer form,
it could not be accepted.  Having regard to the sanctity attached to a dying
declaration as it comes from the mouth of a dying person though, unlike the
principle of English law he need not be under apprehension of death, it should
be in the actual words of the maker of the declaration .  Generally, the dying
declaration ought to be recorded in the form of questions and answers but if
dying declaration is not elaborate but consists of only a few sentences and is
in the actual words of the maker the mere fact that it is not in question-answer
form cannot be a ground against its acceptability or reliability.  The mental
condition of the maker of the declaration, alertness of mind, memory and
understanding  of  what he is saying, are matters which can be observed by any
person.  But to lend assurance to those factors having regard to the importance
of the dying declaration, the certificate of a medically trained person is
insisted upon.."
23.     In Padmaben Shamalbhai Patel v. State of Gujarat, (1991) 1 SCC 744 it was
held that the failure on the part of the medical men to record the statement of
the deceased in question and answer form cannot in any manner affect the
probative value to be attached to their evidence.  This view was reiterated in
State of Rajasthan v. Bhup Ram, (1997) 10 SCC 675 and Jai Prakash and ors. v.
State of Haryana, (1998) 7 SCC 284."
        In the aforesaid judgment, their Lordships had taken into consideration
many aspects vis-`-vis the manner of recording dying declaration and its
evidentiary value, in which the other judgments of Hon'ble Supreme Court were
also taken into account.
     Following the aforesaid judgment of Hon'ble Apex Court, in our view, it can
be summed up that; (1) it is not essential that a dying declaration should be
made only before a Magistrate- Section 32 of the Evidence Act nowhere states
that the dying declaration must be recorded in the presence of Magistrate; (2)
Dying declaration recorded by a police officer in the presence of doctor, who
had given an opinion that the deceased was in a fit state of mind to make the
statement, was held to be credible and reliable  and sufficient to establish the
guilt of the accused; (3) it cannot be laid down as an absolute rule of law that
a dying declaration cannot form the sole basis of conviction unless it is
corroborated; each case must be determined on its own facts keeping in view the
circumstances in which the dying declaration was made; (4) it cannot be laid
down as a general proposition that a dying declaration is a weaker kind of
evidence other than pieces of evidence; a dying declaration stands on the same
footing as another piece of evidence and has to be judged in the light of
surrounding circumstances and with reference to the principles governing the
weighing of evidence; (5) in order to pass the test of reliability, a dying
declaration has to be subjected to a very close scrutiny, keeping in view the
fact that the statement has been made in the absence of the accused who had no 
opportunity of testing the veracity of the statement by cross-examination; (6)
dying declaration can be acted upon without corroboration. It is only if the
circumstances surrounding the dying declaration are not clear or convincing that
the Court may, for its assurance, look for corroboration to the dying
declaration; (7) generally, the dying declaration ought to be recorded in the
form of questions and answers but if a dying declaration is not elaborate but
consists of only a few sentences and is in the actual words of the maker the
mere fact that it is not in question-answer form cannot be a ground against the
acceptability or reliability; and (8) very often the deceased is merely asked as
to how the incident took place and the statement is recorded in a narrative
form.  In fact such a statement is more natural and gives the version of the
incident as it has been perceived by the victim.

                One vital aspect is very clear before us that while examining the
'dying declaration' on which the prosecution asks for the conviction, it becomes
the duty of the Court to ensure that before making the statement the declarant
was in a fit mental condition to make the said statement; it was a voluntary act
of the victim free from any outer pressure because the victim was never
subjected to cross-examination and the statement made becomes admissible piece   
of evidence by virtue of Section 32(1) of Indian Evidence Act, 1872. Apart from
the said statement being admissible, the basic touchstone is that it must pass
the test of reliability.  Once it is held to be reliable then the conviction can
be safely based on it alone as held in case 'Narain Singh and another Vs. State
of Haryana' 2004 (2) Recent Criminal Reports 933 (SC).

        In the case in hand, we are primarily testing the 'dying declaration' on
the touchstone of reliability and in this exercise, we shall be discussing all
the material aspects of the case.
     One very material fact and incidentally skipped the notice of Mr. Gupta is
that the prosecution has not produced any doctor, who had initially examined
Gita Devi in Jammu Medical College on the day of her examination.  In other
words, her MLR has not been proved by the prosecution.  This would have
certainly disclosed atleast one fact to us as to whether the body was smelling
of some kerosene oil or not?  Generally, in the case of burn injuries, where it
appears to the examining/attending doctor that the body is smelling of some
kerosene oil or any product used which is inflammable, the clothes are taken
into possession.  These are the general steps, which every doctor does take as
it is expected of him.  The prosecution evidence in this regard is admittedly
missing on the file.  The investigation starts from 28.09.2000 only when for the
first time Officer Incharge, Police Post, Satwari, went to the hospital and
contacted one Dr. Abdul for getting the fitness certificate of the injured.
This application too is not proved by the prosecution. We do not know as to when
the said application was moved during the entire day of 28.09.2000. The
prosecution then jumps to 29.09.2000, the date when the statement of victim was
recorded.
     As held in Dayal Singh's case (supra) it is not essential that a dying
declaration should be made only before a Magistrate and if recorded by a police
officer in the presence of a doctor who opined the state of mind of injured can
be acted upon.  But this all depends upon the facts of the each case.  Let us
proceed to appreciate the present case in its right perspective in this regard.
The only evidence which is before us is a docket EXPW-GG, in the form of a
request made to one Dr. Kirti Bhushan for obtaining the fitness certificate of
the injured.  Admittedly, Dr. Kirti Bhushan has also not stepped into the
witness box to say as to at what time the said application was moved.  There is
no time indicated even on that application.  This doctor, no doubt, is the
attesting witness to the statement recorded at 8.35 p.m. (as per noting), but
the fact that earlier to that time, whether the injured was in fit state of mind
or not is not made clear.  There is every possibility that the injured was fit
to make a statement even during the day hours of 29.09.2000.  All this could be
clarified by Dr. Kirti Bhushan only, who has been withheld by the prosecution.
As stated above, one other doctor was produced by the prosecution, who was not
aware of any fact. Despite the application moved by the State under Section 540
Cr.P.C. by the prosecution being allowed, aforesaid concerned doctor (Dr. Kirti
Bhushan) was not produced.  Non-examination of this witness does create doubt in
the mind of the Court. In 'Munna Raja Vs. State of Madhya Pardesh' A.I.R. 1976
(3) SCC page 2199, it was held by the Apex Court that Investigating Officer is
naturally interested in the success of the investigation and the practice of the
Investigating Officer himself recording a dying declaration during the course of
an investigation ought not to be encouraged.  Similar view was taken in 'State
of Punjab Vs. Amarjit Singh' A.I.R. 1988 SC page 2013.
     There can be a situation that a police official records the statement of a
victim at a particular time and within no time the injured dies.  In that
situation the service of a Magistrate cannot be requisitioned.  It depends upon
the facts of each case. In the case in hand, the record reveals that there was
sufficient time with the police to have the services of any Magistrate may be
Judicial or Executive.  The injured patient was in the hospital on 28.09.2000
may be initially unfit to make the statement.  The statement is not recorded on
28.09.2000 throughout the day.  It is only in the evening of 29.09.2000 that the
SHO (Dy.SP Anil Kumar Katoch) goes to the hospital for that purpose that too in
the late hours.  Had the police taken the pains to call some Magistrate for
recording the statement of the victim, there would have been no doubt in the
minds of the Court about the sanctity of the 'dying declaration'.  In our view,
this was one of the safest course, which the prosecution could very comfortably
adopt atleast in this case.  It could be done even subsequently also as the
victim died on 02.10.2000.
        We are not doubting the 'dying declaration' solely on the basis of
aforesaid flaws highlighted by us, even non-examination of Dy.SP Anil Kumar
Katoch, who was officiating as SHO of Police Station Satwari and played an
important role in this case, goes to the root of the case.  He is the person who
was asking all relevant questions to Gita Devi (since deceased) and she was
responding to him.  No doubt, PW ASI Gh. Mohd Giri has stated that whatever Gita
Devi was stating to Dy.SP Anil Kumar Katoch, he was recording the same, but in
our considered view, the best witness was Dy.SP Anil Kumar Katoch only in this
regard, who admittedly has not been produced by the prosecution. Therefore, an
adverse inference has to be drawn by us about the sanctity of 'dying
declaration'.
        We are doubting the 'dying declaration' yet from another angle.  The
evidence before us is that the parents of the deceased were present in the
hospital before statement of Gita Devi was recorded.  Father of the deceased has
gone to the extent of saying that it was around noon time when her daughter
narrated the occurrence to him and nobody else was around her at that time.  He
disclosed the time of reaching the hospital about 10 a.m.  The statement of
deceased was recorded by the police at 8.35 p.m.  This shows that the father was
talking to his daughter prior to reaching of the police in the hospital and at
the same time she was able to speak also.  May be according to him, his daughter
was in a semi conscious condition, the fact remains that he had a talk with his
daughter. Therefore, possibility of tutoring her by outer source before her
statement was recorded by the police can not be ruled out.  To what extent the
deceased could be tutored is not the subject matter of appreciation.  The test
of care and caution is that there should not be any tutoring at all from any
outer agency.  Even the slightest doubt in this regard should not creep in the
mind of the Court. Whereas in our view, it smacks of tutoring.
        On the other hand, the evidence of mother of the deceased, creates a lot
of doubt in the manner of recording of the statement.  She stated that when the
statement of her daughter (since deceased) was being recorded, the doctor was
not there.  She went to the extent in saying that the police official recorded
the statement on his own.  This piece of evidence cannot be just ignored by this
Court while arriving at just conclusion of the case. After all the entire
controversy revolves round the 'dying declaration' only.
        We would also like to comment upon the substantive evidence of the parents
of the deceased with regard to dowry demand, which has been made the basis of 
this occurrence.  In our view, it has some effect for the reason that even in
the statement of the deceased, dowry demand only is cause.  When the parents of 
the deceased, from whom the prosecution is begging for corroboration, stepped
into witness box, they gave a complete go-bye to the allegation of dowry demand.
Both these witnesses were very categoric in saying that their daughter was never
harassed on account of any dowry, rather the husband and wife were staying
happily.  Mother of the deceased went to the extent of saying that she did not
know as to what was the cause of this occurrence.  If it is so, then we do not
feel hesitant in observing that some outer force had certainly played some role
in putting words in the mouth of Gita Devi since deceased.  In other words, it
can be said that the 'dying declaration' is not put forth before this Court in
its purest form, which is the requirement of law.  Rather it appears to be
adulterated one.  The evidence of parents of the deceased instead of
corroborating the 'dying declaration', in our considered view, demolishes it to
a great extent.  It may be observed here that even the trial Court on the basis
of this piece of evidence has acquitted the brother-in-law and mother-in-law.
        We see the 'dying declaration' with an eye of suspicion vis-`-vis the
medical evidence also.  As stated above, the initial MLR of the victim is not
before us.  The treatment chart is also not placed on record.  The only evidence
is the statement of Dr. Sunil Gupta, who conducted the postmortem.  In his
evidence, he, on the basis of postmortem report, stated that the parts spared
from the burn injuries were as under:-
"1.     part of back of trunk;
2. parts of both legs below knee;
3. scalp and perianal area."

        Another important fact on the file is taking into possession the stove by
the investigating agency.  PW-Sharda Devi is the attesting witness to that
effect.  Prosecution does rely upon this witness. The case as set up in 'dying
declaration' is that accused-Gharu Ram had brought a container of kerosene oil
and poured it on the deceased.  If this was the very case set up by the
prosecution, then why the stove was taken into possession creates some doubt in
our mind.  Mother of the deceased, Smt. Bachno Devi, has also stated in her
evidence that she got the information that her daughter received burn injuries
from stove.  Even a bunch of hair removed from the back scalp of the head of the
deceased was also taken.  However, no kerosene oil residues were detected in
that.  This fact we find from the F.S.L. report on the trial Court file,
(admittedly not proved during trial).  We do not depend upon it and are just
referring to it as it came to our notice, while perusing the record.    The
aforesaid facts and the parts of the body left as unburnt take us to draw an
inference that the occurrence is not taken place in the manner it is depicted in
the initial statement of Gita Devi (since deceased), which has been made the
basis of conviction.
     All the aforesaid inherent weaknesses, when taken collectively make the
case of the prosecution doubtful about the credibility to be attached to the
statement (Dying Declaration) of the victim-Gita Devi.
        To be fair to Mr. Salathia, we may observe here that the judgment (supra)
cited by him does not lend any advantage to his case. Rather certain
observations strengthen our view.
        Appreciating the prosecution case on all angles, in our considered view,
it would not be safe at all to rely upon the Dying Declaration of Gita Devi for
the purpose of maintaining the conviction of any of the accused as the same does
not stand the touchstone of reliability.  The net result is that it has to be
rejected in its entirety.
        Consequently, we hereby allow Cr. Appeal No.07/2004 filed by accused Gharu 
Ram and set aside the impugned judgment of conviction and sentence.  He is 
acquitted of the charge and shall be released forthwith, if not required in any
other case.
        Resultantly, Criminal Acquittal Appeal No.46/2004 filed by the State
against all the three aforesaid accused also stands dismissed.
        Confirmation No.06 /2004 is answered, accordingly.

