

IN THE HIGH COURT OF JAMMU AND KASHMIR AT JAMMU             
Cr Appeal no. 15-A of 2002
Baldev Raj and Ors 
petitioner
State
respondent 
!Mr. V. R. Wazir, Advocate
^Mr. S.C.Gupta, AAG  

MR. JUSTICE J. P. SINGH, JUDGE    
Date: 03/11/2008 
:Judgment :
_______________________________________________________________________________             
Appellants have been convicted by learned Ist
Additional Sessions Judge, Jammu under Sections 498-A  
and 306 RPC for treating Ms. Garu Devi with cruelty and
abetting her suicide, and sentenced to undergo
imprisonment for three years and a fine of Rupees Ten
thousand and in default thereof to simple imprisonment for
four months, under Section 306 RPC, besides imprisonment  
of one year and fine of Rupees Ten thousand and in default
of payment of fine to simple imprisonment for four months
under Section 498-A RPC vide his judgment and order of
November 28, 2002. 
Calling in question their conviction and sentence, the
husband, father-in-law and mother-in-law of Garu Devi
deceased, have approached this Court by this appeal.
Mr. V. R. Wazir, Learned counsel for the appellants,
submits that the learned Ist Additional Sessions Judge,
Jammu, the trial court, had erred in relying upon Garu
Devi's Dying Declaration which, in view of divergence in the
statements of the Investigating Police Officer, who had
recorded the Dying Declaration and PW-Dr. Satinder Dhar,
who had certified her fitness to make the statement, was
un-worthy of credence additionally because the Investigating
Police Officer had not indicated in the Dying Declaration
that it was the translated version of the statement of the
deceased which she is stated to have made in Dogri language 
and recording conviction and sentence against the
appellants. Learned counsel submitted that the facts
disclosed by the prosecution and projected during the trial
would not, even otherwise, make out any case, on the basis
whereof, the appellants' conviction under Sections 498-A/
306 RPC may be justified.
Learned counsel places reliance on Gananath Pattnaik 
v. State of Orissa, reported as ( 2002 ) 2 SCC 619 and Gopal
Dass versus State of Jammu and Kashmir, reported as 2008  
(2) JKJ 153 [HC] to support his submissions.
Per contra, Mr. S.C.Gupta, learned Additional
Advocate General submitted that although there was
discrepancy regarding the time when the statement of Garu
Devi is stated to have been recorded, in the statements of the
Investigating Police Officer and PW-Dr. Satinder Dhar, yet
the evidence on record was sufficient enough to uphold
appellants' conviction and sentence under Sections
306/498-A RPC.  
I have considered the submissions of learned counsel
for the parties and gone through the evidence on record.
FACTS:  
Prosecution has founded its case on the statement of
Garu Devi, which is stated to have been recorded by PWDurga 
Dass, the Investigating Police Officer, on July 08,
1998, in Government Medical College Hospital, Jammu after 
having obtained certificate from PW- Satinder Dhar, the
doctor on duty, about the fitness of Garu Devi to make
statement.
Garu Devi says in her statement that she was married
to appellant-Balev Raj about six years ago and had given
birth to one female child who was four years old and a male
child who was 8/9 months of age. Right from the very
beginning, her husband and parents-in-law had been
quarrelling with her and would accuse her of having brought
less dowry. She had not, however, told anyone about all this
in her parental house including her surviving Aunt. She had
been beaten by her husband and father-in-law in the evening
and fed up with the daily quarrels in the family, she had put
herself on fire by sprinkling Kerosene at about10.30 p.m on
July 08, 1998. While extinguishing the fire, her husband too
had burnt his hands and her father-in-law had also got
burns when she had struck against the Cot where he was 
sleeping. She had been brought to the Hospital for treatment
by her husband and parents-in-law.
In order to prove its case, the prosecution had
examined (1) PW-Dr. Satinder Dhar, who, on being 
requested by the Investigating Police Officer, had examined
Garu Devi and found her fit to make statement. PW-Durga 
Dass who had recorded Garu Devi's statement in presence of 
PW-Dr. Satinder Dhar who had attested it, (2) PW-Bishan 
Dass, the Uncle of the deceased, who had stated that he had
seen the deceased last time when she had visited his place
and wanted to tell him something about the appellant. Her
husband, Baldev Raj would not, however, permit her to stay
with him because he was apprehending that she may not  
open up her mind to him, (3) PW-Tarseem Lal, the brother of
the deceased, who had deposed that his sister was 
comfortable with her husband for about three years of their
marriage, whereafter the appellants had started troubling
her. This according to him was because of his refusal to
marry Rita Devi, appellant Gian Chand's daughter.
Appellant would not come to their place and would neither
permit the deceased to visit them. He had, however, assured
her sister on his visit to her in the year 1998 that he would
give her more dowry on Namkaran Ceremony of her son. He  
had invited the appellants to his place at the betrothal
ceremony of her second sister but they had not obliged him,
and her sister alone had come to attend the ceremony. He
had not thereafter met her sister, (4) PW-Kasturi Lal,
another Uncle of the deceased, who had stated that Garu
Devi had told him on his visit to her in the Hospital that her
parents-in-law and husband had been treating her with
cruelty and had beaten her because of which she had burnt
herself by pouring Kerosene on her body. Baldev Raj
appellant wanted to give her sister in marriage to the
brother of the deceased, on whose refusal the appellants had
started treating the deceased with cruelty, (5) PW-Swaran
singh has stated that by that time he had reached Hospital,
Garu Devi had already expired, (6) PW-Durga Dass, who is 
the Investigating Police Officer of the case had stated that
during his posting in Police Station, Akhnoor, he had
received a wireless message from Government Medical  
College, Jammu on July 08, 1998 that Garu Devi had been 
admitted in Hospital in a burnt condition. He was directed
by the Station House Officer of the Police Station to record
her statement. He, accordingly, requested PW-Satinder Dhar 
to certify as to whether or not Garu Devi was fit to make
statement and after getting the fitness certificate from the
doctor on duty, he had recorded EXPWDD/1, on the basis  
whereof, FIR no. 124/1998 had been registered in the Police
Station. According to him, Garu Devi had made her
statement to him in presence of the doctor in Dogri language
which had been transcribed by him in Urdu language. He
had recorded the statement of Garu Devi around 2.00 p.m on
July 08, 1998 and had reached Police Station around 6.00
p.m. He had admitted in his statement that he had prepared
memos of Injury forms of appellants-Baldev Raj and Gian
Chand by antedating them on the request of the Medical
Officer, (7) PW-Dr. R. K. Gupta, who had examined deceased 
Garu Devi on July 25, 1998 had stated that he was posted as
Medical Officer Sub-Divisional Hospital, Akhnoor and had
found burn injuries on her body. She had been referred by
him to Government Medical College, Jammu for  
hospitalization and further management. He had examined 
appellants-Gian Chand and Baldev Raj on the same day  
noticing three burn injuries on Gian Chand and five on
appellant Baldev Raj And (8) PW-Dr. Bhupesh Khajuria,
who had stated about his conducting the post-mortem 
examination of Garu Devi on July 09, 1998. He had found
94% of her body to have been burnt.
When examined under Section 342 of the Code of  
Criminal Procedure, the appellants had denied treating
Garu Devi with cruelty and abetting her suicide. They had
produced DWs-Godawari Devi and Shanti Devi besides Sita  
Ram and Naseeboo Ram as their witnesses to support their  
plea of innocence.
I would now examine the submissions made at the Bar  
to find out as to whether or not the trial Court was justified
in holding the appellants guilty of offences punishable under
Sections 306/498-A RPC and punishing them accordingly.  
Before examining the other evidence on records, regard
needs to be had to the discrepancy which the appellants'
counsel had indicated in the statements of PW-Durga Dass 
and PW-Dr. Satinder Dhar regarding the time when EXPW   
DD/1, the Dying Declaration had been recorded in the
hospital.
According to PW-Durga Dass, he had recorded EXPW    
DD/1 around 2 p.m of 8th July, 1998 after obtaining
certificate from PW-Dr. Satinder Dhar and had reached his
Police Station at Akhnoor, which is about 30 Kms from
Government Medical College Hospital, Jammu, by 6 p.m.  
Dr. Satinder Dhar, on the other hand, is categoric in stating
that he had issued fitness certificate of Garu Devi to PWDurga
Dass at 7.45 p.m on 8th July, 1998. EXPW-SD is the 
certificate which PW-Satinder Dhar had issued to PW-Durga 
Dass. This reads as under:-
"She is fit for statement.
Sd/-
Dr. Satinder Dhar
7.45 p.m 
8/7/98"
Dr. Satinder Dhar's statement is supported by the
certificate he had given on 08.07.1998 and in that view of the
matter it may be difficult to accept PW-Durga Dass's
statement that he had recorded Garu Devi's Dying
Declaration around 2 p.m on 08.07.1998 in the absence of
any explanation by the prosecution and the learned
Additional Advocate General to reconcile this major
contradiction in the statements of the two prosecution
witnesses.
Yet another circumstance which raises doubt in
accepting EXPW DD/1 as the true reflection of the statement
which the deceased is stated to have made to PW-Durga  
Dass is PW-Durga Dass's admission that EXPW DD/1 was     
the translated version of the statement of Garu Devi which
she had made in Dogri Language. There is no certificate on
EXPW DD/1 certifying the statement to be the true
translation of Garu Devi's statement in Dogri. EXPW-DD/1
does not even contain any such endorsement on the basis 
whereof it may be said that the translated version of the
statement had been read over and explained to Garu Devi in
Dogri Language and she had accepted it to be her correct
statement.
That apart, Garu Devi, as stated by PW-Dr. Satinder
Dhar was in pain when she had been examined by PWDurga    
Dass. The expressions used and the manner in which  
the translated version of Garu Devi's statement appears in
EXPWDD/1 does not inspire confidence as such a coherent  
and consistent statement, may not be expected from a person 
who had burnt 94% of her body area and was in pain at the
time of making statement. The statement does not contain
even a single word of the Dogri language in which the
statement is stated to have been made by the deceased. 
Above noticed discrepancies in recording EXPWDD/1  
would thus put the Court on guard as this statement, by
itself, may not be sufficient to uphold the conviction of the
appellants.
I would, therefore, proceed to find out as to whether
the prosecution had produced any other evidence in the trial
Court which may justify appellants' conviction.
The other evidence which the prosecution had
produced is all hearsay evidence as none of the prosecution
witnesses had witnessed appellants' alleged cruel treatment
with the deceased. None of these witnesses had ever seen 
any of the appellants either raising demand of dowry or
beating or otherwise maltreating and taunting the deceased
of having brought dowry which had absolutely no value. The
prosecution story that right from the very beginning of the
deceased's marriage, she had been accused of having brought 
less dowry and the appellants had been taunting and
beating her, is not supported by any evidence on records. On
the other hand, statement of PW-Terseem Lal, the real
brother of the deceased, that the deceased had been living
comfortably with her husband for three years of their
marriage and the appellants had started troubling her when
he had refused to oblige the appellants to accept Rita Devi,
appellant Gian Chand's daughter, in marriage, demolishes
the very basis of the prosecution story that the appellants
had been maltreating the deceased right from the very
beginning and fed up with the daily quarrels in the family,
she had committed suicide for which the appellants were
responsible. Statement of Tarseem Lal that the appellants
had started troubling her sister when he had refused to
marry appellant Gian Chand's daughter gets further support
from another prosecution witness Kasturi Lal who had
stated that the appellants had started troubling the
deceased when Kasturi Lal had refused to marry Gian 
Chand's daughter Rita Devi.
The version given by PW-Tarseem Lal and Kasturi Lal
that the deceased had been putting up comfortably with her
husband for three years of their marriage and the trouble in
the family had started only on refusal of PW-Tarseem Lal to
marry appellant Gian Chand's daughter, is not reflected in
EXPW-DD/1 and as against this, a contrary version appears 
in the Dying Declaration that the appellants had been
maltreating the deceased and quarrelling with her right
from the very beginning of the marriage because of which
she had committed suicide. This contradiction in the version
projected in the Dying Declaration and that of the
aforementioned two witnesses, too discredits the prosecution
story.
Another blow which the prosecution story received
from the statement of the brother of the deceased is his
reported silence in not immediately reporting to the police
that the appellants were responsible for the suicide of the
deceased. This silence, according to the witness, was because
of his being in two minds as to whether or not should he
report the matter to the police despite the fact that his sister
with 94% burns stood admitted in the hospital.
All these factors, taken together indicate that the
Investigating Police Officer had not properly investigated
the occurrence so as to elicit truth and find out the real
cause for which Garu Devi had taken the extreme step of
ending her life. The Investigating Police Officer does not
appear to have taken requisite steps in this direction. He
had failed to take necessary coercive measures to record the
statements of those persons belonging to the appellants'
village who had the occasion to see the conduct of the
appellants vis-`-vis the deceased to find out as to whether or
not the deceased had been treated by the appellants with
cruelty and what was the real cause of her committing
suicide.
Thus in the absence of any evidence on records proving
that the appellants had treated deceased Garu Devi with
cruelty, appellants' conviction by the learned Ist Additional
Sessions Judge, Jammu cannot be justified. 
Looked from a purely legal angle, the prosecution case
against the appellants may not even otherwise sustain itself
because the evidence the prosecution had led in the case was
inadmissible insofar as it pertained to charge under Section
498-A RPC. This is so because none of the prosecution 
witnesses had actually seen the appellants either beating
the deceased or maltreating or taunting her of not bringing
sufficient dowry and their version about the maltreatment of
the deceased was based on what had been allegedly conveyed   
to them by the deceased. The statement of the deceased 
appearing in EXPW-DD/1 that she had been maltreated and  
troubled by the appellants for not bringing enough dowry
would be inadmissible in evidence, as Section 32 of the
Evidence Act would not make such statement admissible as  
it did not relate to the cause of her death. I am supported in
taking this view by Gananath Pattnaik versus State of
Orissa, reported as 2002(2) SCC, 619, where Hon'ble
Supreme Court of India had held as follows:-
"Learned Counsel for the appellant then
submitted that the findings returned by the
trial court regarding the cruelty within the
meaning of Section 498-A of the Indian
Penal Code are not based on any legal
evidence.
To hold that the accused had once
given pushes to the deceased which drove 
her to commit suicide is based upon the
alleged testimony of PW 4 who is the mother
of the deceased. We have minutely read the
statement of the aforesaid witness and do
not find any mention of her having seen the
accused pushing the deceased which, in 
turn, could be held to be "cruelty" driving
her to commit suicide.
Another circumstance of cruelty is with
respect to taking away of the child from the
deceased. To arrive at such a conclusion,
the trial court has referred to the statement
of PW 5, who is the sister of the deceased.
In her deposition recorded in the court on
4-5-1990 PW 5 had stated: 
"Whenever I had gone to my sister, all
the times she was complaining that she is
not well treated by her husband and in-laws
for non-fulfillment of balance dowry amount
of a scooter and a two-in-one."
and added: 
"On 3-6-1987 for the last time I had
been to the house of the deceased i.e. to her
separate residence. Sworna, Snigdha, Sima 
Apa, Baby Apa accompanied me to her   
house on that day. At that time the
deceased complained before us as usual 
and added to that she said that she is being
assaulted by the accused now-a-days. She  
further complained before us that the
accused is taking away the child from her,
and that her mother-in-law has come and
some conspiracy is going against her (the
deceased). She further told that 'mate au
banchei debenahin'."
Such a statement appears to have been 
taken on record with the aid of Section 32 of
the Indian Evidence Act at a time when the
appellant was being tried for the offence
under Section 304-B and such statement  
was admissible under clause (1) of the said
section as it related to the cause of death of
the deceased and the circumstances of 
the transaction which resulted in her death.
Such a statement is not admissible in
evidence for the offence punishable
under Section 498-A of the Indian Penal
Code and has to be termed as being only 
a hearsay evidence. Section 32 is an
exception to the hearsay rule and deals with
the statements or declarations by a person,
since dead, relating to the cause of his or
her death or the circumstances leading to
such death. If a statement which otherwise
is covered by the hearsay rule does not fall
within the exceptions of Section 32 of the
Evidence Act, the same cannot be relied
upon for finding the guilt of the accused."
The trial Court has, therefore, erred in holding the
appellants guilty under Section 498-A RPC on the basis of
hearsay evidence.
Trial Court's finding that appellants were guilty under
Section 306 RPC too is not even otherwise sustainable in the
absence of any evidence produced by the prosecution to prove
the ingredients of Section 107 RPC, for it is only when
ingredients of Section 107 RPC are held proved against an
accused that he may be held to be an abettor for commission
of any other offence. In order to succeed in the prosecution of
an offence under Section 306 RPC, the prosecution is
required to prove all the ingredients of Section 107 RPC
against the offender(s). In the absence of any such proof,
charge under Section 306 RPC may not be sustained. I am  
supported in taking this view by Bhagwan Dass versus
Kartar Singh and others, reported as AIR 2007 SC, 2045
where their Lordships of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India
had held as follows:-
"The only allegation against the appellant
was that they harassed the deceased 
Shobha because she did not bring 
adequate dowry. Hence, it is submitted by
the learned counsel for the appellant that
this amounted to abetment to suicide and
hence was covered under Section 306  
RPC, read with S. 107.
The word "abetment" has been  
defined in Section 107 IPC as follows:
"Abetment of a thing - A person
abets the doing of a thing, who
First - Instigates any person to do
that thing; or
Secondly - Engages with one or 
more other person or persons in any
conspiracy for the doing of that thing, if an
act or illegal omission takes place in
pursuance of that conspiracy, and in order
to the doing of that thing; or
Thirdly - Intentionally aids, by any
act or illegal omission, the doing of that
thing.
Explanation 1. A person who, by
willful misrepresentation, or by willful
concealment of a material fact which he is
bound to disclose, voluntarily causes or
procures, or attempts to cause or procure,
a thing to be done, is said to instigate the
doing of that thing.
Explanation 2. Whoever, either prior
to or at the time of the commission of an
act, does anything in order to facilitate the
commission of the act, and thereby
facilitates the commission thereof, is said
to aid the doing of the act."
Learned counsel for the appellant
has relied on the decision of this Court in
Brij Lal v. Prem Chand & Anr. AIR 1989
SC 1661. In that case it was held that:
"Where there was overwhelming  
evidence that the accused had made the 
life of his wife intolerable by constantly
demanding money and made it clear to  
her that if she wanted to die, she may do
so on very same day and give him relief
forthwith, thereby spurring her and
goading her to commit suicide, the case
would squarely fall under the first
category of abetment under Section 107."
On the other hand, learned counsel
for the respondents relied on the decisions
referred to in the impugned judgment.
Thus in Netai Dutta v. State of West
Bengal JT 2005(3) SC 46, where a suicide
note was involved, this Court came to the
conclusion that in the suicide note there
was no reference to any act or incident
whereby the appellant was alleged to have
committed any willful act or omission or
intentionally aided or instigated the
deceased to have committing suicide.
Hence, it was held that there was no
abetment to suicide.
Similarly, in Mahendra Singh & Anr.
v. State of M.P. 1995 Supp. (3) SCC 731, it
was observed by this Court that it is
common knowledge that the words uttered  
in a quarrel or in the spur of the moment
or in anger cannot be treated as
constituting mens rea. In that case the
appellant said to the deceased "to go and
die". As a result of such utterance, the
deceased went and committed suicide.  
However, the Supreme Court observed  
that no offence under Section 306 IPC
read with Section 107 IPC was made out 
because there was no element of mens  
rea.
In Randhir Singh & Anr. v. State of
Punjab 2004 (13) SCC 129, it was 
observed that "more active role which can
be described as instigating or aiding the
doing of a thing is required before a
person can be said to be abetting the
commission of offence under Section 306 
IPC."
In the same decision, it was
observed following the decision in State of
West Bengal v. Orilal Jaiswal 1994(1) SCC
73 that:
"the courts should be extremely
careful in assessing the facts and
circumstances of each case and the 
evidence adduced in the trial for the
purpose of finding whether the cruelty
meted out to the victim had in fact
induced her to end the life by committing
suicide. If it transpires to the court that a
victim committing suicide was
hypersensitive to ordinary petulance,
discord and differences in domestic life
quite common to the society to which the
victim belonged and such petulance,
discord and differences were not expected
to induce a similarly circumstanced
individual in a given society to commit
suicide, the conscience of the court should
not be satisfied for basing a finding that
the accused charged of abetting the
offence of suicide should be found guilty."
In our opinion the view taken by the
High Court is correct. It often happens
that there are disputes and discords in the
matrimonial home and a wife is often
harassed by the husband or her in-laws.
This, however, in our opinion would not by
itself and without something more attract
Section 306 IPC read with Section 107
IPC.
However, in our opinion mere
harassment of wife by husband due to 
differences per se does not attract Section
306 read with Section 107 IPC, if the wife
commits suicide. Hence, we agree with the 
view taken by the High Court. We,
however, make it clear that if the suicide
was due to demand of dowry soon before 
her death then Section 304B IPC may be  
attracted, whether it is a case of homicide
or suicide. Vide Kans Raj v. State of
Punjab & Ors. 2000(5) SCC 207, Satvir 
Singh & Ors. v. State of Punjab & Anr.
2001 (8) SCC 633, Smt. Shanti & Anr. v.
State of Haryana AIR 1991 SC 1261. 
In the present case, since no charge
under Section 304 B has been framed, 
obviously the accused cannot be convicted
under that provision."
In the absence of any admissible and reliable evidence
on records in proof of the prosecution story, the findings of
learned Sessions Judge that he was satisfied from the
evidence tendered by the prosecution that the appellantsaccused
had been intermittently maltreating the deceased
demanding more dowry and they had compelled the   
deceased to commit suicide cannot be justified.
The judgment and order of learned Ist Additional
Sessions Judge, Jammu dated 28th November, 2002    
convicting the appellants under Sections 306/498-A RPC and 
sentencing them to imprisonment and fine as mentioned at 
the threshold, is, accordingly, set aside.
This appeal, therefore, succeeds and is, accordingly,
allowed acquitting the appellants of charges under Sections
306/498-A RPC. The police challan against the appellants
shall accordingly stands dismissed.
(J. P. Singh)
Judge 
JAMMU:  
03.11.2008 

