

HIGH COURT OF JAMMU AND KASHMIR AT JAMMU             
HC(W) no. 40 of 2008 
Sourav Gupta 
Petiotioner
State and others.
Respondent  
!Mr. Satinder Gupta, Advocate.
^Mr. V. K. Chopra, AAG. 

MR. JUSTICE J.P.SINGH, JUDGE     
Date : 04/02/2009
: J U D G M E N T :

Sourav Gupta has filed this petition through his father Bansi Lal
Gupta, questioning his preventive detention, ordered by District
Magistrate Samba vide detention order no. 04-PSA of 2008 dated 
02.05.2008, mainly on two grounds viz:-
(1) Copies of the FIR's relied upon by the Detaining
Authority had not been supplied to the detenue thereby
depriving him of his Constitutional right to make an
effective representation against his detention; And
(2) unawareness of the District Magistrate about
petitioner's arrest in FIR no. 91 of 2008 registered at
Police Station Samba under sections 4/25, 3/25 Arms Act 
2
and Section 149 RPC, demonstrates non-application of 
mind.
District Magistrate Samba has not controverted the pleas set up
in the petition regarding petitioner's arrest in FIR no. 91/2008 and of
non-supply of the copies of the FIR's to him, which had been relied
upon by the Detaining authority while directing his detention.
I have considered the submissions of learned counsel for the
parties and perused the detention records which were made available
at the time of consideration of this petition, by the learned State
counsel.
Perusal of the grounds of detention does not indicate District
Magistrate's awareness about petitioner's being in police custody at
the time when the detention order had been passed by him, although
the police dossier did indicate about the arrest of the petitioner in FIR
no. 91 of 2008. Copies of the FIR's too do not appear to have been
supplied to the detenue because the detention records do not contain
any such document or entry, on the basis whereof it may be said that
copies of the FIR's, relied upon by the Detaining authority, had been
supplied to the detenue.
Although Section 8 of the Jammu and Kashmir Public Safety 
Act, 1978, does not contemplate any impediment on District
Magistrate's power to put a person, who is already in custody, under
preventive detention, but all that is required to be done by the District
3
Magistrate in such cases is to record his satisfaction that there was
likelihood of such person's release on bail and when so released, he
was likely to indulge in activities prejudicial either to the security of
the State or to maintenance of public order or such other activities for
which his preventive detention may be permissible under the
provisions of Public Safety Act, 1978. Such satisfaction is required to
be recorded on the basis of some material justifying such satisfaction.
The detention records, however, do not contain any such
material, on the basis whereof it may be said that there was any
likelihood of petitioner's release on bail and further likelihood of his
indulging in activities prejudicial to the maintenance of public order
or security of the State etc.
The District Magistrate has not recorded any such satisfaction
about petitioner's likelihood of release from police custody or his
indulging in activities for which he may be detained under the Public
Safety Act.
The detention order, in the absence of any such satisfaction,
therefore, becomes unsustainable.
That apart, the material relied upon by the District Magistrate,
on the basis whereof he had contemplated petitioner's detention,
which includes FIR nos. 30/2008 and 91/2008 registered at Police
Station Samba, having not been supplied to the detenue along with the
grounds of detention, deprives him of his right to make effective
4
representation to the government against his detention. This is so
because supplying of grounds of detention sans material which had
weighed with the detaining authority in directing petitioner's
detention, cannot be said to be sufficient compliance to the provisions
of Article 22(5) of the Constitution of India.
In view of the above discussion, petitioner's detention deserves
to be quashed.
Allowing this petition, petitioner's detention ordered by District
Magistrate Samba vide order no. 04-PSA of 2008 dated 02.05.2008 
is, accordingly, quashed and a direction is issued to the respondents to
release him from preventive custody forthwith, if not required in any
other case.
Records to be returned to the State Counsel.
(J. P. Singh)
Judge 
JAMMU   
04 .02.2009
Anil Raina, Secy



HIGH COURT OF JAMMU AND KASHMIR AT JAMMU             
CRev No. 58 of 2008 
#Ratno Devi 
Petiotioner
$Bharat Singh & anr.
Respondent  
!Mr. V.R.Wazir, Advocate.
^Mr. K.J.Singh, Advocate.
*
MR. JUSTICE J.P.SINGH, JUDGE     
%Date : 04/02/2009 
: J U D G M E N T :

Rajinder Singh, a State Government employee, died in an
automobile accident. His wife, Ratno Devi was engaged on
compassionate grounds in government service, under SRO 43 of 1994.  
A family settlement is stated to have been reached at between
Ratno Devi and her parents-in-law.
In terms of the settlement, Ratno Devi had to relinquish her right
to receive compensation payable for the death of her husband in the
motor vehicular accident, in favour of her parents-in-law. Her parentsin-
law had agreed to pay her an amount of Rs. 20,000/- in lieu of her
dowry and ornaments. That apart they had conceded her right to
government service in place of her husband.
2
Alleging violation of the settlement-Agreement, the parents of the
deceased filed a suit against Ratno Devi seeking declaration besides
enforcement of the terms of the agreement, in the Court of Munsiff,
Ramban.  
Saying that her parents-in-law had been cruel to her after the death
of her husband, who had, besides turning her out of the house, deprived
her of the dowry valuing more than Rs. 60,000/-, Ratno Devi had
controverted respondents' plaint questioning inter alia the legality and
valid execution of the agreement which had been relied upon by her
parents-in-law.
An application under Section 151 of the Code of Civil Procedure
was filed by her parents-in-law seeking issuance of interim directions
against Ratno Devi, during the pendency of the suit.
Allowing the application, learned Munisff, Ramban has, vide his
order of March 07, 2008 directed payment of half of Ratno Devi's
monthly salary to the respondents.
Aggrieved by, and seeking setting aside of the impugned order,
Ratno Devi petitioner has invoked this Court's Revisional jurisdiction
through this Revision Petition.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties and considered their
submissions. 
Perusal of learned Munsiff's order indicates that he has virtually
re-written the provisions of SRO 43 of 1994, providing right of
employment to the parents of the deceased employee, as well. 
3
He, in my opinion, has thus acted beyond his jurisdiction in
entering into legislative arena, which power is not vested in the courts.
Making of laws is the exclusive domain of the legislature. Courts
have absolutely no role to play in this field, for the jurisdiction it
possesses is only of the true and correct interpretation of the laws framed
in exercise of legislative power. Power of interpretation of laws does not
contemplate legislation of laws as such. The courts are, therefore,
required to be within the bounds of their jurisdiction.
The State Government had not, in its wisdom, considered it fit and
appropriate to allow benefit of compassionate appointment, in the event
of the death of a serving employee, to his parents. In this view of the
matter, learned Munsiff had, therefore, absolutely no jurisdiction to
observe that parents of the deceased were required to be included as
beneficiaries under the SRO, particularly when it was not seized of any
such dispute in the respondents' suit.
Inherent powers of the courts to make such orders as may be
necessary for the ends of justice or to prevent abuse of the process of
court which section 151 of the Code of Civil Procedure saves, pertains
only to such matters which the courts have the jurisdiction to entertain
and adjudicate upon. No court has the inherent power to invest itself
with jurisdiction, not conferred on it, by law. Section 151 of the Code of
Civil Procedure, not being a substantive provision, may not thus confer
any right on a litigant to get any relief of any kind whatsoever. It is a
4
mere procedural provision which enables a party to have proceedings, in
a pending lis, conducted in a manner consistent with justice and equity.
That apart, learned Munsiff has erred in expressing his views
accepting respondents' case without there being any prima facie
evidence to support such conclusion. As the legality and the valid
execution of the agreement relied upon by the respondents had yet to be
gone into, on the basis of the evidence of the parties, so learned Munsiff
was not right in observing that respondents had fallen prey to the tricks
of the petitioner. The defence projected by the petitioner in her written
statement appears to have escaped learned Munsiff's notice as no
reference thereto has been made by him while passing the impugned 
order.
The course adopted by learned Munsiff is thus unwarranted
besides being unjustified. Petitioner's right to salary which she has
earned pursuant to her appointment under SRO 43 of 1994, cannot be 
curtailed or for that matter shared with the respondents who have
absolutely no right on the earnings of the petitioner.
Order passed by learned Munsiff is thus without jurisdiction and
unjustified. It is, therefore, liable to be set aside.
Allowing this petition, learned Munsiff, Ramban's order of March
07, 2008 is, accordingly, set aside.
(J. P. Singh)
Judge 
Jammu  
04.02.2009 
Tilak, Secy.
