

HIGH COURT OF JAMMU AND KASHMIR AT JAMMU.            
Criminal Revision No. 78 OF 2004 
Mohd. Din 
Petitioners
Shabnam Akhtar  
Respondent  
!Mr.V.R. Wazir, Advocate 
^Mrs. Surinder Kour, Adv

Hon'ble Mr Gh. Hasnain Massodi, Judge. 
Date: 10/02/2010 
:J U D G M E N T :

  Inherent jurisdiction of the Court under section
  561-A    Cr.P.C is being invoked to seek quashment
  of   the   order   of   the   learned   Additional   Sessions
  Judge, Doda dated  26-8-2004 whereby the learned
  Additional Sessions Judge, Doda has dismissed the 
  revision   petition,   assailing   the   order   of   learned
  Judicial Magistrate Ist Class (JMIC), Doda  directing
  the petitioner to pay maintenance allowance of Rs.
  600/- per month to his wife  respondent herein.
            The   undisputed   facts   are   that   the   petitioner
 married the respondent, where-after  the parties lived
 as husband and  wife  for some   time.   However,  the
relation   between   the   parties   got   strained   and   the
respondent,   constraining     her     to   live   with   her
parents.   The   respondent   on   1-7-2002,   filed   an
application under Section 488 Cr.P.C in the Court of
Judicial Magistrate Ist Class, Doda, pleading therein
that   the   petitioner   in   June,   2001   after   making
demand for dowry, turned down the respondent from 
his house. It was alleged that the petitioner  making
use   of   Special   Task   Force   Personnel   of   the   state
police,   outraged   the   modesty     of   respondent   and
dragged   the respondent   to his house   and that the
respondent   was   constrained     to   lodge   a   Criminal
Complaint     alleging   commission   of   offence
punishable   under   sections   342/354/367/109   RPC
against the petitioner  and Personnel of Special Task
Force.   The   respondent   averred   that   the   petitioner
avoided to pay any maintenance     allowance to her
despite   his   having   recurring   income   of   Rs.   4974/-
per   month   in   addition   to   income   from   agriculture
produce.     The   respondent   prayed   for   grant   to
maintenance   allowance   of  Rs.   2000/-   per   month   
the amount, according to respondent, the   petitioner
was in a position to pay.
       The   petitioner   resisted     the   application   inter
alia   on   the   grounds   that   the   respondent   had   left
marital home of her own  and on the instigation  of
 her   father,   who     was   keen   to   see   respondent
 divorced by the petitioner. The petitioner admitted
 to be a Class -IV employee and expressed his desire
 to   live   with   the   respondent   as   her     husband     and
 discharge his  marital obligations.
             The learned Trial Magistrate after affording
the parties opportunity to adduce evidence in support
of   their   respective   stands   and   on   appraisal     of   the
evidence  brought on the file, allowed the application
and directed the petitioner to pay maintenance of Rs.
600/- per month to the respondent .
        The   petitioner   aggrieved   of   the   order   dated
23-12-2003, filed   revision petition in the Court of
Additional   Sessions   Judge,   Doda.   The   order   of
maintenance   was   assailed   on   the   ground   that   the
order   was   passed   without   proper   appreciation   of
evidence . It was insisted  that the respondent   had
failed to prove that the petitioner had neglected  the
respondent. It was pleaded  that the respondent  had
not   stepped   in   the   witness   box   and   that   the
respondent     had   not   given     any   response   to     the
genuine   offer   made   by   the   petitioner   to   take
respondent   to   his   marital   house   and   live   with   the
petitioner as his wife.     The   Revisional Court   not
impressed   by   the   grounds   urged   in   the   revision
petition,   dismissed   the   revision   petition   vide   order
dated 26-8-2004.
       The learned Additional Sessions Judge placing
reliance   on the law laid down in    (1990) JKLR 36
held that   the respondent   had a just ground for her
refusal to live with the petitioner. The Courts below
took notice of the fact that the petitioner had another
wife  with whom the petitioner was residing and the
respondent   was   within   her   rights   to   refuse   to   live
with the petitioner  in presence of his second wife.
       The petitioner now seeks quashment of orders
dated   23-12-2003   and   26-8-2004   on   the   grounds,
identical to the grounds set up  before the Revisional
Court. It is insisted that both the  Courts  have failed
to   apply   their     mind   and   appreciate   the   evidence
available on the file in right perspective. It is pleaded
that the aforesaid orders are illegal, unwarranted and
contrary to the law   and   thus liable to be set aside;
that both   the   Trial   Court  and   the   Revisional   Court
failed   to   appreciate   that   the   respondent   failed   to
prove   that   the   petitioner   neglected   or   refused   to
maintain her.  It is averred that absence of respondent
from the witness box  was sufficient to throw out her
case and hold   her to be dis-entitled from claiming
maintenance from the petitioner. It is pleaded that the
respondent  by  admitting    to   be  second  wife  of the
petitioner, made  it necessary for the Courts below to
examine  legality  of her marriage with the petitioner
in   presence   of   petitioner's   Ist   wife,   and   that   the
Courts below by ignoring   to deal with  this aspect of
the case and further more not  recording satisfaction
that   the   petitioner   had   neglected   or   refused   to
maintain the respondent, made the impugned orders 
liable to be quashed.
       Heard.
       The main plank of the  petitioner's case  is that
absence of the respondent  from the witness box was
fatal  to the application for maintenance and that the
application  merited  to  be  dismissed   on this  ground
alone. From the perusal   of   the record, it transpires
that   the   respondent   examined   two   witnesses     to
substantiate  her case. The respondent did not step in
the   witness   box.     The   learned   Trial   Court   placed
reliance on the witnesses' examination by respondent
to arrive at the conclusion that the petitioner though
possessed   of   sufficient   means,   had   neglected   and
refused to  maintain the respondent, who was unable
to maintain  herself.  The status of the party   to the
proceedings when appearing in the witnesses  box, is
nothing but that of any other witness   examined   in
support  of  the  case.     There  is  no  rule   of  universal
application that failure   of a party to appear in the
witness  box  must invariably  lead to dismissal of the
case   set   up   by     such   party,   irrespective     of   other
evidence brought by such party on the file.  The case
set up by the party   before the Court may   succeed
on the strength of evidence brought on the file even if
the   party   himself   /herself     fails   to   appear   in   the
witness   box.   It   is   for   the   Court     to   assess     and
evaluate  in each case  having  regard to the facts and
circumstances   peculiar   to   the   case,   the   fall  out    of
failure of a party to stand in the witness box.   Cases
can   be   visualized   where   having   regard   to   the
pleadings of the parties, the Court is not persuaded
to accept a case in the event  the party  projecting the
case does   not appear   as a witness . However, in a
case   like     the   present   one,   where   admissions
fundamental   to   the   proceedings     are   made   by   the
opposite  party,   failure   of a  party     to  appear  in   the
witness box   may not have any fatal   consequences
for the case set up by such party in the Court.  In the
case   in   hand,     the   petitioner     in   his   objections
admitted   the   respondent   to   be   his   legally   wedded
wife.   The   petitioner   further   admitted     that   the
respondent  was living separately from the petitioner
with her parents. It was also admitted by implication
that the respondent has   no source of income  to fall
back  upon  and was thus, unable to maintain herself .
The   petitioner   also   made   bold   admission   that   the
petitioner was Class-IV   government employee   and
thus,   had   recurring   income     as   pleaded   in   the
application.   In   presence   of   such   admission   by   the
petitioner,   the   absence   of   respondent     from   the
witness   box,   cannot   be   held   to   be   fatal   to   the
respondent's case.
      In view of the pleadings of the parties, the only
question left to be determined by the Trial Court was,
whether the respondent had just ground to live away
from   the   petitioner     and   spurn     his   offer   to   go   to
marital home.
      It   has   been   observed     in     Shail   Kumari     Vs.
Krishen Bhagwan  Pathik   reported as (2008) 9 SCC 
632 :
               "   Again,   maintenance   is   a   right
               which accrues   to a wife against
               her   husband   the   minute   the
               former  gets marriage to latter. It
               is not only a moral  obligation but
               is also a legal duty cast upon the
               husband     to   maintain   his   wife.
               Hence, whenever a wife does not
               stay with her husband and claims
               maintenance,   the   only   question
               which the court is called upon to
               consider   is   whether   she   was
               justified   to   live   separately   from
               her   husband     and   still   claim
               maintenance from him ? If reply
               is in affirmative, she is entitled to
               claim maintenance......"
         In the case in hand, the learned Magistrate as
well as Revisional Court  alive  to the legal mandate,
answered the said question in affirmative   and held
the respondent be justified to live separately and to be
entitled to get maintenance. The Courts below found
the petitioner to have the second wife and held   the
respondent to have just ground  for not going to live
with the petitioner  at the  place where the petitioner
already had family   and was living with the second
wife.
       The   argument   that   as   the   respondent   had
contracted   marriage   with   the   petitioner,   when   the
petitioner was already married, the respondent is to
be presumed to have waived her right to refuse to live
with the petitioner in presence of Ist wife, cannot be
pressed   into   service   to   dis-entitle     the   respondent
from the right to get maintenance from the petitioner.
When   the   petitioner   notwithstanding     his   meagre
resources   decided to contract second marriage, the
petitioner is expected to have been alive to the legal
mandate   to give equal treatment   to both the wives
and   that   if   the   petitioner     had   arranged   residential
accommodation for his first wife, the petitioner was
bound to provide similar separate accommodation for
second   wife.     The   petitioner   by   insisting   that   the
respondent   should come to live with the petitioner
under   the   same   roof   where   the   petitioner   is   living
with his   former wife, cannot be held genuine   and
bona fide offer . This apart,   the tactics   adopted by
the petitioner  to drag the respondent from her house,
allegations of abduction, outrageous assault levelled
in the application, which have gone un-controverted,
by itself constitute a just ground   for the respondent
not   to   give   any   positive   response   to   the   so   called
offer made  by the petitioner.
       The argument that the respondent had failed to
prove   that   the   petitioner   neglected   or   refused   to
maintain   the   respondent,   is   equally     specious   and
untenable. Not only does the evidence adduced by the
respondent   support   the   case     that   respondent   had
neglected and refused to maintain the respondent, but
the petitioner in his objections has no where  claimed
to have provided any maintenance  in cash or kind to
the   respondent,   after   the   respondent   started   to   live
separately from the petitioner.
            In   the   circumstances   and   for   the   reasons
discussed above, no ground is made out to exercise
inherent   jurisdiction   under   Section   561-A   Cr.P.C.
The petition is as such meritless and deserves to be
dismissed. 
       The petition is, accordingly, dismissed. Record
be sent down. The parties to appear  before the Court
below on 25.02.2010. 
                                                        ( Gh. Hasnain Massodi )
                                                                              Ju
dge 
Jammu:  
RSB,Secy.  
10.02.2010.







