

HIGH COURT OF JAMMU AND KASHMIR AT JAMMU.            
Cr Appeal No. 26 OF 2009 AND Cr M A No. 25 OF 2009 AND     
Confirmation No. 7 OF 2009 
Vijay Kumar 
Petitioners
State of J&K
Respondent  
!Mr. Anil Khajuria, Advocate
^Ms. Z.S.Watali, Dy.AG 

Honble Mr. Justice J.P.Singh, Judge.
Honble Mr. Justice Muzaffar Hussain Attar, Judge
Date: 12.07.2012 
:J U D G M E N T :

JUDGME_T   
J.P. Singh-J:
1] The Appellant-Vijay Kumar was convicted and 
sentenced to Rigorous Imprisonment for Life and fine of
Rs.5000/- under Section 302 RPC with default sentence of
one year, and two years Rigorous Imprisonment and fine of
Rs.2000/- with default sentence of six months under Section
498-A RPC by the learned Sessions Judge, Kathua vide his 
judgment and order dated 16.04.2009, for committing Murder
of his wife- Pinki Devi alias Babli, and treating her with
Cruelty.
2] He is in Appeal against the sentence.
2
3] Learned Sessions Judge too has made Reference for 
confirmation of the sentence of life imprisonment awarded to
the appellant.
4] The Facts, in brief, necessary for disposal of the Appeal
and Confirmation Reference may be stated thus:-
Pinki Devi alias Babli, the appellants wife,
received burn injuries in the kitchen of appellants
house situated at village Seswan Rang Talab,
Hiranagar on 01.02.2003. She was shifted initially
to the Government Hospital, Kathua and 
thereafter to the Government Medical College
Hospital, Jammu for treatment. The Incharge
Police Post Chadwal, who was deputed to record 
her statement, could not, however, so do, for, the
Doctors attending on Pinki Devi certified her
_ot Fit for Statement. The Doctors continued
to declare her unfit for Statement until February
06, 2003. In the meantime, Raj Kumar, Pinki
Devis brother, lodged a Written Report with the
Police Post Chadwal accusing the appellant, his
brother Kali Dass and brothers wife, Rani Devi
of threatening to do away with his sister and
pressurizing her to bring money from her parents.
The parents of the deceased would satisfy their
demands. The trio thereafter entered into a
criminal conspiracy and set Pinki Devi to fire
pouring kerosene on her. On Raj Kumars report,
3
FIR No.34/2003 was registered at Police Station
Raj Bagh, Kathua under Sections 307/498-A  
RPC. 
Head Constable Sat Pal, Incharge Police
Post Chadwal, recorded Pinki Devis statement in
Government Medical College Hospital, Jammu on  
February 06, 2003, when she was declared fit for
statement by a Doctor.
Pinki Devi succumbed to the injuries in
Government Medical College Hospital, Jammu on  
February 09, 2003.
The appellant was arrested on 10.02.2003
i.e. a day after Pinki Devis death and his brother,
Kali Dass on 17.02.2003.
On the basis of the investigation, the
appellant, his brother and brothers wife, were
found involved in commission of offences
punishable under Sections 302/498-A/120-B RPC.  
The Final Police Report laid by the Police
before the Judicial Magistrate First Class,
Hiranagar was committed to the Sessions Court at 
Kathua where the accused were charged for the 
above offences to which they pleaded Not
Guilty and claimed to be tried.
To sustain the Charge, the prosecution
examined Raj Kumar, the brother, Manohar Lal, 
the father, Biro Devi, the mother, Madan Lal and
Chaman Lal, the uncles, Jyoti Devi, Shashi Paul,
4
Srishta Devi, Kamlesh Kumari, the neighbourers,
of the deceased, besides Head Constable Sat Pal, 
who had recorded the Dying Declaration of Pinki
Devi at Government Medical College Hospital,
Jammu. In addition, the prosecution examined
Ram Chand, Dr. L.D.Bhagat, Harbhajan Singh,  
Ashok Kumar, Onkar Nath, Romesh Chander,    
besides Ravinder Singh, the Investigating Police
Officer, who concluded the investigation in the
case.
The documents placed on records along with 
the Police Challan include the Directorate of
Forensic Science Laboratory, Jammu and  
Kashmir, Jammus Reports, which indicate 
presence of kerosene in the Plastic Jeerican and
Plastic Bottle seized from the place of occurrence,
besides EXPW18-LD, the Post Mortem Report of   
the deceased which, inter alia, records the cause
of death and injuries found on the body of the
deceased as follows:-
 Infected burns present over whole face,
neck, front & back of chest, abdomen
and back, both the arms including
dorsum and palms of both hands, both 
the thighs anteriorly and posteriorly both
the gluteal regions, both legs anteriorily
and posteriorily.
Distil = portion of both feet, both the
soles and perineal region spared.
Approximate born area is 90% 
The cause of death is stated due to
septicaemia and shock as a result of
extensive, infected burns.
5
Entering the defence after being examined
under Section 342 Cr.P.C, the accused examined  
Prem Chand and Ram Chand to prove that Pinki  
Devi had committed Suicide because of her 
having gone into depression on termination of her
husbands employment from Army, wherefrom   
she would not come out until she committed 
Suicide.
On appreciation of the evidence of the
parties, the trial Court found Vijay Kumar guilty
of Murder in pouring kerosene on Pinki Devi and
setting her on fire as a result whereof she
succumbed to the burn injuries in the Hospital,
besides of Cruelty to her during her life time. No
case was, however, found proved by the
prosecution against the appellants brother and
brothers wife, who were, accordingly, acquitted.
In coming to the conclusion that the Charge
against the appellant was proved, the trial Court
heavily relied on the Statement of Head Constable
Sat Pal, who had recorded the Dying Declaration
of Pinki Devi, besides the Statements of Madan
Lal, Onkar Nath and Harbhajan Singh, who had 
signed the Dying Declaration as witnesses
because there was no eye witness to the 
occurrence.
6
5] The appellants learned counsel, Mr. Anil Khajuria,
questioned the appellants conviction urging that in the
absence of any acceptable evidence having been produced by 
the prosecution that Pinki Devi was in a fit state of mind to
make statement, the learned Sessions Judge had erred in 
relying on it and convicting the appellant on the basis thereof.
According to him the prosecution had failed to produce any
sustainable evidence on the basis whereof any Charge against
the appellant could, in law, be said to have been proved. Vital
aspects of the case appearing in the evidence are stated to
have been ignored consideration by the learned Sessions
Judge while appreciating the evidence of the prosecution,
which, if considered, in right perspective, would demonstrate
appellants innocence. He submitted that the appellant was
entitled to be acquitted as the prosecution had failed to prove
any case against him.
6] Per contra, Ms. Watali, the learned Deputy Advocate
General, appearing for the State submitted that the
prosecution had produced enough evidence to justify the
appellants conviction and no such aspect of the case had
been refused consideration by the trial Court which, if so
considered, would demonstrate appellants innocence. She 
submitted that the deceased having received burn injuries in
the premises of the appellant; there was a strong presumption
of appellants involvement in causing burn injuries and
ultimate death of his wife, And his conviction, which was
otherwise supported by the evidence produced by the
7
prosecution, may not, therefore, warrant interference in
Appeal.
7] We have considered the submissions of learned counsel 
for the parties and perused the evidence and material on
records.
8] In view of the submissions made by the learned counsel
for the parties, the first question that falls for consideration is
as to whether the prosecution had proved that the deceased
was in a fit state of mind when her statement was recorded,
and if so, whether the Dying Declaration- EXPW-SP/6 was a 
Reliable Piece of Evidence warranting appellants
conviction?
9] To examine the issue, we would first refer to EXPWSP/
6, the Dying Declaration of Pinki Devi which has been
relied upon by the learned Sessions Judge, English rendering
whereof is as follows:-
Statement of Pinki Devi alias Babli wife of Vijay
Kumar, Caste Chamaar R/O Rang Talab Hiranagar,   
Aged 20 years, Occupation housewife, under Section 
32 of Evidence Act (the words under Section 32 of the
Evidence Act superimposed on the words under  
Section 161 Cr.P.C.) dated 6.2.2003.
When questioned by the Police, stated, I am a
housewife and resident of Rang Talab Tehsil
Hiranagar. I was married to Vijay Kumar son of Bui
Lal caste Chamaar R/o Seswan Rang Talab Tehsil  
Hiranagar according to Hindu religious rites about
three years ago. My parents gave dowry much beyond  
their means. A son was born to me from my husband,  
whereafter he started beating me and would trouble me
a lot. He would accuse me of bringing less dowry. I
would bring money from my parents and give it to my
husband. My parents had given rupees twenty thousand  
to me for the purchase of a scooter and the money is in
deposit in the Jammu and Kashmir Bank, Barnoti. My  
8
husbands brother Kali Dass and his wife Rani Devi
would also say that my parents had given less dowry
and when I would tell them that they had given
whatever was within their means, my husband, his
brother and brothers wife would unnecessarily taunt
and accuse me and my husband would always beat me.    
I would tolerate all this; but they would always say that
they did not want to keep me in their house. I would
narrate all this to my mother from time to time. My
mother used to console me and send me back to my inlaws  
house so that my matrimonial home remained  
rehabilitated. All the three would always taunt me but I
would concentrate on my child playing with him and
would not take note of their taunts. My husband would
always beat me and threaten me that one day or the
other he would kill me. After all one day, pursuant to a
conceived plan, I was asked as to what was I doing, to
which I responded that I was cooking pulses. My
husband told me that for whom was I cooking, because 
my end had come, and with these words he held me  
from hair and started beating with his shoes. This
happened on Saturday the first of February, 2003 at
about 5/5.30 p.m. My husband Vijay Kumar son of Bui 
Lal Chamaar, r/o Saiswan Rang Talab Tehsil Hiranagar 
emptied kerosene Jeerican on me and lit it with a
matchstick. I raised hue and cry, called for help and
came out from the kitchen in the compound and there I
fell down. My husbands brother and his wife kept on
watching all this. Some Rajput ladies poured water on
me and covered me with quilt whereafter I lost
consciousness. At this time, I am fully conscious and
there is no pressure on me. I am receiving treatment in
Government Medical College Hospital, Jammu in  
Ward No.11, Bed No. 58. This is my Statement which I 
have read and is correct.
10] At the hearing of the Appeal, it was not disputed by the
prosecution, and rightly so, that Dr. Mashooq, who had
certified Pinki Devi Fit for Statement, was not examined
during the trial. Therefore, in the absence of the evidence of
Dr. Mashooq, it needs to be examined as to whether the other
evidence produced by the prosecution would prove that Pinki
Devi was in a fit state of mind when her statement was
9
recorded by Head Constable Sat Pal. The first witness whose
statement, therefore, needs consideration is Head Constable
Sat Pal.
11] According to PW-Sat Pal, number of Doctors had, on 
his request, examined Pinki Devi to certify as to whether or
not she was fit to make statement. Whereas all others had
certified Pinki Devi unfit for statement; it was only Dr.
Mashooq, who found her fit for statement on February 06,
2003. According to him and the investigation carried out in
the case, the deceased had spoken for the first time after the
occurrence, only on February 06, 2003 and was unable to
speak before that. She gained consciousness in the Hospital
at Jammu around 12 p.m and thereafter taking the permission
of the Doctors he commenced recording her statement at 
12.30 p.m. It took him half an hour to complete the
statement. Pinki Devi died on February 09, 2003, but he did
not approach any Magistrate for recording her statement. He
admits that no Medical Officer from the Government
Medical College Hospital, Jammu had attested Pinki Devis
statement. According to him the Doctor was not present at
the time of the recording of the statement. He showed his
ignorance about interpolations appearing in the statement of
Pinki Devi recorded by him under Section 161 Cr.P.C where
the words under Section 32 of the Evidence Act, appear to
have been superimposed on the words under Section 161  
Cr.P.C. He says that on being asked, Pinki Devi would
respond saying Yes or _o. He recorded whatever was
stated by the witness, and at times, the witness would only
10
nod her head to indicate Yes or _o. Pinki Devi spoke in
Dogri dialect and he would record it in Urdu. He requested
the Doctor to attest the statement, but the latter plainly
refused so to do. He did not reflect in the Case Diaries, the
factum of the refusal of the Doctor to attest the statement.
12) From the above excerpts of Sat Pals statement, it
appears that the deceased would respond to the Head 
Constables questions saying Yes or _o and at times, would
only nod her head to indicate her response to the
questions put to her. The statement appears to have been
made by Pinki Devi in Dogri language and Sat Pal had
transcribed it in Urdu.
13] Looking to the nature and complexion of the statement
appearing in EXPW-SP/6, it becomes difficult to accept its
authenticity, inter alia, because it is quite lengthy and
couched in usual police jargon that one would see in the
statements recorded under Section 161 Cr.P.C where the 
recording officers normally indicate the parentage, caste and
residence of the accused/witnesses wherever appearing in the
statement. Not only this, the statement which begins with the
factum of Pinki Devis marriage, religious rites that were
performed in the marriage and the brief history about alleged
Cruelty and thereafter the actual occurrence. Towards the end
of the statement it is recorded that Pinki Devi was fully
conscious and there was no pressure on her. She is recorded
to have been receiving treatment in the Government Medical
College Hospital, Jammu in Ward No.11 Bed No.58.  
11
Such a detailed statement, looking to its form,
complexion and length was not expected from a person who  
had received burn injuries over 90% of her body and had
remained unconscious right from the time of receiving
injuries and re-gained consciousness only few minutes before
her statement was recorded. It, therefore, becomes necessary
to refer to the statements of other witnesses to find whether
Pinki Devi was in a fit state of mind when her Statement was
recorded by Sat Pal.
14] We would, therefore, go to the statements of Madan
Lal, Onkar Nath and Harbhajan Singh, who are indicated to
have signed the Dying Declaration.
PW- Madan Lal, the uncle of the deceased says that he 
was present in Government Medical College Hospital,
Jammu when Pinki Devis statement was recorded.  
According to him, Pinki Devi was in conscious state and
would not talk much. Doctor was present when Pinki Devis
statement was recorded. 6/7 Police Personnel besides Bhajan 
Lal, Romesh Kumar and Biro Devi were present when the  
statement was being recorded. It took around 2 to 2= hours
to record the statement. The Police Personnel would not put
any question to Pinki Devi and Pinki Devi made statement on
her own in Dogri language. She would, however, make 
statement with pauses. After recording of the statement, an
attempt was made to have the signatures of the Doctor; but he
was not available. Thereafter further attempt was made to
obtain his signatures but he did not know as to what
happened thereafter. He further stated that the Doctor was
12
present but had refused to attest the statement on the plea
that only superior Doctor would do that. He read the
statement before appending his signatures. The other
witnesses too had read it before signing.
PW- Onkar Nath says that when he went to the  
Hospital, the Police had recorded Pinki Devis statement
where she would say that her husband had poured kerosene  
and thereafter put her on fire. About 30 to 35 persons had
surrounded the deceased at the time of the recording of her
statement. The Doctor and the Nurse were also present there.
The statement was recorded within 15 to 20 minutes. Pinki
Devi was making statement with pauses. 4 to 5 persons had 
signed the statement and the Doctor must also have signed it.
PW-Harbhajan Singh says that Pinki Devis face was 
burnt and swollen and because of the burn injuries she was
unable to take medicine and would speak less and in a feeble
voice. Her hands and feet were also burnt and she signed the
statement with great difficulty. Pinki Devi was making
statement with pauses and after every two minutes would be
vertiginous and it was because of this reason that she would
make statement with pauses.  
15] In view of the divergent statements made by the three
witnesses, we independently scrutinized the statements and
find that in view of what has been stated by the witnesses,
Pinki Devi cannot be said to have been in a fit and proper
state of mind to make the statement, with certainty. The
statements of the three witnesses, besides being contradictory,
13
do not support the manner in which the statement is stated to
have been recorded by Head Constable Sat Pal. 
This apart, in the facts and circumstances of the
case when the witnesses themselves admit that at the time of
the recording of the statement of Pinki Devi she would feel
giddy, speak in a feeble and low voice and that too very less,
she cannot be expected to have made such a detailed 
statement couched in usual phraseology used by the police in
recording statements.
16] In the circumstances when it does not come out from
the evidence on records as to what were those questions that
were put by Head Constable Sat Pal to the witness, to which
she would respond in Yes or _o and at times only nod her
head to convey answer to the questions, it would be highly
unsafe to rely on such statement additionally because neither
had the prosecution produced Dr. Mashooq, who had certified
Pinki Devi fit for statement nor the Hospital records during
the trial, on the basis whereof her medical condition could be
examined to form opinion as to whether or not she was able
to make statement on February 06, 2003. 
17] In view of the above discussion, we find that the
evidence produced by the prosecution does not prove Pinki
Devi to be in a fit state of mind on February 06, 2003. We
further find that Head Constable Sat Pal had not satisfied
himself that Pinki Devi was in a fit and proper state of mind
to make statement. The Head Constable has not recorded the  
statement of Pinki Devi in question and answer form in which
14
it ought to have been so recorded in view of his statement that
he would put questions to the witness to which she would
respond in Yes or No and at times nod her head to reply the
questions. The statement appearing in EXPW-SP/6 does not  
appear to be that of Pinki Devi, who, because of extensive
burn injuries on her body, could not have made such a
detailed statement when after every two minutes she would
feel giddy.
18] We, therefore, do not find it safe to rely on
EXPW-SP/6.   
19] We are fortified in taking the above view by the settled
legal position as indicated in Kanti Lal versus State of
Rajasthan, reported as AIR 2009 SC 2703, where while 
dealing with similar circumstances, it was held as follows:-
It is well-settled that one of the important tests of
the credibility of the dying declaration is that the
person, who recorded it, must be satisfied that the
deceased was in a fit state of mind. For placing
implicit reliance on dying declaration, court must be
satisfied that the deceased was in a fit state of mind
to narrate the correct facts of occurrence. If the
capacity of the maker of the statement to narrate the
facts is found to be impaired, such dying declaration
should be rejected, as it is highly unsafe to place
reliance on it. The dying declaration should be
voluntary and should not be prompted and physical
as well as mental fitness of the maker is to be
proved by the prosecution.
20] Barring the Dying Declaration, the prosecution has not
produced any evidence on the basis whereof it be said that
the appellant had poured kerosene on the deceased and set 
her on fire on 01.02.2003.
15
21] It appears from the prosecution evidence that the
appellant had all along remained with the deceased in the
Hospital right from the day she caught fire upto the date of
her death. The prosecution has not explained its omission to
arrest him till February 10, 2003, when Pinki Devi is alleged
to have specifically indicated his involvement in pouring
Kerosene and setting her on fire, on 6th February, 2003. The
omission indicates and points out the making of the alleged
Dying Declaration post Pinki devis death.
Fard Surathaal prepared by the Police on
February 10, 2003 too does not record the factum of Pinki
Devis making statement on February 06, 2003. 
22] We would now deal with the learned State counsels
plea that having led no evidence to prove as to how his wife
had caught fire in his house, the appellant was presumed
responsible for causing her burn injuries.
23] The argument raised by the learned State counsel, is not
supported by law, in that, in a Charge of Murder, the accused
is presumed to be innocent unless the initial onus was
discharged by the prosecution. There is no such presumption,
in law, as argued by the learned State counsel that in the
event of wifes suffering burn injuries in husbands house, a
presumption of husbands involvement in causing injuries to
cause her death would arise in all cases. The Evidence Act
Svt. 1977 does not contemplate any such presumption and  
the only presumption contemplated by law, as contained in
the provisions of Section 114-C of the Act is regarding
16
abetment of suicide by a married woman and not that of a
Murder of a married woman. 
24] We, therefore, do not find merit in the learned State
counsels submission and, accordingly reject it.
25] In view of the above discussion, we find that the
appellants learned counsel is right in contending that Pinki
Devi was not proved to be in a fit state of mind on 06.02.2003
and the learned Sessions Judge had erred in relying on her
statement treating it as her Dying Declaration and convicting
the appellant on the basis thereof.
26] We will now deal with the second Charge for which the
appellant has been convicted.
27] The learned Sessions Judge has convicted the appellant
of the second Charge without dealing with it and merely on
the proof of the first Charge. Every Charge is required to be
dealt with separately on the strength of the evidence produced
in support thereof. The omission of the learned Sessions
Judge to deal with the evidence produced by the prosecution
on the Charge, cannot, therefore, be justified. In any case as
we have gone through the whole case, we would like to deal
with the second Charge too.
28] According to the case of the prosecution, the relations
between the appellant and the deceased were cordial for one
year whereafter the appellant had started beating her. He
would taunt her for bringing less dowry and had declared that
he would not permit her to stay at his place.
17
It is, however, not the case of the prosecution that
the appellant would coerce the deceased to meet any unlawful
demand. Although the Charge against the appellant may not 
strictly speaking fall within the definition of Cruelty
appearing in Section 498-A(b) RPC, in the absence of any
allegation that the appellant would coerce the deceased to
meet any unlawful demand for any property, yet it appears
from the case set up by the prosecution that the Charge is
otherwise vague, for, neither the date(s), the month, or the
year in which the appellant had coerced the deceased to
satisfy any unlawful demand of the appellant, are
forthcoming either from the prosecution story or from the
evidence produced by it.
This apart, the evidence of the parents of the
deceased does not support the Charge, in that, they are
categoric in saying that the appellant had never made any
demand for any property. According to the mother of the
deceased, the deceased would remain depressed because of   
the poor financial condition of the appellant, which is stated
to have further worsened about six months prior to the
occurrence when the appellants employment in the 
Territorial Army had ceased. The neighbours of the deceased,
who were produced by the prosecution to support the Charge 
of Cruelty against the appellant, who were first to reach on
spot, have, however, a different story to tell. According to
them, the appellant and the deceased were living happily
before the occurrence and according to some of them, the
deceased had admitted to have committed mistake.  
18
29] In these circumstances, when the persons residing in the
immediate vicinity of the appellant and the deceased had not
supported the prosecution on the Charge of Cruelty and the
evidence of the relations of the deceased, besides being
contradictory, is vague, ambiguous and shorn of the
circumstances that would prove the ingredients constituting
offence under Section 498-A(b) RPC, we do not find the
prosecution to have proved the second Charge too.
30] For all what has been said above, we find that the
prosecution has failed to prove any Charge against the
appellant and the learned Sessions Judge has erred in holding
him guilty of the offences punishable under Sections
302/498-A RPC. The Judgment and order passed by the   
learned Sessions Judge is, therefore, liable to be set aside.
31] This Appeal, accordingly, succeeds and is, therefore,
allowed declining the Confirmation Reference. The Judgment
and Order dated 16.4.2009 of the learned Sessions Judge,
Kathua is set aside and the appellant acquitted of the Charges.
He is directed to be set to liberty forthwith.
(Muzzaffar Hussain Attar) (J. P. Singh)
Judge Judge 
JAMMU:  
12.07.2012 
Pawan Chopra  
