

HIGH COURT OF JAMMU AND KASHMIR AT JAMMU.            
561-A No. 324 OF 2012  
Manav Mishra and ors 
Petitioners
State of J&K & anr
Respondent  
!Mr. G.S.Thakur, Advocate 
^Ms. Z.S.Watali, Dy.AG.Ms. Surinder Kour, Sr. Advocate with Ms. 
Vandana Sharma, Advocate   

Mr. Justice J. P. Singh
Date: 31.12.2012 
:J U D G M E N T :

J U D G M E N T 
Petitioner No.1-Manav Mishra and respondent No.2- 
Aditi were married according to Hindu religious rites on
December 01, 2008. They started living in their
matrimonial home at D-16, Lajpat Nagar-I, 3rd Floor Delhi
but with some matrimonial disputes which ultimately led
to respondent No.2s coming back to Jammu on January  
23, 2010. She thereafter filed a Complaint with the learned
Special Mobile Magistrate Passenger Tax, Shops and  
Establishment Act, Jammu on June 11, 2011 impleading  
Manav Sharma- her husband, Sham Sunder Mishra-her    
2
father-in-law, Sharda Mishra-her mother-in-law, Mohit
Mishra, Gourva Mishra and Aman Mishra-her brothers-inlaw, 
accusing them of harassment, maltreatment and  
cruelty.
Although the cruel treatment including physical
assault is stated to have been given to Aditi at Delhi,
however, it is indicated in paragraph No.8 of the
Complaint, that even at Jammu the behaviour of the
persons named hereinabove was cruel and they had  
reiterated their demand for cash, plot, shops and WagonR
car even at Jammu. 
The statement made by Aditi in support of her
Complaint before the learned Magistrate on 11.07.2011,
however, does not refer to any such cruel treatment or
reiteration of demand for cash, plot, shops and WagonR at
Jammu. It is alleged that all the accused beat her on
January 24, 2010 and forcibly turned her out from the
matrimonial home threatening that she may not come  
without dowry. She thereafter came back to her paternal
house without making any complaint against the accused 
because she apprehended threat to her life.
Learned Magistrate before whom respondent No.2  
filed complaint postponed issuance of process directing
inquiry into the Complaint by Station House Officer,
Police Station Peer Mitha, Jammu. The Police found the
3
petitioners involved in commission of offences punishable
under Sections 498-A/34 RPC.  
On the basis of the statement of the complainant and
the inquiry conducted by Station House officer, Police
Station Peer Mitha, Jammu, process was issued against the 
petitioners.
Aggrieved by the process issued against them by the
learned Magistrate, the petitioners have approached this
Court seeking quashing of respondents Complaint and the
process issued thereon.
According to the petitioners, the marriage between
Manav Mishra and Aditi was without any dowry but 
Aditis mother would pressurize petitioner-Manav Mishra
to separate from his parents threatening dire consequences
in case her instructions for having separate home with her
daughter were not carried out.
Aditis mother is stated to have come to Delhi on
January 23, 2010 to get her daughter back home and, 
accordingly, they came to Jammu along with all the
household articles gold and silver ornaments for which
petitioner No.1 is stated to have lodged Complaint with
Incharge Police Station, Lajpat Nagar, New Delhi on
08.02.2010. Efforts made by petitioner No.1 to have
reconciliation however failed despite there being an
exparte decree for restitution of conjugal rights, which the
4
petitioners had obtained from a Family Court at New
Delhi.
Aditi is accused of having filed Complaint at Jammu
to drag and harass petitioner No.1 and his family members
in uncalled for litigation. It is pleaded that there being no
specific allegation against the petitioners that may
constitute an offence in terms of Section 498-A RPC, the
Complaint was liable to be quashed.
The offence alleged by the respondent to have taken
place at Delhi, Courts at Jammu are stated to have no
jurisdiction to entertain the Complaint.
Heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the
material on records.
Provisions of Section 498-A RPC are often misused 
by one or the other spouse to settle their matrimonial
disputes abusing the process of criminal Courts to
pressurize and harass not only the other spouse but also
his/her relations. The Complaint filed by Aditi, respondent
No.2, who is stated to be a practicing Advocate, is one of
such Complaints. 
The Complaint made by Mrs. Aditi, neither indicates
the date/dates, month or year when she is stated to have
been beaten or for that matter harassed or treated with
cruelty and tortured. The role played by each one of the
petitioners in causing her cruelty and harassment is also
not indicated in the Complaint. Mere statement in the
5
Complaint that all the accused had treated her with cruelty
may not be sufficient enough, in law, for a Criminal court
to issue process against someone without any specific act
or omission attributed to him/her either individually or
collectively with others that may amount to his/her
committing any act or omission punishable under law.
Magistrates are required to satisfy themselves and
that too after going through the statement on oath, if any of
the complainant and the witnesses, as also the result of
investigation of inquiry, if any, under Section 202 Cr.P.C.,
before considering as to whether issuance of process was
warranted, and, if so, against whom. As issuance of
process on a complaint, results in personal appearance of
the person(s) accused of the offence, on each and every
date of hearing during trial, unless exempted therefrom
until it would amount to curtailing his/her right to Personal
Liberty to move freely.
The Magistrates authorized to take cognizance and
issue process are, therefore, required to be cautious while
issuing process, in that, process may be warranted only, if
a prima facie offence appears to have been committed and
the Magistrate was empowered to hold trial therefor.
The vague statement of the complainant-respondent 
No.2 that as and when she and petitioners visited Jammu,
the behaviour of petitioners remained cruel and they
demanded cash, plot and especially WagonR Car,  
6
appearing in the Complaint without any details of the cruel
treatment, would not justify issuance of process
particularly when the complainant had not referred to any
of these allegations in her statement on oath before the
learned Magistrate or before Police. Even during the
inquiry before Police there was no such material, on the
basis whereof, the petitioners be said to have made
demands at Jammu.   
Learned counsel for the respondent-complainant was 
repeatedly asked to point out any statement made by any 
witness during the course of inquiry before the Magistrate,
who had indicated about petitioners visit to Jammu when
they threatened respondent No.2 or made demand of  
dowry, as indicated in paragraph No.8 of the Complaint,
but she was unable to refer to any such statement or
material.
There was, therefore, absolutely no material before
the learned Magistrate on the basis whereof the petitioners
could be proceeded against for any of their acts/omission
punishable under law for the time being in force in State,
to have been committed within his jurisdiction. The alleged
act of cruelty stated by the complainant and her witnesses
to have taken place at Delhi, could not be taken cognizance
of by the learned Magistrate and that too on a vague
Complaint.
7
I am fortified in taking the above view by the law laid
down by Honble Supreme Court of India in Neelu Chopra 
and anr. v. Bharti reported as AIR 2009 SC(Supp) 2950,
where while dealing with similar Complaint with vague
allegations, it was held as follows:-
4.We have seen the complaint very carefully. From a bare reading of
the complaint it is apparent that the problem started barely after six
months of the marriage. In paragraph 3 of the complaint, it is stated
that all the accused came to complainants parents house at
Gidderbaha and asked her parents to give the complainant more gold
and other articles as dowry otherwise they would leave the
complainant there and Rajesh would be married second time. In
paragraph 4, the complaint is against Rajesh in the sense that the
accused Rajesh asked the complainant to hand over the ornaments and  
clothes to his parents lest they are lost in the way. On reaching to
Delhi when the ornament were asked back by the complainant, they 
were not returned back. When we see the complaint as a whole it is
basically against the accused Rajesh. All the allegations are against
Rajesh. There is undoubtedly some reference to the present
appellants, but what strikes us is that there are no particulars given as
to date on which the ornaments were handed over, as to the exact
number of ornaments or their description and as to the date when the
ornaments were asked back and were refused. Even the weight of the 
ornaments is not mentioned in the complaint and it is a general and
vague complaint that the ornaments were sometime given in the
custody of the appellants and they were not returned. What strikes us
more is that even in paragraph 10 of the complaint where the
complainant says that she asked for her clothes and ornaments which 
were given to the accused and they refused to give these back, the
date is significantly absent. It seems from the order taking cognizance
that the learned Magistrate has mentioned about the version of the
complainant is supported by Bhagwati and Dharampal to the fact that
the ornaments were entrusted to Krishan Saroop and Rajesh while 
clothes were entrusted to Rakhi and they refused to hand over the
same. Even their statements could not be better than the vague
complaint. Even about the clothes, the date on which they were
handed over to Rakhee who happens to be the daughter of the present
appellants and the other details are very significantly absent. It was
also the version of the complainant that she was beaten in support of
which she has filed a certificate from AIIMS hospital, New Delhi.
However, in the complaint, it is not seen as to on which date she was
beaten and by whom. It is significant to note that the matter against
the Rakhee, the 4th original accused has already been dropped as she
was in fact not even the resident of the same house.
5. In order to lodge a proper complaint, mere mention of the
Sections and the language of those Sections is not be all and end of
the matter. What is required to be brought to the notice of the Court is
the particulars of the offence committed by each and every accused
and the role played by each and every accused in committing of that
offence. When we see the complaint, the complaint is sadly vague. It
does not show as to which accused has committed what offence and  
8
what is the exact role played by these appellants in the commission of
offence. There could be said something against Rajesh, as the
allegations are made against him more precisely but he is no more and
has already expired. Under such circumstances, it would be an abuse
of process of law to allow the prosecution to continue against the aged
parents of Rajesh, the present appellants herein on the basis of vague
and general complaint which is silent about the precise acts of the
appellants.
6. The High Court has merely mentioned that the allegation in
the complaint are of retaining jewellery articles in possession of the
husband and the petitioners. Now if the articles were in the possession
of the husband, there is no question of the present appellants being in
possession of the appellants. This is apart from the fact that it has
already been expressed by us that there is no mention of the date on
which the said ornaments, if any, were entrusted to the appellants or
even the date when they were demanded back and were refused to be  
given back by the appellants or any one of them. Insofar as the
offence under Section 498A, IPC is concerned, we do not find any
material or allegation worth the name against the present appellants.
All the allegations appear to be against the Rajesh.
For all what has been said above, the process issued
against the petitioners on respondent No.2s Complaint is
found to be an abuse of the process of Court.
Proceedings initiated on respondent No.2s
Complaint are, accordingly, quashed, allowing this
Petition with costs of Rs.10,000/- (Rupees Ten Thousand) .
( J. P. Singh )
Judge 
JAMMU:  
Sunita.
31.12.2012 




