

HIGH COURT OF JAMMU AND KASHMIR AT JAMMU.            
561-A No.100 OF 2011  
Rahul Sharma and anr  
Petitioners
State of J&K & anr
Respondent  
!Mr. Amit Sharma, Advocate 
^Ms. Zhainab Shamas Watali, Dy.AG. Mr. M.L.Gupta, Advocate    

Mr. Justice J. P. Singh
Date: 27.12.2012 
:J U D G M E N T :

Petitioner No.1-Rahul Sharma was married to 
respondent No.2-Megha Kakkar on 19.02.2007 at  
Jodhpur. After their marriage, they resided at
Gurgaon-Haryana where they were working at IBM  
DAKSH, Gurgaon.   
Respondent No.2s father, however, brought
her back to Jammu finding that petitioner No.1
and his relations had treated her with cruelty. He
thereafter lodged Complaint with Police Station,
Women Cell, Jammu on 10.08.2010, inter alia, 
indicating about the dowry items that he had given
to petitioner No. 1 and his family members at the
time of the marriage of his daughter. Petitioner
No.1-Rahul Sharma, his mother Sarita Sharma  
2
and sister Neha Sharma were accused in the 
Complaint of committing domestic violence against
respondent No.2. 
Although Rahul Sharma is stated to have
threatened Megha Kakkar not to come back to  
Haryana without money yet she was sent to the 
matrimonial home where she was again stated  
subjected to malnutrition besides mental and
physical torture. This Complaint remained pending
with Police but without registration of any FIR
thereon. It is alleged by the petitioners that they
were forced to enter into compromise in terms
whereof marriage between Rahul Sharma and   
Megha Kakkar was agreed to be dissolved on  
payment of Rs.9.00 lac. The Compromise, however,  
did not mature and thereafter respondent No.2
again approached the Police Station for registration
of FIR against the petitioners. The Police having
not obliged the respondent, she approached a
Criminal Court at Jammu with fresh Complaint on
which FIR No.3/2011 was registered at Police
Station, Women Cell, Jammu, under Sections 498-  
A/109 RPC.  
The Complaint, on the basis whereof FIR was 
registered, impleads Rahul Sharma, his mother
Sarita Sharma, Sister Neha Sharma and Lt. Col. 
K.K.Sharma, the maternal uncle of Rahul Sharma, 
3
as accused. It is indicated in the respondents
Complaint that when the accused came to Jammu   
they demanded one Car of City Honda Make   
threatening that in case their demand was not met,
the complainant would be eliminated.
Petitioner No.1-Rahul Sharma, the husband 
and petitioner No.2-Sarita Sharma, his mother,
have approached this Court seeking quashing of
the FIR registered on respondent No. 2s
Complaint.
Heard learned counsel for the parties and
perused the material on records.
Perusal of the Complaint filed by Megha
Kakkar on the basis whereof FIR was registered
does not refer to any date, month or year when the
complainant is stated harassed or maltreated. The
manner in which she was maltreated, harassed or 
treated with cruelty too is missing from the
Complaint. Not only that, the role played by each
person accused of maltreating her, either
individually or collectively, too is not there in the
Complaint.
The Complaint, in short, raises general and
vague allegations of maltreatment, harassment and
domestic violence, without indicating the date,
month or year of such alleged incidence(s) still less
detailed account thereof.
4
Putting of Criminal Law into motion on such
vague Complaint would certainly be abuse of the
process of law, in that, no prosecution, in the
ordinary course of things, may succeed on the
basis of such type of Complaints shorn of
necessary details and indicating existence of
ingredients constituting penal offences.
This apart, the second Complaint on the basis
whereof the FIR was registered under Section 156
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, though
pursuant to the orders of the learned Magistrate, is
materially different from the initial Complaint that
was lodged by the complainants father in Women 
Cell, Jammu and pursuant whereto an Agreement   
is stated to have been reached at between the two
families. There is not even a whisper in the first
Complaint about petitioners or any of their family
members demanding Honda City Car when they    
came to Jammu on May 05, 2010. The event of  
May 05, 2010, ex facie appears to have been coined
and introduced only to justify the maintainability
of the Complaint at Jammu, in that, there is
absolutely no mention of this event even in the
Notice sent by the complainants father to
petitioner No.1s Advocate in answer to the latters
Notice. Had any such event happened on May 05,  
5
2010, the event would have been referred in Notice
sent by the complainants father on 17.06.2010.
From the reading of the Complaint, it is
explicit that all the alleged acts of omission and
commission, attributed to the accused, had taken
place at Gurgaon, a place outside the territory of
the Jammu and Kashmir State. In any case,  
matrimonial disputes having been alleged by the
petitioners to have been settled, there was
absolutely no justification for the Criminal Court to
have referred the respondents Complaint for
registration of FIR, to compel execution of the
Compromise by putting the criminal law into
motion.
The facts and circumstances of the case,
therefore, eloquently demonstrate abuse of the
process of Court and law in registration of FIR
against the petitioners. I am supported in taking
the above view by what was held by Honble
Supreme Court of India in Neelu Chopra & anr. v.
Bharti reported as AIR 2009 SC (Supp) 2950,
where while dealing with such like situation, it was
observed as follows:-
5. In order to lodge a proper complaint, mere
mention of the Sections and the language of those
Sections is not be all and end of the matter. What is
required to be brought to the notice of the Court is
the particulars of the offence committed by each and
every accused and the role played by each and every
accused in committing of that offence. When we see 
the complaint, the complaint is sadly vague. It does
6
not show as to which accused has committed what  
offence and what is the exact roe played by these
appellants in the commission of offence. There could
be said something against Rajesh, as the allegations
are made against him more precisely but he is no
more and has already expired. Under such 
circumstances, it would be an abuse of process of
law to allow the prosecution to continue against the
aged parents of Rajesh, the present appellants herein
on the basis of vague and general complaint which is
silent about the precise acts of the appellants.
6. The High Court has merely mentioned that the
allegation in the Complaint are of retaining jewellery
articles in possession of the husband and the
petitioners. Now if the articles were in the possession
of the husband, there is no question of the present
appellants being in possession of the appellants. This
is apart from the fact that it has already been
expressed by us that there is no mention of the date
on which the said ornaments, if any, were entrusted
to the appellants or even the date when they were
demanded back and were refused to be given back by  
the appellants or any one of them. Insofar as the
offence under Section 498A, IPC is concerned, we do
not find any material or allegation worth the name
against the present appellants. All the allegations
appear to be against the Rajesh.
The petitioners learned counsels submission
that registration of FIR against the petitioners and
others is abuse of the process of law is, therefore,
found well merited.
This Petition, accordingly, succeeds and is,
therefore, allowed quashing FIR No.3/2011
registered at Police Station, Women Cell, Jammu 
under Sections 498-A/109 RPC.  
( J. P. Singh )
Judge 
JAMMU:  
27.12.2012 
Vinod.




