

HIGH COURT OF JAMMU AND KASHMIR AT JAMMU.            
CTA No. 1 OF 2012  
Satinder Kour and Ors 
Petitioners
Daljeet Singh
Respondent  
!Mr.P. S. Pawar, Advocate 
^None 

Honble Mr. Justice M.M. Kumar, Chief Justice
Date: 30.11.2012 
:J U D G M E N T :

M. M. Kumar, CJ  
1. This is an application with a prayer for transferring the
petition filed by the respondent-husband under Section 9 of the
Hindu Marriage Act ( for brevity  the Act) titled as Baljeet Singh
v. Satinder Kour and ors pending in the Court of Additional
District Judge, Srinagar to any Court of competent jurisdiction
at Jammu. The petition has been preferred by the wife and her
father, mother and brother.
2. According to the averments made by the petitioners, the
petitioner no.1- wife was thrown out of the matrimonial home on
account of demand of dowry on the part of the respondenthusband 
and his parents. An FIR no. 24/2011 dated 21.11.2011
has been lodged by petitioner no.1 with Police Station, Women
2
Cell, Jammu under Sections 498-A, 506, 323, 406 and 109 
RPC (Annexure C). The averments made in para no. 5 of the 
petition further suggest that challan is likely to be produced as
the investigation is at the verge of completion. The petitioner
no.1 has also filed a petition under Section 488 Cr.P.C for
payment of maintenance which is also pending in the Court of
Special Electricity Magistrate, Jammu. A copy of the summons 
issued by the said Court has been placed as Annexure C1. It
has been alleged that a petition under Section 9 of the Act
could have been filed only against the wife-petitioner no.1 and
there was no reason to drag in the father, mother and brother of
petitioner no.1- wife.
3. I have heard Mr. Pawar, learned counsel for the
petitioners, who has submitted that petition under Section 9 of
the Act is a counter blast to the FIR lodged by the petitioner on
21.11.2011 as the petition under Section 9 was filed
subsequently on 25.11.2011. According to the learned counsel
even otherwise the litigation is pending in the Courts at Jammu
and the petitioner no.1, the deserted wife, is compelled to live
with her parents who are at Jammu.
4. The petitioner no.1 is without any means of livelihood and
appears to be dependent on her parents. It would also be
convenient for the respondent-husband to prosecute his suit for
3
restitution of conjugal rights under Section 9 of the Act at
Jammu because he is already defending litigation initiated by
his wife at Jammu. Therefore, the petitioner under Section 9 of
the Act, titled as Baljeet Singh v. Satinder Kour and ors,
pending in the Court of Additional District Judge, Srinagar, is
ordered to be transferred to the Court of Additional District
Judge (Matrimonial Cases) Jammu. The record of the case 
which has been received shall be sent to the transferee Court
along with a copy of this order. It is further directed that a copy
of this order be sent to the court of Additional District Judge,
Srinagar along with a photocopy of the record.
5. Parties through their counsel are directed to appear
before the Additional District Judge (Matrimonial Cases)
Jammu on 26.12.2012.  
(M. M. Kumar) 
Chief Justice
JAAMU:  
30.11.2012 
Anil Raina, Secy.




