

HIGH COURT OF JAMMU AND KASHMIR AT JAMMU.            
CTA NO. 37 OF 2012   
Bindu Bala 
Petitioners
Satvir Singh
Respondent  
!Mr. J. P. Gandhi, Advocate
^

Honble Mr. Justice M. M. Kumar, Chief Justice.
Date: 08.03.2013 
:J U D G M E N T :

M. M. Kumar, CJ  
1. Mrs. Bindu Bala, wife of the respondent has
approached this Court with a prayer that the
proceedings initiated by her husband under Section 9
of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 in the Court of
Additional District Judge, Udhampur may be
transferred to a Court of competent jurisdiction at
Jammu.  
2. It has been pointed out that the marriage
between the parties was solemnized on 18.07.2008 
according to the Hindu rites and customs at Shastri
Nagar, Jammu. They lived together for sometime and 
soon thereafter the differences developed. There are
allegations of demand of dowry, harassment by
2
beating of the petitioner by her husband. There are
further allegations that the husband-respondent is a
daily drinker and this habit vitiates the family
atmosphere of the house because after consuming  
liquor, the respondent used to beat her and none of
the family members would come forward to rescue 
her. Eventually, the petitioner is alleged to have been
thrown out of the matrimonial home and since
October, 2008 she is living with her parents at Shastri
Nagar, Jammu.  
3. She further states that she has no source of
livelihood as she is totally dependent on her father
who is a low paid pensioner. He has to look after his
own family of five members and feed them. The
petitioner has not even been paid the maintenance
allowance by the respondent, though, an application
under Section 488 Cr.PC has been filed before the
Judicial Magistrate at Jammu, therefore, the
petitioner cannot attend the proceedings at
Udhampur. The respondent is employed in the Indian 
Army and drawing salary of more than Rs.31,000/-
per month. Even his father is also a pensioner who is
being paid double pension. Therefore, the expenses of
3
travelling from Jammu to Udhampur cannot borne by 
her.
4. Despite service, respondent has not put in
appearance. 
5. I have heard learned counsel for the petitioner at
some length and am of the view that in the matters
concerning matrimonial disputes, the convenience of
the wife is kept in view especially when she has no
source of income and is wholly dependent on her
parents. Moreover, her application under Section 488
Cr.PC for grant of maintenance is pending and the
respondent has been attending proceedings in the
aforesaid application at Jammu.
6. The respondent appears to have sufficient
income being working in the Indian Army. It is true
that transfer of petition filed under Section 9 of the
Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 which, in fact, is a counter
blast to the petition filed under Section 488 Cr.PC
would cause some inconvenience to respondent, yet it
would be far easier for him to attend the proceedings
in Jammu, than for the petitioner to attend the same
in Udhampur. In that regard, reliance may be placed
on the observations made in the case of Deepti
Bhandari v. Nitin Bhandari and anr. (2012) 1 SCC
4
725. Similar view has been taken by Honble the
Supreme Court in the case of Sumita Singh v.
Kumar Sanjay and anr. AIR 2002 SC 396.  
7. As a sequel to the above discussion, the case
titled as Satvir Singh v. Bindu Bala filed under
Section 9 of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 pending in
the Court of Additional District Judge, Udhampur is
ordered to be transferred to Jammu. The learned
Principal District Judge, Udhampur, is directed to
withdraw the aforesaid case from the Court of
Additional District Judge, Udhampur and send the file
alongwith all papers to the learned Additional District
Judge (Matrimonial Cases), Jammu. A copy of this 
order be sent to the Principal District Judge,
Udhampur for retaining the same on record. A
photocopy of the whole case file and documents be
also retained at Udhampur for record.
8. The petitioner through her counsel shall appear
before the Transferee Court on 26.03.2013.
9. The application stands disposed of.
(M. M. Kumar) 
Chief Justice
Jammu,  
08.03.2013 
Parshant 



