

HIGH COURT OF JAMMU AND KASHMIR AT JAMMU.            
OWP No. 727 OF 2012 AND OWP No. 804 OF 2012 AND OWP           
No. 242 OF 2012  
1. Mohinder Singh and anr
2. Dr. Manohar lal Sharma
3. Peerzada Mohd. Sayeed  
4. Satvir Gupta
5. Suman Lata Bhagat  
6. Vikas Behal
7. Rattan Lal Tickoo
8. Sheikh Rafiq Ahmed 
Petitioners
1.State Th. Accountability Commission and ors 
2.State Th. Accountability Commission and ors 
3.State Th. Accountability Commission and ors 
4.J&K Accountability Commission and ors. 
5.State Th. Accountability Commission and ors 
6.State Th. Accountability Commission and ors 
7.State Th. Accountability Commission and ors 
8.State of J&K and anr
Respondent  
!Mr.S.K.Shukla, Advocate Mr. B.S. Salathia, Sr. Advocate with
Mr. Ashish Sharma, Advocate Mr. D.C. Raina, Sr. Advocate with 
Mr. Anil Verma, Advocate Mr. U.K. Jalali, Sr. Advocate with Ms.
Neha Bakshi, Advocate Mr. P.N. Raina, Sr. Advocate with Mr. 
J.A. Hamal, Advocate Mr. Abhinav Sharma, Advocate Mr.  
Virender Bhat, Advocate Mr. Ajay Sharma, Advocate  
^Mr.Gagan Basotra, Sr. AAG Mr. Sunil Sethi, Sr. Advocate with
Ms.Veenu Gupta, Advocate Mr. S.S. Lehar, Sr. Advocate with  
Mr. S. Meharban Singh, Advocate Mr. D.S. Thakur, Sr. Advocate 
with     Ms. Aruna Thakur, Advocate Mr.S.S. Ahmed, Advocate   
Mr. H.C. Jalmeria, Advocate

Honble Mr. Justice Hasnain Massodi, Judge 
Date: 04.01.2013 
:J U D G M E N T :


OWP No. 727/2012   
c/w
OWP No.804/2012   
OWP No.242/2012   
OWP No.956/2006   
OWP No.902/2006   
OWP No.72/2007   
OWP No.94/2007   
OWP No.64/2007   


1. Mohinder Singh and anr. Vs. State Th. Accountability Commission and ors.
2. Dr. Manohar lal Sharma Vs. State Th. Accountability Commission and anr.
3. Peerzada Mohd. Sayeed  Vs.State Th. Accountability Commission and ors.  
4. Satvir Gupta Vs.J&K Accountability Commission and ors.  
5. Suman Lata Bhagat Vs. State Th. Accountability Commission and anr.  
6. Vikas Behal Vs State Th. Accountability Commission and anr. 
7. Rattan Lal Tickoo Vs.State Th. Accountability Commission and anr.
8. Sheikh Rafiq Ahmed Vs. State of J&K and anr. 

1.      Whether the Accountability Commission established under  
Jammu and Kashmir Accountability Commission Act, 2002, has    
power to suo-moto direct investigation, inquiry or proceedings
against a public functionary under the Act, is the question that
calls for an answer in the writ petitions on hand.  In all the
petitions, the Accountability Commission (hereinafter, the
Commission) has suo-moto initiated proceedings under the Act 
against the petitioners.
2.      Before an effort is made to find answer to the pivotal question on
which fate of writ petitions on hand hinges, it would be
appropriate to make a brief survey of background facts.
3.      Shri Mohd. Shafi Indrabi filed a complaint being               No.J-
115/2006  before Accountability Commission under Section 11 of
the Act, against Smt. Sunali Kumar, Principal Secretary Health
and Medical Education Department and Ranjit Kour, Ex- 
Principal/tutor of AMT School, Srinagar, alleging financial
irregularities by the respondents while running affairs of AMT
School, Srinagar and violation of rules in making admissions in
AMT, School. The Commission on 3rd March 2006, on perusal of  
the complaint, record made available by the parties and after
hearing counsel for the parties opined that the complaint
disclosed a fit case in which regular inquiry was required to be
conducted not only against the respondents but also against Smt.
Suman Lata Bhagat Minister for Health and Medical Education  
present petitioner, Mr. Abdul Gani Sofi, Minister for Health and
Medical Education, Shri Vikas Bhagat - PRO of Minister for
Health and Medical Education, and             Mst. Halima, Principal
AMT, School, Srinagarsuccessor in office of Smt. Ranjit Kour
respondent in the complaint.  The Commission, accordingly,
arrayed Smt. Suman Lata Bhagat and three others as respondents  
3 to 6 in the complaint and directed a notice to be issued to the
newly added respondents. Smt. Suman Lata Bhagat  petitioner- 
herein questions the jurisdiction of the Commission to take suo-
moto action against the petitioner on the ground that the
Commission does not have any such power and jurisdiction. 
Petitioner, accordingly, seeks quashment of order dated      3rd
March, 2006, whereby she and three others were arrayed as 
respondents 3 to 6 and regular inquiry initiated against them.
4.      The Commission received two anonymous complaints sometime     
in 2006, leveling allegations of corruption and acquisition of
estate disproportionate to known source of income against Shri
Satvir Gupta formal DIG Doda-Udhampur Range. The   
Commission on 6th December, 2006 entertained the complaint  
registered it as complaint No. J-54/2006 to Commissioner
Vigilance to get the allegations secretly investigated through an
officer not below the rank of IGP and submit the report at the
earliest. Shri Gupta aggrieved with the order dated 6th December,
2006, seeks its quashment on the ground that Commission lacks  
jurisdiction to entertain the complaint. He also questions vires of
Regulation 9 of Jammu and Kashmir Accountability Commission   
Regulations 2005.
5.      The Commission on 10th March, 2006 received an anonymous    
complaint against Shri B. S. Dua MD Jammu and Kashmir Small   
Industries Development Corporation (SICOP) and other officers
of the Corporation,               alleging misappropriation of crores of
rupees, backdoor appointments and use of private vehicles on
payment owned by Mr. Dua in running affairs of the Corporation.
The Commission entertained the complaint, registered it as
complaint No. 617 dated 13th March, 2006 and amongst others  
issued notice to Shri R. L. Tikoo GM SICOP, Jammu, requiring
him to appear in person and submit his comments in reply to the
complaint on 8th December, 2006. Shri Tikoo aggrieved with the
cognizance taken by the Commission on an anonymous complaint    
and issuance of notice dated 2nd December, 2006, has come up  
with a writ petition registered as OWP No. 94/2007. Mr. Tikoo
questions jurisdiction of the Commission to entertain and proceed
on an anonymous complaint and also questions vires of regulation
9, Jammu and Kashmir Regulations 2005.  
6.      Someone introducing himself as a well wisher of society,
dispatched a complaint to the Commission leveling allegations of
naked corruption against Sheikh Rafiq Ahmad Additional
Deputy Commissioner, Jammu and Ravi Saran clerk in the office 
of Deputy Commissioner, Jammu while granting of Permanent  
Resident Certificate in violation of rules charging rupees  one
thousand per certificate from the beneficiaries. The anonymous
complaint attached Permanent Resident Certificates alleged to
have been issued without preparation of any file and completion of
necessary formalities in favour of S/Shri Sohan Lal and Lekh Raj
Gupta. The complaint was addressed to Shri Pramod Jain  
Divisional Commissioner, Jammu and a copy forwarded to  
Chairman of the Commission. The Commission entertained the  
complaint registered it as complaint No. D-89/2006, issued
notice to Shri Sheikh Rafiq Ahmad for his personal appearance
before the Commission on 29th December, 2006 to submit his  
statement of defence.  Shri Sheikh claims to have made a request
to the Commission for closing the proceedings on the ground that
the Commission lacked jurisdiction to entertain an anonymous
complaint. He thereafter rushed to this Court with a writ petition
being OWP No.64/2007. The grounds urged in the petition are
identical to the grounds set out in the other petitions. He insists
that the Commission lacks jurisdiction to entertain an anonymous
complaint and initiate proceedings against the petitioner and that
his prayer for dropping the proceedings was not accorded
consideration by the Commission. 
7.      Shri Vikas Behal vide order dated 3rd March, 2006 added as
respondent No. 4 by the Commission, a complaint filed by Shri
Mohd Shafi against Smt. Sonali Kumar and Smt. Ranjit Kour, has 
filed a petition registered as OWP No. 72/2007. It may be recalled
that while according consideration to the complaint and the
record made available by the parties, the Commission as detailed
in para 2 above, took cognizance of the matter not only against
the respondents name in the complaint but also against Smt.
Suman Lata Bhagat, Minister for Health and Medical Education.
Shri Abdul Gani Sofi formal State Minister for Health and Medical
Education, Shri Vikas Behal, PRO Minister for Health and Medical
Education and Mrs. Haleema successor Mrs. Ranjit Kour  
Principal ATM School, Srinagar. Mrs. Suman Lata Bhagat  
questions the order in OWP No. 72/2007. Shri Vikas Behal 
claiming to have been wrongly identified as Vikas Behal in the
Commission order dated 3rd March, 2006, throws challenge to 
the order on the same grounds as urged in the writ petition filed
by Mrs. Suman Lata Bhaghat in OWP. No.902/2006.    
8.      Peerzada Mohd Sayeed is Minister for Public Enterprises in the
present Cabinet. On 31st January, 2012, Daily Excelsior, Kashmir
Times, Tribune, The Indian Express, carried a news item wherein
it was alleged that Mr. Peerzada had used his official position in
facilitating use of unfair means by his foster son namely, Imam
Soubhan Bhat during Secondary School Examination (Annual)   
2009 in Centre No. 228, Al-Ameen School. It was further alleged
that the candidate even after he was caught by the Vigilance
Squad of the Board using unfair means was not booked and let off
on intervention of Shri Peerzada, who at the relevant time was
Education Minister with J&K Board of Secndary Education as one 
of the Departments/Institutions under him. It was further
reported that the Crime Branch of the State Police on inquiry
ordered by the Chief Minister had submitted its report to the
Principal Secretary Home Department. The Commission on   
17.02.2012 took notice of the news items repeated in Greater
Kashmir on 9th February, 2012 opining that allegations made
against the Education Minister squarely fall within the meaning of
Sub Section (3) of Section 2 of Jammu and Kashmir 
Accountability Commission Act, 2002 and that the allegations are
likely to shake confidence of the public in Democratic
institutions.  The Commission, accordingly, found it appropriate
to take cognizance of the matter in exercise of powers vested in
terms of Section 9 of the Act. The Commission directed notice to
be issued to Mr. Peerzada for his personal appearance or
appearance through a duly authorized agent or counsel on 2nd
March, 2012. The office was directed to call the authenticated
copy of the inquiry report submitted by the Crime Branch from
the Principal Secretary relating to the matter in issue.  Peerzada
Mohd Syed aggrieved with the Commission order dated 17th  
February, 2012 has filed writ petition registered as OWP No.
242/2012. The ground urged in the petition was that the
Commission did not have jurisdiction to take suo-moto cognizance
of the matter and initiate proceedings against the petitioner. It
was pleaded that the Commission lacked power to frame  
Regulation 9, Jammu and Kashmir Regulations 2005 and the  
Regulation was liable to be quashed as ultra vires, the
Accountability Commission Act, 2002. The petitioner contended
that as the petitions questioning validity of Regulation 9 of
Jammu and Kashmir Regulations 2005, framed by the   
Commission stand admitted his petition deserved to be given same
treatment and taken up for hearing.
9.      S/Shri Farooq Ahmad Dar (from Kashmir) and Sunil Sharma   
(from Jammu) on 11th August, 2011 addressed a complaint to His 
Excellency - the President of India, leveling allegations of
misappropriation of Government Funds to the tune of five
thousand Crore rupees against S/Shri Dr. Manohar Lal Sharma 
Minister Cooperative Department, Ab. Hamid Wani, 
Commissioner Secretary Cooperative Department and Mohd    
Abbas Registrar Cooperatives.  The respondents in the complaint
were alleged to have indulged in misappropriation while running
affairs of the Cooperative Department and the Cooperative
Institutions in the State. The complaint also leveled allegations
against other officer/officials named in the body of the complaint
including Shri Mohinder Singh  Chairman, Cooperative Bank 
Limited and Shri Arun Bakshi  - Managing Director, Jammu 
Central Cooperative Bank . The Commission received a copy of the
complaint by speed Post on 5th September, 2011. The Commission   
entertain the complaint, registered it as complaint No. K-10/2011,
issued notice to Dr. Manohar Lal and other public functionaries
against whom the allegations were leveled, requiring them to
submit their replies. The Commission on 11th May, 2012 on going
through the complaint and the replies submitted by the
respondents found a prima facie case made out for regular
inquiry. The Registry was asked to register the complaint as a
regular complaint and issue notice to the respondents. The
Vigilance Organization, Kashmir in the meantime, was asked to
inform the Commission about the status of the cases registered in
the matter.
10.      S/Shri Mohinder Singh and Arun Bakshi aggrieved with the order
of Commission dated 11.05.2012, have filed a writ petition being
OWP No. 727/2012. The main plank of the petitioners case is
that Regulation 9, Jammu and Kashmir Regulations 2005 is ultra
vires. It is pleaded that the Commission does not have jurisdiction
to take cognizance on an anonymous complaint and that the 
Sections 7, 9, 20, 21, 23, 28, 30, 31 are ultra vires the
Constitution and liable to be quashed. It is further pleaded that
the allegations leveled in the complaint do not fall within the
definition of grievance as defined under the Act, nor does the
complaint fall within purview of the Act.
11.     The writ petition OWP No. 804/2012 titled Manohar Lal
Versus State and anr. also arises out of the Commission order
dated 11th May, 2006. The petitioner is Minister of State for
Cooperative (with independent charge) in the State Cabinet. It is
pleaded that the Commission lacks power to initiate proceedings
against the public functionaries in absence of a complaint in the
format prescribed under SRO 281/2005. It is urged that
jurisdiction of Commission is confined to investigate and enquire,
as contemplated by the Act and does not extend beyond the 
jurisdiction delineated in the Act. Independent of challenge to the
vires of Regulation 9 Jammu and Kashmir Regulations 2005, it is
insisted that the allegations set out in the complaint are false,
frivolous and devoid of any substance.
12.     The State Governmentrespondent no. 1 has not filed reply in any
of the writ petitions. Learned Advocate General appearing for
respondent No. 1, however has taken a categoric stand that the
Commission does not have power to take suo-moto cognizance of  
a matter, in absence of complaint filed in accordance with the Act
and the Regulations made thereunder and that Regulations 9,
Jammu and Kashmir Regulations 2005 is ultra vires the Act.
13.     The Commission however has filed its reply in OWPs 64/2007, 
902/2006 and 905/2006. As stand taken by the Commission in  
all other petitions, is similar to the stand taken in aforesaid
petitions, learned Counsel for the respondent Commission prays
that the reply filed in OWPs  64/2007, 902/2006 and 905/2006
be treated as reply in other petitions as well. It is made clear that
the Commission is presently, restricting its contest to the
interpretation of the provisions of Jammu and Kashmir
Accountability Commission Act, 2002, delineating the power of
the Commission. The respondent Commission while denying all  
the averments made in the petitions insists that the Commission
in terms of provisions of the Act and the Regulation 9 made in
exercise of powers under Section 31 of the Act, has power to
initiate suo-moto proceedings where grounds exist to initiate
action. It is denied that the Commission has acted beyond or
without jurisdiction while taking cognizance of the complaints and
issuing notice to the petitioners to file their reply or deciding to
hold a regular inquiry.
14.     I have gone through the petitions and have heard learned counsel
for the parties.
15.     The main plank of the petitioners case is that the Act does not
confer any power on the Commission to initiate             suo-moto
investigation/inquiry into an action of a public functionary or an
allegation against a public functionary.  It is pleaded that the
Commission lacks jurisdiction to commence proceedings, on its 
own, on the facts that come to its notice otherwise than in the
form of complaint contemplated under the Act, Rules framed
thereunder and Regulations made in exercise of powers under
Section 31 of the Act.  Learned counsel for the petitioners lay
emphasis on the Section 3 of the Act that provides for
establishment of the Commission and maps out the purpose for 
which the Commission is established and Sections 11, 13, 24 of the
Act as also Rules 5, 7 8, 9, and 16 of Jammu and Kashmir 
Accountability Commission Rules, 2005.  It is insisted that
Regulation 9 of Jammu and Kashmir Accountability Commission   
Regulations, 2005 does not have its roots in any of the provisions
of the act and is beyond scope of Section 31 of the Act where-
under power is conferred on the Commission to make 
Regulations.  It is insisted that the commission cannot under
Regulation 9 assume a jurisdiction that the law makers have not
conferred on the Commission.  Learned counsel for the
petitioners argue that power to make Regulations enables the
Commission to lay down the procedure to be followed by
Commission for conducting proceedings including inquiries and
investigations on complaints received by it and not to create a
power or jurisdiction not available under the Act.  The
Commission, it is pointed out, cannot claim any inherent powers
as available to the Courts as the power and jurisdiction of the
Commission is to remain within confines of the Act.  Learned
counsel for the petitioners also refer to Section 24 of the Act that
insulates public functionaries against false and frivolous
complaint.  It is pointed out that whenever a complaint is found
by the Commission to be false, frivolous and vexatious to the
knowledge of the complaint, the Commission has power and  
jurisdiction in terms of Section 24 to proceed against the person
and once found guilty, the complainant is to be sentenced to
imprisonment and fine.  Learned counsel for the petitioners
contend that, in case, an information that prompts the
Commission to suo-moto  initiate proceedings, is later found to be
false, frivolous and vexatious,  the Commission would be helpless
to proceed against the source of information and the public
functionary would be subjected to unwarranted and avoidable
harassment. 

16.     Learned counsel for the Commission, on the other hand, argues
that in terms of Section 9 of the Act delineating jurisdiction of the
Commission, the Commission is empowered to investigate any   
action, which is taken by or with the general or specific approval
of a public functionary as defined in clause (16) of Section 2.  Mr.
Sethi argues that Sections 11 to 13 of the Act do not limit the
jurisdiction of the Commission and merely lay down procedure to
be followed by the Commission while conducting inquiry and
investigation.  Section 11 of the Act, it is pointed out, has been
made subject to other provisions of the Act including Section 9
and that Section 9 is not in any manner controlled by Section 11.
It is pointed out that Section 9 of the Act by omitting to use
expression allegation and by using the expression, action
widens power and jurisdiction of Commission.  It is argued that
the law makers by using the expression action have made it
clear that the Commission to swing into action, must not
necessarily have a complaint detailing the allegation before it.  The
Commission, it is argued can look into any action like decision,
recommendation, or finding as also failure to act on part of public
functionary, on its own without their being any allegation leveled
in a complaint against such public functionary.  Sections 11, 13, 24
of the Act as also to Rules 5, 7 8, 9, and 16 of Jammu and Kashmir
Accountability Commission Rules, 2005, it is pointed out, deal
with only one of the modes that may prompt the commission to 
initiate investigation or inquiry and are not exhaustive in
character, so as to infer that the Commission cannot act in
absence of a formal complaint.  Mr. Sethi, learned Senior
Advocate appearing for Commission, insists that the Regulation 9
falls within the ambit of powers available under Section 31 of the
Act, inasmuch as Sub Section (2) of Section 31 is illustrative in
character and does not control Sub Section (1) of Section 31 that
give the Commission power to make such Regulations as it may  
deem necessary for carrying out the purpose of the Act.
Regulation 9, it is emphasized does not infringe or go beyond any
of the provisions of the Act and can be validly used by the
Commission to initiate suo-moto proceedings against the public
functionary, as has been done by the respondent-Commission in 
the matters on hand.
17.     Learned counsel for the interveners laying emphasis on purpose
of the Act, the mischief sought to be addressed and menacing
proportions assumed by corruption in public life argue that the
Act needs to be given a purposive interpretation.  It is argued that
the hyper technical view, restricting ambit and scope of the Act
and powers of the Commission would defeat the very object and
purpose for which the Act came into being.  Mr. Ahmad, learned
counsel for the interveners, in particular, places reliance on the
following observations of the Supreme Court in Subramanian
Swamy Vs. Manmohan Singh and another (2012) 3    
Supreme Court Cases 64;  
                68.    Today, corruption in our country not only poses a grave
danger to the concept of constitutional governance, it also
threatens the very foundations of the Indian democracy an the
Rule of Law.  The magnitude of corruption in our public life is
incompatible with the concept of a socialist secular democratic
republic.  It cannot be disputed that where corruption begins all
rights end.  Corruption devalues human rights, chokes
development and undermines justice, liberty, equality, fraternity
which are the core values in our Preambular vision.  Therefore,
the duty of the court is that any anti-corruption law has to be
interpreted and worked out in such a fashion as to strengthen the
fight against corruption.  That is to say in a situation where two
constructions are eminently reasonable, the court has to accept
the one that seeks to eradicate corruption to the one which seeks
to perpetuate it.
        69.    Time and again this Court has expressed its dismay and
shock at the ever-growing tentacles of corruption in our society
but even then situations have not improved much.(See Sanjiv
Kumar V. State of Haryana; State of A.P. Vs. V. Vasudeva Rao; 
Shobha Suresh Jumani V. /Appellate Tribunal; state of M.P. v.
Ram Singh; J. Jayalalitha v. Union of India; and Major S.K. Kale
v. State of Maharashtra.)

18.     In order to examine whether the Commission can suo moto  
initiate inquiry, investigation or proceedings against the public
functionary, our attention must, in the first place, go to the
provisions of the Act.  The preamble of the Act to spelt out the
purpose of the Act states that the object to establish an institution
to inquire into the grievances and allegations against public
functionary and for matters connected therewith.  The
expression grievances and allegations imply or presuppose that
there is a person aggrieved or a person leveling the allegations.
The expressions refer to someone, who has a grievance against a
public functionary or has an allegation to level against such
functionary.  The preamble to the Act, therefore, visualizes a
complaint voicing grievances or allegations.  The preamble
obviously does not refer power to inquire into the matter in
absence of grievance or allegation or a power to act suo moto.
Section 3 of the Act further reflects the intention of legislature in
establishing the Commission and the objects sought to be
achieved by enactment of the Act.  It would be advantageous to
reproduce Section 3 of the Act hereunder;
       3.      Establishment of Accountability Commission 

(1).    As from the commencement of this Act, there shall
be established, for the purpose of conducting
investigations and inquiries in respect of
complaints under this Act, an institution to be
called the Accountability Commission.
(2).    The Accountability Commission shall consist of-,
a.      [a Chairperson who has been a 
Judge of the Supreme Court or
Judge of any High Court]; and
b.      Such other Members, if any, as
may be prescribed: 
                                
        Provided that a person shall not be
qualified for being appointed as a Member
unless he has been [a Judge of the High
Court].
(3).    The Chairperson and every other member shall,
before entering upon his office, make and
subscribe before the Governor or any person
nominated in this behalf by him, an oath or
affirmation in the form set out in the Schedule.
(4).    A vacancy occurring in the institution of
Accountability Commission shall be filled in as
soon as possible.

19.     The plain reading of Section 3 would make it clear that the
purpose to establish the Commission is to provide for conducting
investigations and inquiries in respect of complaints under the
Act.  Section 3 does not include power to initiate suo moto
inquiry, investigation or proceedings against the public
functionary.  It is pertinent to point out that the legislature in its
wisdom has not made Section 3 subject to other provisions of the
Act.  Sections 11 and 12 lay down the procedure to be followed by
the Commission while receiving the complaint under the Act.
Sections 11 and 12 read as under;
       11. Provisions relating to complaints

(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, a complaint may
be made under this Act, to the Accountability
Commission, by any person by a person aggrieved: 
(2)  Every complaint shall be made in such form and in
such manner and shall be accompanied by such   
affidavit as may be prescribed.
(3)  The contents of the complaint shall not be made
public till its scrutiny by the Accountability
Commission under section 12. 

12. Preliminary scrutiny of complaints by
      Accountability Commission

(1) If the Accountability Commission is satisfied, after
considering a complaint and after making such
verification as it deems appropriate that the complaint
is manifestly false and vexatious, the Accountability
Commission shall dismiss the complaint after
recording its reasons therefore and communicate the
same to the complainant and to the competent 
authority.
(2) The procedure for verification in respect of a
complaint, under sub-section (1) shall be such as the
Accountability Commission deems appropriate in the 
circumstances of the case and in particular, the
Accountability Commission may, if it deems it
necessary so to do, call for the comments of the public
functionary concerned.

     Section 11 again refers to a complaint and procedure to be
followed by the Commission while dealing with the complaint.
Sub Section 2 Section 11 makes it mandatory for the complainant 
to file affidavit in support of the complaint.  In terms of Section
12, in the event, the complaint is dismissed at a preliminary stage,
the order made thereon is to be conveyed to the complainant and
also to the Competent Authority.  It gives liberty to the
Commission to evolve its own procedure and methodology for 
verification of complaints received by the Commission and
permits it to call for comments of the public functionary
concerned. 
20.     Section 13 likewise contemplates service of copy of the complaint
on the public functionary as well as the Competent Authority.
The public functionary is to present his defence within a period of
two months from the date of receipt of the copy of the complaint
and the Competent Authority to furnish its comments within a
period of one month from such date.  In terms of Section 13 Sub-
Section 3, the Commission is to hold an inquiry as expeditiously as
possible and in any case, complete the inquiry within the period of
six months from the date of receipt of the complaint.  Section
13(3), therefore, refers to the complaint while prescribing the
period with which an inquiry is preferably to be completed.  It
again makes it clear that inquiry, investigation or proceedings
cannot be initiated otherwise than on a complaint.  Section 21 of
the Act requires the Commission to communicate its findings
through a report in writing to the complainant, the public
functionary and the Competent Authority.  Such report is to be
published in the Government Gazette besides any other mode as  
may be deemed fit by the Commission.  It is important to note
that Section 21 refers to allegations made in the complaint while
placing a duty on the Commission to communicate through a  
report its findings in the complaint, public functionary and
Competent Authority.  It would be advantageous to reproduce
Section 21 (1) of the Act;
21.     Reports of Accountability Commission 

(1) After the conclusion of inquiry under section 13 the
Accountability Commission shall determine whether all or any
of the allegations made in the complaint have or has been
proved to its satisfaction and by report in writing shall
communicate its findings to the complainant, the public
functionary and the competent authority and such report shall
be published in the Government Gazette besides other manners 
and modes as may be deemed fit by the Accountability 
Commission. 

21.     Let us now consider another aspect of the matter.  There can be
no disagreement with the proposition that while it is of utmost
importance to deal with the menace of corruption with a heavy
hand and no public functionary alleged to be involved in
misconduct, allowed to go off the hook without investigation or
inquiry into the alleged misconduct and punishment prescribed
under law, it is equally important that a public functionary should
not be exposed to frivolous, false and vexatious prosecution.  In
every statute that provides for prosecution and punishment of the
erring officials, a provision is incorporated to guard against
vexatious proceedings against public servants and prosecution is
permitted to be launched after some kind of scrutiny of allegations
at the pre-prosecution stage.  The object is not to protect the
public servants from the prosecution and punishment for the
misconduct alleged but to enable the public servants to perform
their duties fearlessly and unmindful of any threat of vexatious,
mala fide or false prosecution for the acts done in good faith in the
performance of their duties.
22.     While Judicial Magistrate, Ist Class in terms of Section 190 Cr.PC
is empowered to take cognizance of any offence, upon receiving a
complaint of the facts which constitute such offence or upon a
report in writing of such facts made by any police officer or even
upon his own knowledge or suspicion, that offence has been
committed yet Section 197 Cr.PC carves out an exception, in case
of a public servant.  It provides that when any public servant, who
is not removable from his office save by or with the sanction of
the State Government or Government of India, is accused of an
offence alleged to have been committed by him while acting or
purporting to the act in discharge of his official duties, no Court
shall take cognizance of such offence except with the previous
sanction of the Government of India/State Government as the
case may be.  The object is to get such an allegation scrutinized at
appropriate level and permit only such prosecution that on a
prima facie view appears to have substance.  Similarly, Section 6
of the Jammu and Kashmir Prevention of Corruption Act, 2006
Samvat. (1949 AD), prohibits prosecution under the Act except
after the sanction for prosecution is accorded by the Competent
Authority.  One of the modes to rule out or discourage false,
frivolous and vexatious complaints, is to subject such complaints
to scrutiny at the pre-inquiry/prosecution stage, so that only such
complaints as pass through such filtration are entertained.  The
other course or option available, is to provide for prosecution and
punishment of the complainant, who has no genuine reason to 
level allegation against a public servant but files complaint on
vexatious, mala fide and frivolous grounds.  The law makers, in
case of investigation, inquiry and proceedings under the Act, have
opted for the second course.  Section 24 of the Act prescribes
penalty for mala fide complaint.  It reads;
          24.       Penalty for malafide complaint

a).     Every person who makes any complaint which he knows   
or has reason to believe that the same is false, frivolous
or vexatious upon finding to that effect recorded by the
Accountability Commission shall be punishable as 
provided in sub-section (2).    
b).     When any offence under sub-section (1) is committed, the
Accountability Commission may take cognizance of the  
offence and after giving the offender a reasonable
opportunity of showing cause why he should not be
punished for such offence, try such offender summarily,
so far as may be, in accordance with the procedure
specified for summary trials under the Code of Criminal
Procedure, Samvat 1989, and if such offender is found
guilty of committing the offence, sentence him to
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one
year but which may extend to three years and also to
fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees and may
also award where fine is imposed, out of the amount of
the fine, to the public functionary against whom such
false complaint has been made, such amount of 
compensation as the Accountability Commission thinks  
fit:
       Provided that this shall not debar the public
functionary to pursue any other remedy or relief under
any law against the complaint.

     Section 24 is expected to discourage false, mala fide,
frivolous and vexatious complaints against the public
functionaries.  Section 24 of the Act provides an insulation or
protection to the public functionaries against false and frivolous
complaints.  The object is that a public functionary should be in a
position to discharge his duties fearlessly, undaunted by fear of
such complaints.  In case, the Commission is held to have power
to suo moto, in absence of a complaint, order inquiry,
investigation or proceedings against a public functionary, the legal
cover provided to the public functionary will disappear and the
object of Section 24 of the Act would be defeated.  Let us assume
that the Commission without a complaint decides to suo moto,
direct  investigation, inquiry or proceedings against a public
functionary on its own knowledge, because of some private
information, suspicion or any information received otherwise
through a complaint and after inquiry that may stretch over a
period of few months comes to conclusion that the information
received or suspicion nursed that prompted it to swing into an
action, is not only baseless but mala fide, the Commission would
not be in a position to prosecute and punish the source of the
information. In such a case, the public functionary would be
exposed to harassment, to which law makers did not intend the
public functionary to be exposed.  We need to be reminded that
the rule makers in their wisdom under Rule 5 and Rule 6 of the
Rules, 2005 have made it obligatory from the complainant to
sworn an affidavit in support of the complaint so that the identity
of the complaint is free from any doubt and in the event the
complaint is found to be false, frivolous or vexatious in terms of
Section 24 of the Act, he can be proceeded with in terms of the
aforesaid provision and punish in accordance with Section 24(2)
of the Act.  Section 24 further makes the intention of the law
makers clear that the Commission was not intended to have 
power to suo moto order inquiry, investigation or proceedings
against the public functionary in absence of the complaint.
23.     Let us now shift our focus to the Jammu and Kashmir
Accountability Commission Rules, 2005.  Rule 2(iv) defines
complainant as a person entitled to file complaint under
Section 11 of the Act.  Rule 5 prescribes Form and contents of the
complaint.  In terms of Rule 5(1), every complaint is to be, as far
as possible, made in Form-A prescribed in Schedule duly signed
and supported by an affidavit as prescribed under Rule 6.  Rule 7
and 8 prescribe mode and method of scrutiny and registration of
complaints.  In terms of Rule 9, an officer of the Commission is to
send to the complainant an acknowledgement of the complaint in 
Form C prescribing the Schedule.  In terms of Rule 16, a
complaint in which proceedings are closed or concluded exparte
may be taken up by the Commission for rehearing on merits, if
sufficient cause is shown to re-open it.  In terms of proviso to
Rule 16, such order, i.e. one of reopening the case and rehearing it
on its merits shall not be passed three months after from the date
of closure, filing or exparte of the decision of the case.
24.     The Commission in exercise of powers vested in it under Section
31 of the Act has made Regulations called the Jammu and 
Kashmir Accountability Commission Regulations, 2005.  The 
Regulations deal with the procedure to be followed by the
Commission while conducting inquiry, investigation or
proceedings against a public functionary.  In terms of Regulation
4, the Chair person of the Commission by a general or special
order is authorized to delegate any power conferred or duty
imposed on him under the Act, for the purposes of receiving,
processing and registering of the complaints, on any
officer/employee of the Commission as may be specified in the
order/direction.  Regulation 5, lays down mode and manner of
filing of the complaints.  Regulation 6 lays down procedure
regarding holding a preliminary inquiry.  Regulation 6 also refers
to the complaint while laying down the procedure regarding
holding a preliminary inquiry.  In terms of Regulation 6, after the
commission on consideration of the statement of defence and the
report of Competent Authority [submitted in terms of Section
13(1) of the Act] considers that further inquiry or investigation is
required to be conducted, to afford the public functionary further
an opportunity of time not exceeding two months to submit his
defence, if any, and thereafter, issue appropriate directions to the
complainant and the public prosecutor for production of evidence
in support of the allegations leveled against the public functionary
within a specific time.  Regulation 6(2) lays down the manner in
which the evidence is to be produced to substantiate the
allegations leveled in the complaint and provide for an
opportunity to the complainant to address the arguments in
support of the allegations.
25.     Sections 20 and 23 of the Act are also required to be noticed in
the context of the present discussion.
20.     Power to punish for contempt

(1)     The Accountability Commission shall have and exercise the
same jurisdiction, powers and authority in respect of
contempt of itself as a High Court has, and, for this purpose,
the provisions of the Jammu and Kashmir Contempt of 
Courts Act, 1997, shall have effect subject to the modification
that the references therein to High Court shall be construed
as including a reference to the Accountability Commission.
(2)     The Accountability Commission shall be deemed to be Court 
within the meaning of Jammu and Kashmir Contempt of  
Courts Act, 1997.

23.     Power of Accountability Commission to try
certain offences

(1)     When any such offence as is described in sub-section (1) of
section 22 is committed in the view of presence of the
Accountability Commission, the Accountability Commission  
may cause the offender to be detained in custody and may.
At any time on the same day, take cognizance of the offence
and, after giving the offender a reasonable opportunity of
showing cause why he should not be punished under this 
section, try such offender summarily, so far as may be, in
accordance with the procedure specified for summary trials
under the Code of Criminal Procedure, Samvat 1989, and 
sentence him to simple imprisonment for a term which any
extend to six months, or with fine or with both.
(2)     In every case tried under this section, the Accountability
Commission shall record the facts constituting the offence
with the statement, if any, made by the offender as well as
the finding and the sentence.
(3)     Any person convicted on a trial held under this section may
appeal to the High Court which shall be heard and decided
by a Division Bench of the High Court.
(4)     The provisions of this section shall have effect
notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of
Criminal Procedure, Samvat 1989. 

                         The legislature in its wisdom has conferred power on the
Commission to punish for contempt. The Commission in terms  
of aforesaid provision   is competent   to exercise the same
jurisdiction, powers and authority in respect of the contempt of
itself, as a High Court.  The Commission under Section 23 is
again empowered to try an offender summarily in case offence
described in Sub Section (1), Section 22 is committed in view
of the presence of the  Commission.   The law makers,
therefore, have  expressly  clothed  the  Commission  with  the
powers  to  punish for  contempt  where they in their wisdom
thought proper to clothe   the Commission with  such powers.
The legislature, therefore,   would have expressly conferred a
power   on the Commission to suo moto order inquiry,
investigation or proceedings against a public functionary, in the
event, such a power was intended to be given to the
Commission.  
26.     The Scheme of the Act and the Rules framed thereunder lead to
the irresistible conclusion that the law makers did not intend to
confer power on the Commission to suo moto order inquiry,
investigation or proceedings against a public functionary under
the Act in absence of a complainant and a complaint received
from such complainant as far as possible in the format prescribed
under the Rules.  The Regulations 6 and 7 also lay support to such
conclusion.
27.     However, it is argued by learned counsel for the Commission that
the power to suo moto order inquiry, investigation or proceedings
is to be located in Sections 9, 27 and 31 of the Act.  It is argued
that Section 9 sub-Section (1) refers to action and not
allegation and, therefore, jurisdiction of the Commission is not
restricted to investigation or an inquiry on a complaint leveling
allegation against a public functionary.  In order to appreciate the
arguments in right perspective, it would be advantageous to
notice Section 2(2) and Section 9 of the Act;

2.(2): action means action taken by way of decision,
recommendation or finding or in any other manner and
includes failure to act and all other expressions
connoting action shall be construed accordingly.

           9.   Jurisdiction of Accountability Commission

(1)     Subject to the provisions of this act, the
Accountability Commission may investigate any action 
which is taken by or with the general or specific
approval of a public functionally as defined in clause
(16) of section 2.
       Provided that the Accountability Commission
shall not inquire into any matter involved in, or arising
from, or connected with, any such allegation against the
Chief Minister in so far as it is in the interest of the
security of the State and/or maintenance of public order.
(2)     The Accountability Commission may inquire into 
any act or conduct of any person other than a public
functionary in so far as it considers it necessary so to do
for the purpose of its inquiry into any such allegations:
       Provided that the Accountability Commission
shall give such person a reasonable opportunity of being
heard and to produce evidence in his defence.
(3)     No matter in respect of which a complaint may be
made under this Act shall be referred for inquiry under
the Jammu and Kashmir Commission of Inquiry Act,  
1962.

        It is pointed out  by learned counsel for the petitioners that
action is of a wider scope than the expression allegation and
the law makers by using expression action in Section 9 have
conferred wider jurisdiction on the Commission to look into the
decision, recommendation, findings recorded by a public
functionary and even failure to act. The argument may sound
attractive but turns out to be specious, when we take a holistic
view of the Act and the Rules made thereunder.  In the first place,
Section 9 dealing with the jurisdiction of Accountability
Commission is made subject to provisions of the Act.  Section 9,
therefore, is subject to Section 3 of the Act that spells out the
object and purpose of establishment or setting up, of
Accountability Commission.   Section 3 in turn is not made
subject to any other provision of the Act.  Section 3 as already
noticed identifies investigations and inquiries in respect of the
complaints under (the) Act as purpose for the establishment of
the Accountability Commission.  Section 9, therefore, is to be
interpreted against the backdrop of Section 3 of the Act.
Furthermore, the expression action may widen the scope of
matters to be investigated by the Commission but does not
introduce any mode other than a complaint, to prompt the
Commission to swing into action.  Furthermore, the expression
action is used to include omissions and commissions.  It is
important to note that action is not defined under Section 2(2)
of the Act in relation to a public functionary while the expression
allegation is defined under Section 2(3) in relation to the public
functionary.  This apart, Proviso to Section 9 of Act makes it
clear that use of word action in Section 9(1) of the is not
intended to confer any jurisdiction wider than one otherwise
available to the Commission.  The Proviso while giving immunity
to the Chief Minister as regards acts done in the interest of
security of the State or maintenance of public order makes use of
expression such allegation.  Had it been intention of the law
makers to convey a wider jurisdiction by use of word action in
Section 9(1), they would not have made use of expression any
such allegation in the Proviso as acts and omissions beyond
allegation, but within action would be investigated by the
Commission against the Chief Minister even if the act or omission
was made in the interest of security of State or maintenance of
public order. Rule 7 sub Rule 3 makes the position more clear.  It
reads:
7(3).   The complaints relating to actions, allegations and
grievances pertaining to Kashmir Division shall be filed
in the Srinagar Wing of the Commission and such 
complaints pertaining to Jammu Division be filed in the
Jammu Wing of the Commission.   

     Rule 7 sub Rule (3) makes it clear that action, allegation and
grievance are dependent on the complaint filed before the
Commission and the word action used in Section 9 (1) does not
lead to the conclusion that the word confers a power on the
Commission to suo moto order inquiry, investigation or
proceedings against a public functionary in absence of a
complaint.  The argument advanced by Mr. Sethi, learned Senior
Advocate, are, therefore, devoid of any merit.
28.     Let us now turn to Section 27 to find if it admits of a suo moto
power to the Commission as Mr. Sethi would make us to believe. 
Section 27 reads as under;
       27. Persons likely to be prejudicially affected to be heard

If, at any stage of the inquiry, the Accountability
Commission,--- 
(a)     considers it necessary to inquire into the
conduct of any person; or
(b)     is of opinion that the reputation of any
person is likely to be prejudicially affected by the
inquiry,
       The Accountability Commission shall give
to that person a reasonable opportunity of being
heard in the inquiry and to produce evidence in
his defence.
       Provided that nothing in this section shall
apply where the credit of a witness is being
impeached. 

     A bare look at Section 27 would reveal that the Commission
in terms of the said provision would have jurisdiction to inquire
into the conduct of any person, not identified in the complaint
only after a proper complaint as contemplated under the Act is
filed before the Commission.  The Commission, if after it
entertains a complaint, proceeds in the matter considers it
necessary to inquire into the conduct of any person or is of the
opinion that the reputation of any person is likely to the
prejudicially affected by the inquiry, is to give a person a
reasonable opportunity of being heard in the inquiry and to
produce evidence in his defence.  The emphasis should be on word
inquiry used in Section 27 of the Act.  It leads us to conclude
that an inquiry initiated on a complaint, is already pending before
the Commission when a decision to inquire into the conduct of
any person is taken by the Commission.   One cannot, therefore,
locate power to suo moto order inquiry, investigation or
proceedings against public functionary in Section 27 of the Act.
29.     Section 31 clothes the Commission with power to make  
Regulations. Learned Counsel for the respondent Commission  
insists that power to make Regulations under Section 31(1)
includes power to make Regulation 9, wherein procedure in suo
moto actions is laid down.  It is argued that sub Section (1) of
Section 31 of the Act is wide in its scope and does not, in any
manner, restrict or limit the power available to the Commission to
make regulations, as it may deem necessary, for carrying out the
purposes of the Act.  It is insisted that sub-Section 2 of Section 31
does not control sub Section (1) of Section 31 of the Act and that
the former is only illustrative and not exhaustive in character.
The argument is far from convincing and is of no help to the case
sought to be set up by learned counsel for the respondent-
Commission.  
30.     It is pertinent to point out that while the Government in terms of
Section 30 of the Act has power to make rules for the purposes of
carrying into effect, the provisions of the Act, the Commission
is given power to make regulations for carrying out the
purposes of the Act.  There is difference in ambit and scope of
power given to the Government under Section 30 of the Act and
one given to the Commission under Section 31 of the Act.  The
power given to the Commission to make regulations  that it
hardly needs to be emphasized lack statutory flavor, is to be
exercised essentially to lay down the procedure and not to create
any substantive right or introduce a remedy beyond the purpose
of the Act. Firstly, the concept of suo moto power is alien to the
scheme envisaged under the Act and the Rules made there under.  
Secondly, Section 31 is not an open ended provision.  It empowers
the Commission to make regulations as it may deem necessary   
for carrying out the purpose of the Act.  The emphasis must be
on the expression purpose of the Act.  Section 3 of the Act that
as already pointed out is not made subject to any of the provisions
of the Act, maps out purposes of the Act and establishment of
Commission.  The purpose is to establish a Commission, for the
purpose of conducting investigations and inquiries in respect of
complaints, under the Act.  The Commission obviously has the
power to make Regulations to regulate receipt of complaints, and
mode and manner of investigation into the complaints and like
matters.  Section 31, therefore, does not empower the
Commission provide a remedy not available under the Act, to
trigger proceedings under the Act and the rules made there
under.  The Regulation 9 where under the Commission as on 
indirectly confer a power to take suo moto action by laying
down a procedure to be followed in such a case is beyond the
scope of Section 31 of the Act and ultra vires the Act.   The
Commission has made Regulation 9, erroneously assuming that it  
has power under the Act suo moto order investigation, inquiry or
proceedings against a public functionary.
31.     From the above discussion, it is abundantly clear that the
Commission does not have a power under the Act and Rules made   
thereunder to suo moto, in absence of the complaint, order
inquiry, investigation or proceedings against a public functionary.
Regulation 9 is in-conflict with the Act and beyond the scope of
Section 31 of the Act and, therefore, liable to be struck down.  The
Regulation offends the fundamental principle that requires the
Commission to act within the four corners of the State
Accountability Act of which the Commission is a creation.
32.     An argument may be advanced that the Commission has an    
inherent power, independent of the provisions of the Act and the
Rules made thereunder, to swing into action on its own, without a
complaint and suo moto order, inquiry, investigation or
proceedings against a public functionary.  Let us not leave room
for any ambiguity and deal with this aspect of the matter as well.
33.     Inherent Jurisdiction and Inherent Powers are two different
concepts. Though elusive, yet they are used as a basis for
jurisdiction that is not explicitly supported by statute. Inherent
jurisdiction is a doctrine of English Common law that superior
court has the jurisdiction to hear any matter that comes before it,
unless a statute or rule limits that authority or grants exclusive
jurisdiction to other Court or tribunal. Article 142 Constitution of
India may well be taken as a Constitutional provision intended to
recognize inherent jurisdiction of the Supreme Court of India to
pass such decree or such order as is necessary for doing complete
justice in any case or matter pending before it. Supreme Court in
DDA versus Skipper Construction Co. (P) Ltd. (1996) 4 SCC
while reiterating that inherent jurisdiction recognized under
Article 142, cannot be limited by a statutory provision observed:
       the power under Article 142 is meant to supplement the
existing legal frameworkto do complete justice between the
partiesand not to supplant it. It is conceived to meet
situations which cannot be effectively and appropriately
tackled by the existing provisions of law. As a matter of fact, we
think it advisable to leave this power undefined and
uncatalogued so that it remains elastic enough to be moulded to
suit the given situation. The very fact that this power is
conferred only upon this Court, and on no one else, is itself an
assurance that it will be used with due restraint and
circumspection, keeping in view the ultimate object of doing
complete justice between the parties.

     The inherent powers on the other hand inhere in every
Court as these are essential to the nature or constitution of Court.
Blacks Law Dictionery (VIIIth edition) defines inherent powers
as: A power that necessary derives from an office, position, or
status.
34.     Section 561-A Criminal Code of Procedure saves the inherent
power of High Court independent of the provision of the Code and
provides for exercise of such power to give effect to any order
under the Code, or to prevent abuse of process of court or
otherwise to secure justice. Section 151 Civil Procedure Code
likewise saves inherent powers of court to make such orders as
may be necessary for the ends of justice or to prevent abuse of
process of the Court. While 561-A Code of Criminal Procedure is
restricted in its scope to High Courts, Section 115 Civil Procedure
Code, applies to all the courts. It is pertinent to note that neither
Section 561-A Cr.P.C nor Section 115 CPC confers inherent 
powers on the court. These provision only reiterate that inherent
powers available to the Courts, independent of two codes, are to
remain unaffected by the provisions of the Codes. It is equally
important to note that though Supreme Court and High Courts
would have been competent to exercise inherent jurisdiction and
plenary powers and Subordinate Courts to make use of inherent
powers even in absence of Article 142 of Constitution, Section
561-A Cr.P.C and Section 115 CPCyet Framers of Constitution   
and Law makers thought it proper not to allow the area hazy or
leave room for any ambiguity to creep in. The aforesaid provisions
make it clear that the Courts because of their very constitution
and obligation to dispense justice as part of the sovereign power
had inherent powers before the Civil Procedure Code, and
Criminal Procedure Code were enacted. 
35.     What is true about Courts is not true about, a body created under
a statute. It is well settled that a statutory body being creation of a
statute has to exercise its power within four corners of the
statute.
36.     The Commission as a creation of the statute cannot claim
inherent power to suo moto order inquiry, investigation or
proceedings against a public functionary. The purpose of a
statute, creating authority is to specify, delineate and define
powers of the authority created by it. The object would be
undermined by claiming open ended powers in the name inherent  
powers that it would not be possible to easily define, control or
circumscribe.
37.     In Varada Iyengar Versus Ramudu (1983) 2 MLJ 517, the 
court rejecting the argument that an authority vested with
decision making power under any statute is to be taken to have
inherent powers like a court held:
       The conception of inherent powers is opposed to
statute-created jurisdictions. In this respect, Courts of law
are a different brand altogether Every legal system
recognises the existence of inherent powers in the common
law Courts. If Section 151 of the Code of Civil Procedure,
saves the inherent powers of Court, that is because
inherent powers pre-existed the Code. The position,
however of the Tribunals appointed under statutes is quite
different. They may well possess some or even all the
trappings of Courts of justice, but they are creatures of
statute in the sense that they owe their existence as well as
the definition of their powers to the statute. It is the statute
which confers and defines: the powers of the tribunals. In
every case it is a matter of construction of the statute, as to
how and in what manner the tribunal's powers have got to
be exercised, and also as to the nature and extent of those
powers. Depending upon the words of the particular
statute concerned, it might, in a given case, be open to a
Court of construction to read certain incidental, or
ancillary or implied, powers in the statutory tribunals,
over and above that which is expressly conferred by the
statute on such tribunals as their jurisdiction. But the
doctrine of implied powers is quite different from
imputing to the tribunals any inherent powers.


     Inherent powers are to be distinguished from implied
powers. Though they are more often used as synonymous with  
each other the two differ fundamentally. Implied power is a power
that can be reasonably derived from a explicit power. It is
something that can be assumed as a reasonable out growth of 
explicit power. Inherent powers on the other hand are such
powers as are assumed as axiomatic components of fundamental   
function of a Court.
38.     The Commission may have implicit or implied power reasonably
deducible from its explicit power to regulate its procedure but it
does not have inherent power that would overrides the Act, or be
in conflict with any of the provisions of the Act or the rules made
thereunder.
39.     The discussion leads us to the conclusion that the Commission
cannot claim to have an inherent power to suo moto order
investigation, inquiry or proceedings against a public functionary.
40.     It cannot be denied that corruption in public life has of late
assumed alarming proportions. It has been rightly called a threat
to a democratic polity more serious than internal revolt or
external aggression.  It erodes basic human values creates
overnight millionaire, leads to unhealthy competition in the
society, adversely affects life style, promotes  insatiable lust for
wealth, misallocation and misappropriation of resources.
Materialistic pursuits as against value based life style, pompous
show of money power, dowry demands and dowry deaths are only   
a few of spillovers of the menace of corruption that have seeped
deep into our social fabric.  Corruption does not allow the tax
payers money to go to benefit the target groups.  The result is
that the huge budgetary allocations and welfare schemes intended
to ameliorate lot of poor, down trodden, marginalized, deprived
and unattended sections of the society, go to the pockets of a
handful of public functionaries and lead to illegitimate and undue
enrichment. It results in a sense of bitterness, deprivation and
injustice amongst the people below and a little above poverty line.
It erodes their confidence in the rule of law and prompts a few
amongst them to nurse idea of using methods other than 
democratic to usher change in the system.   Corruption having
regard to its negative spillover on the people in general has its
competitors only in terrorism and environmental degradation.  In
other words, the corruption because of its spread and sweep may
be as dangerous as terrorism and as lethal as threat to the eco-
system.  The democratic polity as a whole, the pillars on which it
has its edifices and all its institutions have to formulate responses,
to combat corruption.  The Jammu and Kashmir State  
Accountability Commission Act, 2002 is one of the responses 
formulated by the legislature to fight the menace.  However,
seriousness or gravity of the problem must not prompt us to
make a departure from fundamental principles that govern
exercise of powers by a statutory body  in the present case,
Accountability Commission created by a statute, nor prod us to
interpret the Act and the Rules made thereunder in a manner  not
permissible under law.   The principle of purposive interpretation
cannot be pressed into service to rewrite law.  Such power
belongs to the legislature, and not to the Courts.  The law makers,
therefore, are free to confer power on the Commission to suo
moto order inquiry, investigation or proceeding against a public
functionary by making necessary amendment in the Act.  
However, as on today, such a power to the Commission is not 
available under the Act.
41.     In view of the conclusions drawn, the Regulation 9 is held to be
ultra vires the Jammu and Kashmir Accountability Commission 
and beyond power given to the Commission under Section 31 of 
the Act and, is accordingly, struck down.  The proceedings
initiated against the petitioners in OWP Nos.  727/2012,
804/2012, 242/2012, 956/2006, 94/2007 and 64/2007 by the 
Commission suo moto on anonymous complaints, or the    
complaints filed without sufficient particulars of the complaint(s),
so as to identify the complaints and, therefore, as good as
anonymous are without jurisdiction and are, accordingly, quashed.
The writ petitions bearing OWP Nos. 727/2012, 804/2012, 
242/2012, 956/2006, 94/2007 and 64/2007 are, therefore,
allowed.  However, as regards proceedings initiated against Smt.
Suman Lata Bhagat  and Vikas Behal @ Vikas Bhagat in OWP     
Nos.902/2006 and 72/2007,  the Commission had before it a 
complaint filed by Mohd. Shafi Indrabi lodged in accordance with
the Act.  The Commission while proceeding with the inquiry,
considered it necessary to inquire into the conduct of Smt. Suman
Lata Bhagat Minister for Health and Medical Education, Mr.
Abdul Gani Sofi, Minister for Health and Medical Education, Shri
Vikas Bhagat PRO of Minister for Health and Medical Education,
and Mst. Halima Principal AMT, School, Srinagarsuccessor in  
office of Smt. Ranjit Kour respondent in the complaint.  The
proceedings initiated fall within the ambit of Section 27 of the
Act.  The proceedings against the petitioners in OWP
Nos.902/2006 and 72/2007 having been initiated in exercise of
powers vested in the Commission under Section 27 of the Act
cannot be faulted as the proceedings are marketedly
distinguishable from suo moto proceedings in absence of a
complaint lodged under the Act.  The grounds urged in the
petitions, independent of challenge to the authority of the
Commission to suo moto initiate proceedings, are factual in
character and to be dealt with by the Commission after the
petitioners in response to the notice, avail the opportunity of
being heard and produce the evidence in their defence.  The writ
petition bearing OWP Nos.902/2006 and 72/2007 are,  
therefore, disposed of giving liberty to the petitioners to project
their stand and also produce such evidence as they may deem 
proper before the Commission. 
42.     Registry to send copy of the judgment to the Commission.

(Hasnain Massodi) 
  Judge
Jammu  
04.01.2013      
Varun Bedi 




