

HIGH COURT OF JAMMU AND KASHMIR AT JAMMU.            
CIA No. 51 OF 2008  
Joosy Razdan  
Petitioners
Sanjay Gangoo  
Respondent  
!Mr. P. N. Goja, Advocate
^exparte

Honble Mr. Justice Bansi Lal Bhat
Date: 13.05.2013 
:J U D G M E N T :
Appellant is legally wedded wife of respondent,
marriage between spouses having been solemnized on   
02.10.1998 at Jammu in accordance with Hindu Rites. A 
male child, Master Hritik, was born out of the said wedlock
between the spouses. To her chagrin, appellant discovered
within a month of the marriage that the respondent was a
person of shaky nature avoiding people and the family
members. The respondent would go to long sleep after
consuming some medicine. On being confronted about his  
abnormal behaviour, he would abuse the petitioner. It finally
dawned upon her that respondent was a drug addict  a fact
2
concealed from appellant at the time of marriage.
Respondent lost his job and he could not stick to work at
any place after finding alternate jobs. Appellant was abused
and also subjected to physical violence as the respondent
had been spending his nights in dark tunnels. The consistent
abnormal behaviour of respondent resulted in embitterment
of relations between the spouses. Finding it difficult to
reconcile with the behaviour of respondent and that she had
been cheated in marriage by concealing drug addiction of
respondent, the appellantalong with her minor son started
living with her parents at Jammu. Respondent was fired
from job whenever and wherever he took a new job after
losing the previous one. Appellant prayed for dissolution of
her marriage with respondent by invoking jurisdiction of
District Court where she filed a petition under Section 11 of
the Jammu and Kashmir Hindu Marriage Act for declaring 
the marriage subsisting between spouses a nullity and also
under Section 13 of the same Act for dissolution of marriage
by Decree of divorce. The Petition was contested by
respondent-husband who denied that he ever consumed   
drugs or that he was a drug-addict. Respondent further
pleaded that the appellant was enamoured of glamorous city
life and she was reluctant to live with him in small and
remote areas. She would exhibit her erratic behaviour
picking up quarrel with him frequently. Respondent denied
hat he was ever fired by his employer. He pleaded that he
was in search of better opportunities of job which resulted in
3
frequent change of employment. He alleged that the
appellant had withdrawn from his society without
reasonable and sufficient cause.
Parties joined the following issues:
1. Whether the consent of appellant for marriage
was obtained by suppression of facts? OPP 
2. Whether the respondent has treated the appellant
with cruelty? OPP 
3. Relief. OPP
Evidence was adduced by appellant who besides  
examining 2/3 witnesses in support of her case also entered
the witness box to substantiate the allegations in the
Petition. Respondent failed to enter the witness box to rebut
the allegations in the petition, though he examined two
witnesses in defence.
On consideration of the evidence adduced by parties
learned District Judge (Matrimonial Cases) Jammu 
dismissed the Petition. Learned Trial did not find any
evidence to prove that the respondent was a drug addict
prior to his marriage with the petitioner, therefore no
question of concealment of such fact or getting married with
appellant arouse. He found that there was also no evidence
of cruelty.
4
In this Appeal filed against the impugned Judgment
rendered by learned Trial Court on 30.09.2008 appellant has
seriously questioned findings recorded by learned Trial
Court on the ground that the facts pleaded in the petition
have been substantiated by appellant and proved by her
witnesses including an Expert-Dr. Vinod Dhar which stands
un-rebutted. Respondent has not appeared in the witness
box 
to prove that he has improved upon the vice of drug
addiction and that he has undergone reformation.
Furthermore the mere fact that the respondent was a
drugaddict
perpetuating agony and inflicting pain upon the
appellant in itself constituted cruelty. He submits that the
learned Trial Court failed to appreciate that the effect of
non-appearance of respondent in witness box had resulted
in
non-rebuttal of allegations in the Petition which were also
established satisfactorily by oral evidence adduced at the
trial.
Efforts to serve the respondent through ordinary mode
proved abortive. Substituted service was resorted to.
Proclamation issued for service of respondent was
published
in Newspaper Edition of The Sunday Express Vadodra  
(Gujrat) dated September 09, 2012. However, respondent 
did not appear to contest the appeal. He was set exparte and
the appeal was heard in his absence.
On scanning appreciation of evidence through the
evidence brought on record by appellant during the trial of
the cause before the learned Trial Court, it emerges that
5
appellant has, besides herself entering the witness box,
examined a Medical Expert-Dr. Vinod Dhar and one Mr. K. 
L. Dhar who happened to the boss of respondent while the
latter was serving in Dooli Ganga Project, Uttranchal.
Adverting to testimony of appellant it comes to fore that she
got married to respondent on 02.10.1998 at Jammu. It was
an arranged marriage. She belonged to an educated family
and was a Diploma Holder in Electronics and Tele
Communications from Bangalore. She was working as   
Junior Engineer with Shayan Haryana at the time of her
marriage while respondent was serving as Engineer in JP
Industries at Bunther (H.P.). According to her version it was
a high standard marriage and her parents had given
sufficient dowry to her. She joined respondent at Bunther
just a day after her marriage. However, she found that the
respondent was not having good attitude towards her and
behaved in an abnormal way. He used to avoid people.
Respondent quit his job barely a month after marriage. The
couple went to Delhi where appellant joined her previous
job. However, respondent stayed idle. He would keep
sleeping for the whole day which gave rise to suspicion in
the mind of appellant that he consumed drugs. She alleged
that that respondent had beaten her on 2/3 occasions. Her
mother-in-law was also living with them. Appellant turned
pregnant. The family left for Baroda where respondent
owned a house. Whenever appellant tried to confront the
respondent and enquire about his erratic behaviour,
6
respondent would become violent. She found that the
respondent used Corex and injections to induce drugs in his
body. She gave birth to a child at Baroda. Her father visited
her and bore the expenses incurred on her delivery. At the
instance of her mother-in-law she sought assistance of one
Mr. Sharma who happened to be friend of her father-in-law.
Mr. Sharma arranged a job for respondent in HCC Dooli
Ganga Project at Dharchula. She also joined him at
Dhurchula after some time but to her dismay Project
Manager Sh. K. L. Dhar informed her that respondent was 
an indolent as he was a drug addict. Meanwhile, a team
arrived from Bombay and removed respondent from service. 
Mr. Dhar arranged a job for respondent with Samsung but
respondent did not stick to the work place for more than a
fortnight. Mr. Dhar again came to the rescue of the family
and found another job for respondent with Gamon India
Sikkim. Respondent joined there but he was removed from 
service. Appellantclaimed that she left for Jammu. Her
father not only looked after the appellant and her child but
also managed a job for respondent at Rishikesh. Appellant
did not join him there. She claimed that the respondent was
taken to Dr. Dhar for treatment. Appellant further deposed
that the factum of respondent being a drug addict was
concealed from her till marriage. She was cheated.
Respondent sold her ornaments including her golden chain.
Shopkeepers from whom respondent had taken goods on    
credit visited her with demand of money. She claimed that
7
matrimonial relations between her and respondent were
snapped from the day respondent went to Rishikesh. She 
claimed that she had served notice marked EXPW-J upon  
respondent seeking divorce by mutual consent. She 
apprehended that respondent may push her in flesh
trade to earn money so that he could satisfy his lust for
drugs. Thus she claimed to have lost faith in respondent.
She felt insecure in living in the company of respondent and
also apprehended danger to the safety of the child.
Respondent had declined to go for divorce by mutual
understanding. Appellant has been cross examined at length
which revealed that she had met respondent twice at Delhi
before her marriage. She was with respondent for about 2
hours when engagement had taken place. However during  
these brief visits she did not learn about the drug addiction
of respondent. Her parents met respondent at the time of
engagement only. She stayed in the company of respondent  
at Kulu Bunther after marriage. It is there that she
discovered the attitudinal problem in him. Respondent
would go for long sleep instead of attending to his work at
the work place. But they had cordial relations at that time.
Thereafter she lived with respondent at Delhi for about six
months. It was at Delhi that she suspected drug abuse by
respondent. She found the respondent visiting medical
stores
and going to bathroom with bottles of Corex. On enquiry
respondent told her that he used to consume the drug on
medical advice. However, she did not disclose this fact to
8
anybody. She discovered Charas and Opium besides Corex   
in the bag of respondent while staying at Dharchula. Their
bathroom also smelt of such drugs. Respondent would also 
purchase injections from medical shop at Dharchula. He was
not ailing. She made no complaint about the same. She held
no joint account with the respondent. Her parents had
provided money for purchase of vehicle. Mr. Dhar was the
Project Manager and when she met him, he disclosed that 
the respondent had been deserting the site and indulge in
drug abuse. Respondent was persuaded to attend his job at
the site. The revelation by Mr. Dhar confirmed her suspicion
that the respondent was a drug addict, though she herself
noticed the respondent consuming drugs. She stayed with 
respondent at Dharchula and had relations with him as she
wanted the respondent to reform. Respondent never invited
her to join him at Rishikesh. He was removed from job
shortly thereafter. Project Manager had called her on phone
ad told her that that respondent had taken a loan of
Rs.15,000/- but failed to return the same. She was at Jammu
at that time. She and respondent had stayed at Jammu for
sometime before respondent left for Rishikesh but Doctor
had prescribed medicines for respondent and it was a
fortnight thereafter that the respondent left Rishikesh where
here father had found a job for him. Respondent had never
made any attempt to visit his child.
Appellants testimony brings to fore the plight of a
hapless woman who was duped into a nuptial alliance with a
9
man who turned out to be a drug addict. The amount of pain
and agony inflicted on her can be gauged from the fact that
the addiction of respondent ensued the inevitable
consequences bringing disaster to the family as he was fired
from his job. One can imagine the unenviable position in
which the appellant had landed. She had not only to muster
strength to come out of the shock upon learning that her
husband was a drug addict but also to cope up with the
circumstances resulting from removal of respondent from
service. Clouds of financial crunch and the days of
starvation ahead must have been looming large on her head,
moreso as she attained the status of motherhood and had 
also to take care of her infant baby. The attitudinal change
noticed in the respondent who would go to long sleep after
consuming drugs and get irritated and become violent when
confronted must have been yet another humiliation slapped
upon the petitioner. Uncertainties of future and the family
sinking into hardship on account of lack of resources to lead
a decent life must have been staring at her face and further
compounding circumstances that descended upon her. Not   
rest content with that, appellant had to run from pillar to
post to salvage the sinking ship as she had to approach
people and seek assistance to arrange job for the
respondent.
Her sworn testimony, which has been corroborated on all
vital aspects by her witnesses, graphically depicts the brave
efforts made by her to save marriage and prevent the
respondent from becoming a victim of drug-addiction. Dr.
10
Vinod Dhar, examined by the appellant to establish
drugaddiction
of respondent, proved certificate marked EXPWD. 
He is a qualified Medical Practitioner having a Diploma
in De-addiction course beside a Degree in Medicines. He
claimed to have experience of de-addiction cases which he
handled. He supported appellants version and produced
record to establish that respondent had approached him for
counseling and treatment of withdrawal symptoms as the 
respondent had quit drugs since 43 days. From case history
noticed by the witness it emerges that respondent was
addicted to drugs of Opiate group administered in the form
of Corex Capsules and through Injections. Corex has
codene 
as an ingredient which is an opium derivative. The witness
had prescribed medicines to respondent for withdrawal
symptoms and also had two counseling sessions with him  
but the respondent did not follow up. The record produced
by witness was marked EXPW-D(1). His testimony further  
reveals that he had treated the respondent in the year 2003.
It is, thus, manifestly clear that Dr. Vinod Dhar has duly
corroborated appellants allegations of respondent being a
drug addict. Incidentally the testimony of this witness also
reveals that the appellant alone was accompanying the
respondent in drug de-addiction sessions which
substantiated her assertion in Petition that she made all out
efforts to reform the respondent and save her marriage.
Appellant also examined Mr. K.L. Dhar who was the 
boss of respondent in Dool Ganaga Project Uttranchal. The
11
witness held position as General Manager while the
respondent was working under him as Engineer In-charge of
underground works in the year 2001. Since respondent also
belonged to the same ethnic group, the witness called him in
his office and enquired about his work. The witness allotted
him underground works as per his choice. However, the
witness learnt within a fortnight that the respondent used to
skip the site. On enquiry respondent refuted the allegations.
The witness asked the night duty officer to keep vigil on the
respondent. Three officers reported that the respondent was
not discharging duties and he was a drug-addict. The
witness claimed to have called appellant in his office and
enquired about the drug habit of respondent. Appellant was
speechless and she started weeping. Ultimately she came 
out
with truth. Meanwhile, the witness received instructions
from his Head Office at Mumbai to enquire about the drug
addiction of respondent. He conducted inspection at night
and found two Corex Bottles lying empty in the drawer of
table placed in the cabin of respondent. On enquiry he learnt
that respondent was habitual of drugs. He submitted report
to his Head Office. A team with Deputy General Manager 
Personnel as its Head arrived from Head Office. The witness
was directed to terminate services of respondent. He wanted
to act accordingly. However the respondent was permitted
to resign. The witness claimed that it was on humanitarian
grounds that he recommended respondent to his friend Mr.
Pandey working in Gamoon India Limited. Respondent was   
12
employed there but it was just on his third day that when he
disturbed public peace by knocking at doors of houses and
shops in want of Corex that police arrested him and Mr.
Pandey fired him from service. Testimony of appellant is
also corroborated by her father Kanya Lal Razdan who
supported her version in material particulars and events
connected with matrimonial life of the spouses, drug
addiction of respondent and the circumstances compelling
him to extend financial support to appellant at the time of
her delivery. The evidence tendered by appellant and her
witnesses has withstood the test of cross examination and
their testimonies have not been assailed to establish that
they had a motive in making any false accusation against the
appellant and deriving any benefit out of the same.
Respondent, as stated elsewhere, stayed away from the 
witness box. He examined two witnesses in rebuttal to
appellants evidence.
Vijay Kumar Koul is the maternal uncle of respondent
who stated that he had never seen respondent consuming  
drugs and appellant never complained to him in this regard.
Instead he blamed appellant of being hot-headed and
attributed matrimonial discord to appellant who wanted to
lead a hi-fi life at an urban location and was not willing to
live dull life at the tunnel sites where respondent worked as
Engineer. His cross examination reveals that he had no
knowledge about the circumstances in which the spouses  
got
separated and the events relating to frequent quitting of job
13
by respondent. Same is the case with Rajinder Koul, another
witness examined by respondent. He is a cousin of
respondent who claimed that respondent was not a drug 
addict as he knows the respondent since his childhood. He
blamed appellant of being over-ambitious who wanted to
settle in a city but respondents job did not permit of the
same. None of the two witnesses examined have spoken   
anything about de-addiction counseling and treatment which
the respondent had to undergo but did not follow up. The
evidence adduced by respondent is lacking insofar as the
material issues relating to respondent being a drug addict
and perpetuating cruelty upon appellant is concerned. Same
is hardly of any significance and evidentiary value as the
respondent himself has chosen not to appear in witness box
to rebut the allegations emanating out of sworn testimony of
appellant duly corroborated by her witnesses including a
Medical Expert and General Manager, Dool Ganga Project  
under whom respondent worked as an Engineer. The effect 
of non-appearance of respondent in witness box is that the
allegations in the Petition substantiated by appellant and
her witnesses stand un-rebutted and uncontroverted. In
matrimonial disputes the spouses are best witnesses to
events and circumstances concerning the nuptial alliance.
What happens between them is best known to the couple.  
Seldom have others including the family members, an 
occasion to derive knowledge about the affairs and
circumstances concerning a couple. Once respondent14  
husband chose to stay away from witness box, he withheld 
the best evidence regarding the matrimonial dispute
interse the parties. The evidence of two witnesses tendered
by him, in absence of his own deposition, carries no
weight. Even on merit the same is of no significance.
Cruelty does not necessarily comprise of physical
violence only. Harassment, intimidation, humiliation, breach
of trust, ridiculing the other spouse publicly to humble and
humiliate and create an atmosphere which may not be 
conducive to safety and security of wife constitutes cruelty
on the part of husband.
In Dastane v Dastane Honble Supreme Court  
examined the matrimonial ground of cruelty and held that
the appellant must prove that the respondent has treated
appellant with such cruelty as to cause reasonable
apprehension in the mind of appellant that it will be harmful
or injurious for the appellant to live with respondent. It is
manifestly clear that the apprehension contemplated by the
above conception is that further cohabitation will be harmful
or injurious and not that the same or similar acts of cruelty
will be repeated.
It is well settled that the acts complained of need not
have taken place within the ambit of marital relationship.
The conduct of erring spouse even prior to solemnization of
marriage and revelation after marriage of fraudulent
deception and suppression of facts in regard to conduct that
per se constitutes cruelty may be so distressing as to
amount 
15
to cruelty. The doctrine of actual physical harm and
reasonable apprehension thereof having been repudiated,
modern views consider mental cruelty as causing more 
grievous injury and giving rise of reasonable apprehension
that it will be harmful or unsafe to live with the other party.
The fact of respondent being a drug addict, which resulted
in his being fired from job time and again, had the inevitable
consequence of affecting the susceptibilities of the innocent
spouse. The conduct of respondent can be safely said to be
amounting to cruelty. It is immaterial that the respondent
may not have intended to injure or cause harm to
petitionerwife.
In the instant case the conduct of respondent being a
drug-addict resulting in his being frequently fired from
service is per se unlawful. Its impact on the petitioner-wife
and the minor child living under her care spells disaster.
Proof of conduct of respondent, who has not come forward
to establish that he had quit the vice of drug addiction and
reformed himself so as to instill a sense of security in the
mind of petitioner-wife and generate hope that the object of
marriage interse the parties would be achieved, constitutes
cruelty and I have no doubt in my mind that the findings
adopted on Issue Nos. 1 and 2 are perverse and the same 
cannot be supported.
Question of condonation of cruelty on the part of
petitioner, given the nature of accusation constituting such
cruelty, is untenable. Consumption of narcotic drugs or
16
psychotropic substances without medical necessity or
appropriate permission is an offence. Drug addiction by a
spouse can be a matter of perpetual agony for the other
spouse. Condonation of cruelty on account of drug abuse by
husband has to be established, if same is pleaded by the
husband. In the instant case testimony of Dr. Vinod Dhar
establishes that the case history of respondent established
that he had acquired the habit of consuming drugs since
1992, i.e., six years prior to solemnization of marriage with
petitioner. The onus of establishing the facts necessary for
proving the conduct of respondent in being a drug-consumer
rested upon the appellant who has discharged the same. 
Condonation of the acts of omission and commission 
constituting cruelty was to be established by the respondent
who did not chose to appear in the witness box to rebut the
allegations of appellant and prove that he was not guilty of
any inequitable conduct.
In view of the fore going discussion, findings on Issue
Nos. 1 and 2 returned by Trial Court cannot be supported.
The findings are reversed and both the Issues are decided
in
favour of petitioner. However in view of the provisions of
Section 12 of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1980, appellants
claim for annulment of marriage has to be rejected as no
claim can be entertained if petition is presented more than
one year after the fraud has been discovered. Such claim
being clearly barred in view of the findings arrived at, the
only prayer that can be acceded to in view of the finding
17
returned on Issue No.2 is the prayer for grant of divorce.
Finding on Issue No.2 having been returned in favour of
appellant and appellant not being guilty of any inequitable
conduct disentitling her to the relief claimed, is held entitled
to dissolution of marriage by a Decree of divorce.
The appeal is allowed and impugned judgment is set
aside. Let a Decree of divorce dissolving marriage between
the parties be passed in favour of appellant with costs.
Decree Sheet be drawn up accordingly. 
The Trial Court be informed about this order and the
record be remitted back.
(Bansi Lal Bhat)
Judge 
Jammu:  
Sunita.
13.05.2013 




