

HIGH COURT OF JAMMU AND KASHMIR AT JAMMU             
Cr Appeal No. D-20 OF 2011 AND Cr MA No. D-26 OF 2011 AND      
Confirm No. 09 OF 2011 
Kala Ram. 
Petitioners
State and anr.
Respondent  
!Mr. J. P. Gandhi, Advocate.
^Mr. Z. S. Wattali, Dy. AG

Honble Mr. Justice Hasnain Massodi, Judge 
Honble Mr. Justice Janak Raj Kotwal-Judge
Date: 29.08.2013 
:J U D G M E N T :

Per Kotwal-J.
1. This appeal is by one Kala Ram who has been 
convicted under sections 498-A and 302 RPC by 1st 
Additional Sessions Judge, Jammu vide judgment  
and order dated 30.04.2011. He has been 
sentenced to rigorous imprisonment for life and
fine of Rs. 2000/ under Section 302 RPC and
rigorous imprisonment for six months and fine of
Rs. 1000/ under Section 498-A RPC.  
2
2. Heard. We have perused the record.
3. On 11.10.2007, Sharda Devi, the wife of the
appellant, received severe burn injuries in an
incident which took place in their house at village,
Marjhali within the jurisdiction of Police Station,
Gharota of Jammu district. She was rushed to
Government Medical College Hospital, Jammu from  
where she was shifted to Army Hospital, Satwari
Jammu. On 12.10.2007, Head Constable (HC),   
Kuldeep Kumar, who was deputed from the above   
said Police station, recorded her statement in the
Army Hospital. She stated, briefly, that her
husband Kala Ram (Appellant) and his parents, 
Bikru Ram and Taro Devi had been harassing and  
beating her for bringing more dowry. Her husband
had been insisting that she should bring a
Motorcycle for him from her parents. She also
stated that on 11.10.2007, her husband after
hatching a conspiracy with his parents doused her
with petrol and set her ablaze with the intention of
causing her death. This statement of the victim was
registered as FIR No. 58/2007 under section
307,498-A, 109 RPC and investigation commenced.   
The victim, who had suffered 90 per cent burn
injuries, succumbed to the injuries in the Army
hospital on 16. 10. 2007. Investigation was carried
3
out by the SHO. Police Station, Gharota. On
completion of the investigation charge sheet under
Sections 302, 498-A & 109 RPC was preferred  
against the appellant (A-1) and his parents, Bikru
Ram (A-2) and Taro Dev (A-3) in the Commital
Court. After completion of formalities connected
with the fact that appellant was an Army
personnel, case was committed for trial and came
to be assigned to the Court of learned 1st
Additional Sessions Judge, Jammu.  
4. Learned trial Court after finding prima facie case
under sections 302 and 498-A RPC against the 
appellant (A-1) and under section 498-A against A-2
and A-3, framed charges against them. All of them
pleaded not guilty and claimed to be tried.
Prosecution thus examined 13 out of the 16
witnesses cited in the charge sheet. The witnesses
examined are; Sham Lal (PW-1), Natha Ram (P-2),  
Sanjay Kumar (P-3), Ravi Kumar (P-4), Yudhvir
Singh (P-5), Garu Ram(P-6), Manohar Lal (P-7), HC 
Harvesh Kumar (P-8), Kunti Devi (P-9), Vinod Singh
(P-10), L/Nk Sanjay Kumar (P-13), Sukhdev Singh 
Patwari (P-14) and Dr. K. K. Thakur (P-15). The
statement of the deceased recorded in the hospital
on 12. 10. 2007 was relied upon by the
persecutions as her dying declaration. Statements
4
of the appellant and A-2 were recorded in terms of
Section 342 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (for
short the Code) whereas, A-3 has expired during
the trial. Accused, however, did not lead any
evidence in defence.
5. Learned trial Court, firstly, after considering the
evidence as regards the offence under section 498-
A RPC, held that prosecution has succeeded in 
proving charge of cruelty under section 498-A RPC
against A-1 (Appellant) but there was no cogent
evidence to prove the offence of cruelty against A-
2. Learned Court after considering the evidence as
regards the offence under section 302 RPC further
held that prosecution has proved its case against
appellant (A-1) and therefore, while acquitting A-2,
held the appellant guilty, convicted him under
sections 320 and 498-A RPC and imposed the   
sentence as stated above.
6. As regards the offence under section 498-A RPC
learned trial Court has relied upon the evidence
rendered by PW- 1(father of the deceased) PW 9 
(mother of the deceased), PW-6 (brother of the
deceased) and PW-7 (cousin of the deceased). 
5
7. While dealing with the charge under section 302
RPC, learned trial Court started with ruling out the
possibility of the death of the deceased being
suicidal. Learned Court has observed that it was
not the case of either party that, despite having
strained relations with her husband, the deceased
had developed suicidal tendencies. Learned Court
also took the view, that having been blessed with
motherhood, a caring mother would not commit 
suicide leaving the future of her minor children
under uncertainties. Learned trial Court also took
note that it was not the case of either party that
deceased Sharda Devi died a natural death.
Learned Court, therefore, confined the scope of
determination to the issue whether deceased died
homicide death at the hands of accused persons 
or incidental death as suggested by defence. In
this context, learned trial Court took note of the
explanation given by the appellant in his
statement recorded under Section 342 of the Code 
that the deceased had died in an accidental fire, as
she was igniting a stove and had mixed kerosene
with petrol, which engulfed her and caused burn
injuries leading to her death. This according to the
appellant was conveyed to him by PW-3 and PW-4,   
who are the brother and brothers son of the
appellant. Contextually, it is in place to note here
6
that both these witnesses have stated so while
deposing as prosecution witnesses. 
8. We have carefully analysed the impugned 
judgment and order. Indisputably, there is no
direct evidence to the incident of burning. Learned
trial Court, however, seems to have mainly relied
upon statement, Ex. PW-KD, of the deceased said  
to have been recorded by HC Kuldeep Kumar on  
12.10.2007 at Army Hospital, Satwari. This
statement was registered as the FIR and has been 
used by the prosecution at trial as dying
declaration of the deceased. Besides relying upon
the dying declaration, learned trial Court has taken
into consideration the conduct of accused and
plea of alibi raised by the accused. In addition,
learned trail Court has relied upon the disclosure
statement of the appellant (accused) leading to
recovery of plastic bottle containing few drops of
petrol and a match box.
9. As regards the dying declaration, prosecution case,
as it reveals from the record, is that immediately
after the incident on 11.10.2007 deceased was
shifted to Government Medical College, Hospital,
Jammu from where she was taken to Army Hospital   
at Satwari. On the same day one Investigating Head
7
Constable (IHC) from Police Station, Gharota had
approached the Chief Medical Officer (CMO) at the
Medical College Hospital through a docket for
recording her statement but the CMO had 
endorsed on the docket that she was not fit to give
statement at that time. On 12.10.2007, however,
HC Kuldeep Kumar visited Army Hospital, Satwari, 
where Doctor gave his opinion endorsed on the
docket that patient was fit for giving her
statement. Accordingly, said Kuldeep Kumar 
recorded her statement and on the basis of this
statement, FIR was registered.
10. Mr. J. P. Gandhi, learned counsel for the
appellant would say that statement recorded on
12.10.2007 cannot be said to be the dying
declaration of the deceased for the reason that it
was recorded prior to registration of the FIR. He
argued that this statement was aimed at
registration of the FIR and was not recorded as a
dying declaration. He would say further that even if
statement is taken as dying declaration of the
deceased, it has not been proved before the trial
Court inasmuch as the police official, who recorded
the statement, has not been examined as witness. 
He argued further that the statement cannot be
relied upon because neither any Magistrate nor
8
doctor was present at the time of recording of the
statement and that the doctor said to have issued
the certificate that deceased was fit to give her
statement has not been examined. He, therefore,
concluded that learned trial Court has fallen into
error by relying upon, what he calls, so called dying
declaration of the deceased. Mr. Gandhi relied
upon Govind Narrain v State of Rajasthan, 1993 SC
2457, pointing out that their Lordships of the
Supreme Court have refused reliance on a dying
declaration because its scribe constable was not
produced before the trial Court as witness.
11. Per contra, Ms. Z. S. Watali, Dy. A.G has
supported the impugned judgment and order 
contending inter alia that prosecution has
sufficiently proved the dying declaration by
producing independent witness, PW. L/Nk Sanjay  
Kumar, in whose presence statement was   
recorded. She also contended that any statement 
of the deceased relating to the cause of his death
can be used as dying declaration, notwithstanding
the time of recording of the same and that
recording of dying declaration by a Magistrate or
certification of fitness by Doctor is not sine qua non
for relying upon the same, if reliable.
9
12. We will first deal with the conviction under
section 498-A RPC. As said above, learned trial
Court in this regard has relied upon only the
evidence rendered by PW- 1(father of the
deceased) PW 9 (mother of the deceased), PW-6   
(brother of the deceased) and PW-7 (cousin of the
deceased). We have perused the depositions of 
these four witnesses and are persuaded freely to
agree with the view taken by the learned trial
Court as regards the acceptability and sufficiency of
the evidence rendered by them in proof of offence
under section 498-A. We find no reason for
interfering with the judgement of the learned trial
Court to this extent.
13. We now take up conviction under section 302
RPC. While dealing with the dying declaration, Ex.
PW-KD, and relying upon it, learned trial Court has
referred to deposition of PW L/Nk Sanjay Kumar,
whose name figures as a witness to the said
declaration. He has stated that deceased Sharda
Devi was undergoing treatment in Army Hospital,
Satwari. In his presence police was inquiring from
the deceased about the occurrence and the 
deceased had stated that accused Kala Ram has   
burnt her after dousing her with petrol and that
deceased had also stated that her marriage with
10
accused Kala Ram had taken place some five years  
prior to the occurrence. Learned trial Court has
accepted his evidence observing that he was an
Army personal and has no animus against the 
accused and that he appears to have given natural
and truthful account of statement given by the
deceased before her death. Learned trial Court has
also drawn support from the depositions of PWs
Natha Ram and his son Sanjay Kumar who, as per   
the trial Court, have admitted that deceased had
told them that she caught fire accidentally. Trial
Court has also observed that it cannot be said that
deceased had lost power of speech completely. 
Learned trial Court, nonetheless, has taken note
that the doctors, who had made endorsements on  
the dockets have not been cited as witnesses,
there was nothing on record to suggest why from
the date of occurrence to date of death, that is,
11.10.2007, 16.10.2007, services of a Magistrate
were not requisitioned for recording dying
declaration and why the dying declaration was not
witnessed by the Doctor attending upon her, who
had made certification on 12.10.2007 that she was
fit to make statement. Contextually, learned trial
Court has condemned the omission on the part of 
the investigating officer of the case as extreme
inefficiency bordering on criminal negligence or for
11
extraneous reasons. Learned trial Court, however,
framed propositions, whether dying declaration
not recorded by a Magistrate or in presence of
doctor cannot be relied upon in order to connect
the accused with the commission of offence and
whether the court should play in the hands of
mischievous investigation officer. Learned trial
Court has thereafter referred to lot many
judgements of the Supreme Court dealing with
various aspects of a dying declaration as a piece of
evidenced in a criminal trial. However, what we
have noticed and are rather amazed to notice is
that learned trial Court has not recorded any
finding whether the evidence led by the
prosecution was legally sufficient to prove the
dying declaration and whether the said dying
declaration satisfies all the tests for its admissibility
as substantive evidence in support of the charge.
We feel it apt to reproduce verbatim the
conclusion recorded by the learned trial Court to
underline how the important aspect of the case has
been dealt with:
Thus, in view of the above, the law on the point
can be summarised that the evidence of the
witnesses must be read as a whole and the cases 
are to be considered in totality of the
circumstances and while appreciating the
evidence of a witness, minor discrepancies on
the trivial matters, which do not affect the core
of the prosecution case, should not be taken
12
into consideration as they cannot form grounds
to reject the evidence as a whole.
14. We cannot resist saying briefly, the
conclusion recorded by the learned trial Court is far
from the context in which it has been recorded.
15. To use a statement, verbal or written, as
dying declaration of a person who is dead and rely
upon it as substantive evidence, prosecution must
prove the same as a fact. Prosecution has to prove
that the declaration was made by the deceased.
Such declaration may have been made verbally to 
or in presence of some person/persons or may 
have been reduced into writing when it was made.
In Kans Raj v. State of Punjab, AIR 2000 SC 2324,
their Lordships of a three-Judge Bench of the
Supreme Court have held: 
10. Section 32 of the Evidence Act is an exception
to the general rule of exclusion to the hearsay
evidence and the statements of a person, written or
verbal, of relevant facts, after his death are
admissible in evidence if they refer to the cause of
his death or to any circumstances of the transaction
which resulted in his death. To attract the provisions
of Section 32, for the purposes of admissibility of
the statement of a deceased the prosecution is
required to prove that the statement was made by a
person who is dead or who cannot be found or
whose attendance cannot be procured without an 
amount of delay or expense or he is incapable of
giving evidence and that such statement had been
made under any of the circumstances specified in
sub-sections (1) to (8) of Section 32 of the Act. ...To
13
make such statement as substantive evidence, the 
person or the agency relying upon it is under a
legal obligation to prove the making of such
statement as a fact. If it is in writing, the scribe
must be produced in the Court and if it is verbal,
it should be proved by examining the person who
heard the deceased making the statement. 
(Emphasis supplied) 
16. View expressed by Their Lordships in Kans Raj
(supra) has been reiterated with approval by their
Lordships recently in Vinay D. Nagar v. State of
Rajasthan 2008 AIR SCW 1709.   
17. Judicially approved legal evidence for proving
a dying declaration is the statement of its scribe.
We may in this regard, besides Kans Rajs case 
(supra), refer to Govind Narrain and anr. v. State of
Rajasthan, AIR 1993 SC 2457. In this case Ex. P-3
was relied upon by the prosecution as a dying
declaration of the deceased but their Lordships
refused reliance upon the same for the reason that
its scribe was not produced at trial. Their Lordships
have observed in para 14 of the Judgment as
under:
That takes us now to the consideration of the dying
declaration alleged to have been reduced into
writing, exhibit P-3. The High Court as well as the
trial court have disbelieved exhibit P-3 for a variety
of reasons. Even if we agree with Mr. Makwana,
learned Counsel for the complainant that some of
the reasons given by the High Court to discard
14
exhibit P 3 were not sound, we find that no reliance
can be placed on the document exhibit P-3 for the
simple reason that the scribe of the document, Shri
Jagdish Narain, constable, for the reasons best
known to the prosecution, was not examined at the
trial and the defence therefore, had no opportunity
to cross examine him. Mohammed Ali P.W. 4 has   
failed to explain the cause for non production of
Jagdish Narain. We are, therefore, in agreement
both, with the trial court and the High Court, that
there are sufficient reasons on the record to justify
the discarding of the alleged dying declaration
contained in exhibit P 3 and we do not place any
reliance on the same.
18. Importance of examining scribe of dying
declaration at trial is discernible from the
observation of their Lordships of the
Constitution Bench in Laxman v. State of
Maharastra (2002) 6 SCC 710. Their Lordships in
this case, while underlining juristic theory
regarding acceptability of a dying declaration,
have emphasized requirement of great caution
to be exercised in considering the weight to be
given to this species of evidence on account of
the existence of many circumstances which may  
affect their truth. Their Lordships inter alia have
emphasized as essential requirement that the
person who records a dying declaration must be
satisfied that the deceased was in a fit state of
mind.
15
19. The Constitution Bench in that case has also referred
to a three-Judge Benh decision of the Supreme Court
in Koli Chunilal Savji v State of Gujrat, (1999)9 SCC 432,
wherein it was held by Their Lordships that the
ultimate test is whether the dying declaration can be
held to be truthful one and voluntarily given and it was
also held that the officer concerned must find that the
declarant was in a fit condition to make the statement
in question
20. It is the scribe of the document who through
his deposition tested with the yardstick of cross
examination can satisfy the court that he had
recorded thSSe statement after having been
satisfied that the person making the statement
was in fit statement of mind to make a
voluntary statement. He can explain as to how
he was so satisfied.
21. As per the prosecution case, scribe of the dying
declaration alleged to have been made by the
decease, EX-PW KD, was Head Constable, Kuldeep     
Raj. This is stated in the opening words of the FIR
and the charge sheet. He, however, has not been
examined at trial nor cited as witness. Here we may
point out that learned trial Court at page 33 of the
impugned judgement has made incorrect  
statement of fact that the dying declaration has
16
been recorded by PW-I, a Head Constable of Police 
Station, Gharota. PW-I as per the list given in the
charge sheet, however, is Sham Lal. Due to
prosecutions failure to produce the scribe at trial,
it cannot be said that making of the dying
declaration by the deceased has been proved.
Rather it is to be held that prosecution has failed to
prove the dying declaration allegedly made by the
deceased. It is not understandable why the scribe
has not been produced or cited as a witness in the
case. Investigating Officer of the case, who
happens to be the SHO of the Police Station too
has not been examined at trial so it remains a
mystery why such an important witness of the
alleged dying declaration has been kept back.
22. The alleged dying declaration, Ex. PW DK
could not have been and cannot be relied upon as
evidence in support of the prosecution case for the
simple reason that it has not been proved by
producing its scribe before the Court.
23. If prosecution in a case proves a dying
declaration as a fact by examining its scribe,
consideration would shift to its reliability and value
as evidence about the cause of the death of its
maker. Court, having regard to the prosecution
17
evidence and the principles of caution governing
consideration of dying declaration, has to
determine whether the dying declaration is truthful
and voluntary. It goes without saying that dying
declaration is an exception to general rule against
hearsay. It is something stated by a person who
cannot be brought before the court and the
accused against whom the declaration is going to
be used as evidence cannot be provided
opportunity to cross-examined him. The court has
therefore to be guarded to see that the statement
was not the result of tutoring or prompting or a
figment of imagination. The Court must be satisfied
that the deceased was in a fit state of mind at the
time of making the declaration. To say precisely the
evidence led by the prosecution should be of such
nature that the dying declaration inspires full
confidence of the court in its truthfulness,
correctness and voluntary nature.
24. Judicially evolved principles of caution
governing dying declaration have been summed up 
by Their Lordships in Paniben v. State of Gujarat
(1992) 2 SCC 474 as under: 
(i) There is neither rule of law nor of prudence
that dying declaration cannot be acted upon
without corroboration.
18
(ii) If the Court is satisfied that the dying
declaration is true and voluntary it can base
conviction on it, without corroboration.
(iii) The Court has to scrutinize the dying
declaration carefully and must ensure that the
declaration is not the result of tutoring,
prompting or imagination. The deceased had 
opportunity to observe and identify the
assailants and was in a fit state to make the
declaration.
(iv) Where dying declaration is suspicious it should
not be acted upon without corroborative
evidence.
(v) Where the deceased was unconscious and  
could never make any dying declaration the
evidence with regard to it is to be rejected.
vi) A dying declaration which suffers from
infirmity cannot form the basis of conviction.
vii) Merely because a dying declaration does
not contain the details as to the occurrence, it is
not to be rejected.
(viii) Equally, merely because it is a brief statement, it is
not to be discarded. On the contrary, the shortness
of the statement itself guarantees truth.
(ix) Normally the Court in order to satisfy whether the
deceased was in a fit mental condition to make the
dying declaration looks up to the medical opinion.
But whether the eyewitness has said that the
deceased was in a fit and conscious state to make
this dying declaration, the medical opinion cannot
prevail.
(x) Where the prosecution version differs from the
version as given in the dying declaration, the said
declaration cannot be acted upon."
25. Recently, these principles have been
reiterated by Their Lordships of the Supreme Court
in Vikas and ors. v State of Maharastra, (2008) 2
SCC 516 and even more recently in Sukanti 
Moharana v State of Orrisa, AIR 2009 SCW 6161.  
19
26. We have, however, considered in particular
whether the deceased was in fit state of mind at
the time of the recording of the dying declaration,
presuming that the same was duly proved by the 
prosecution, because mental fitness of the
deceased is the most important condition for
relying upon the dying declaration. Court must be
satisfied that the person making the dying
declaration was in a fit state of mind at the
relevant time. We may state it as a matter of rule
that normally the medical opinion would be the
best evidence about the mental fitness of the
deceased at the time the declaration is made but if
from the evidence of the witnesses court is
satisfied that the deceased was in fit state of mind
to make the declaration, the opinion of the doctor
neither need to be insisted upon nor would prevail.
This legal position is clearly stated by Their
Lordships of the Constitution Bench in Laxmans
case (suprs) and earlier referred to in Paniben
(Supra).
27. In considering the fitness of the deceased at
the time of the recording of Ex. PW KD, evidence
rendered by PW-Dr. K. K. Thakur, who had 
performed autoposy on the dead body of the
20
deceased, cannot be lost sight of. According to him
approximately 90 per cent body surface of the
deceased had suffered burn injuries. In crossexamination,
he says that due to extensive burns
over face and nostrils and inflammation of trachea
and larynx the deceased was in no position to
speak more than few words before her death 
because ordinarily a person suffering with such
burn injuries cannot make a long statement. In this
backdrop, it needs to be pointed out that the
alleged dying declaration Ex. PW KD spreads over 
more than a full page. It contains a detailed
account of facts including other than what had
happened on the day of incident.
28. There is nothing, however, in the deposition
of PW-L/Nk. Sanjay Kumar, whom the prosecution   
has examined as the sole witness to the alleged
dying declaration, about the physical condition or
mental fitness of the deceased at the time of
recording of the statement on 12. 10. 2007. In this
regard, learned trial Court seems to have drawn
support from the evidence of PWs Natha Ram and  
Sanjay Kumar but we, having gone through their
depositions, feel that it was not possible. These
two witnesses, one of them being brother and
other brother's son of the appellant, have stated
21
that after the incident the deceased had said that
she caught fire accidentally. Learned trial Court
has rejected their versions observing that they
have stated so in order to help the accused to
escape the punishment and we find nothing useful
in their depositions as regards the mental fitness of
the deceased on 12. 10. 2007. We have a reason in 
not looking to the depositions of these two
witnesses in context of the mental fitness of the
deceased to make statement on 12.10.2007. Role  
of these two witnesses is confined to the time
immediately after the incident on 11. 10. 2007. As
per their depositions, both of them had together
extinguished the fire from the body of the
deceased and taken her in a vehicle to Government
Medical College Hospital, Jammu. However, 
according to PW Natha Ram, the statement that  
deceased caught fire accidentally, was given by the
deceased at the place of occurrence whereas,
according to PW Sanjay Kumar such statement was    
given on their way to the hospital in the vehicle.
Statement of these two witnesses at the most can 
be relied upon to the extent of their say that they
had extinguished the fire from the body of the
deceased and taken her to the hospital and in no
case as regards mental and physical fitness of the
22
deceased to make a statement on next day, that is,
12.10.2007.
29. We after a cautious scrutiny of the
depositions of all the prosecution witnesses have
found no evidence to believe that deceased was
mentally fit to make a dying declaration, much less,
a detail statement on 12.10. 2007. In absence of
such evidence, prosecutions failure to produce the
scribe and the Doctor, who issued the fitness
certificate on 12.10.2007, assumes importance.
These two witnesses could have stated whether 
the deceased was in fit state of mind to make the
statement and it could have been ascertained from
the Doctor, having issued fitness certificate,
whether the detailed statement of the nature
could have been made or not, having regard to the
nature and extent of burns suffered by her.
30. When we were going through the depositions 
of the witnesses, it was pointed out to us that the
deceased had stated to her mother PW-Kunti Devi 
and her brother PW-Garu Ram that she was set  
ablaze by her husband after dousing her with
petrol. Learned Dy. A. G. sought to project that
depositions made by these two witnesses show  
that the deceased was mentally fit to make dying
23
declaration and whatever stated by her to them is
to be treated as oral dying declarations of the
deceased. Per contra it was submitted by Mr.
Gandhi that whatever allegedly stated by the
deceased to these two witnesses has not been 
relied upon by the learned trial Court and rightly
so because depositions of these witness are not
trustworthy and in no case prove that the
deceased was in fit state of mind to have said
anything to them. Mr. Gandhi sought to make out 
from the evidence as to why these two witnesses
may not be relied upon.
31. On reading the depositions of PW-Kunti Devi
and her husband PW-Sham Lal, it clearly comes out  
that on the day of occurrence, that is, 10.07.2007
both of them had reached Medical College Hospital
together. PW-Sham Lal is explicit in his say that on
their reaching at the Hospital, deceased did not
respond to their calls. She was admitted in the
hospital and was not conscious. He has further
stated that he had then gone to the house of the
in-laws of the deceased where police had obtained
his signatures on some documents. He had  
returned to the hospital and at that time also the
deceased was not conscious. On the other hand, 
say of PW-Kunti Devi is that deceased had spoken 
24
to her in the hospital on that day and stated inter
alia that she was burnt by her husband, which, in
the backdrop of the say of PW- Sham Lal, cannot be 
accepted as a true.
32. PW-Garu Ram in chief examination says that 
he saw the deceased in the Army Hospital on 16. 
10. 2007, deceased demanded water from him, he  
gave her water with a spoon and on his asking, she
had stated that deceased had burnt her after
dousing with petrol (besides other things). In cross
examination he says that during his conversation
with deceased a doctor and CMP Havaldar was  
present there and the Havaldar had written this on
a piece of paper. He thus referrers to a statement
of the deceased, which was recorded by a CMP  
Havaldar. Existence of such writing, however, is not
comprised in the prosecution evidence. To
conclude precisely, depositions of PW. Kunti Devi
and PW Garu Ram do not inspire confidence and  
whatever, alleged to have been stated to them by
the deceased cannot be accepted as oral dying 
declarations of the deceased.
33. For aforementioned reasons, the conclusion
we arrive at is that the alleged dying declaration
25
dated 12.10.2007, Ex. PW KD, cannot be relied 
upon as substantive evidence, firstly, for the reason
that it has not been proved and secondly, for the
reason that it has not been proved that deceased
was in a fit mental condition to make the
declaration.
34. Learned trial Court seems to have wriggled
out of this draw back in prosecution case by
condemning the prosecuting agency and  
investigating officer but we may point out that
condemnation of their cannot be a substitute for
legal evidence. Lapses on the part of Investigating
Agency or Investigating Officer can be ignored and
their benefit to accused refused but nonetheless,
there has to sufficient and legal evidence to prove
the case.
35. We need not look into the plea of alibi,
conduct of the accused and disclosure statement
of the accused taken into consideration by the
learned trial Court as we are of the view that
conviction and sentence of the appellant under
Section 302 RPC cannot sustain after the dying
declaration is rejected as a piece of evidence.
Nonetheless, to say the least, plea of alibi assumes
importance only after prosecution has led
26
sufficient evidence to prove involvement of
accused. This is discernible from the judgment in
Jayantibhai Bhenkarbhai v. State of Gujarat (2002)
8 SCC 165 referred to by the learned trial Court.
Their Lordships have observed in para 19 as under:
19The burden of proving commission of  
offence by the accused so as to fasten the liability of
guilt on him remains on the prosecution and would not
be lessened by the mere fact that the accused had
adopted the defence of alibi. The plea of alibi taken by
the accused needs to be considered only when the 
burden which lies on the prosecution has been
discharged satisfactorily. If the prosecution has failed in
the discharging its burden of proving the commission of
crime by the accused beyond any reasonable doubt, it
may not be necessary to go into the question whether
the accused has succeeded in proving the defence of
alibi. But once the prosecution succeeds in discharging
its burden then it is incumbent on the accused taking
the plea of alibi to prove it with certainty so as to
exclude the possibility of his presence a the place and
time of occurrence. An obligation is cast on the Court to
weigh in scales the evidence adduced by the
prosecution in proving of the guilt of the accused and
the evidence adduced by the accused in proving his
defence of alibi. If the evidence adduced by the accused
is of such a quality and of such a standard that the Court
may entertain some reasonable doubt regarding his
presence at the place and time of occurrence, the Court
would evaluate the prosecution evidence to see if the
evidence adduced on behalf of the prosecution leaves
any slot available to fit therein the defence of alibi
36. In this case nothing in support of charge under
section 302 RPC against the appellant has been found in
the prosecution evidence. Though it stands proved that
the deceased had been making demand for more dowry   
and causing harassment to deceased and for that 
27
learned trial Court has rightly convicted and sentenced
him under section 498-A RPC but there is nothing
beyond that. Inasmuch as there is no evidence even to
show that the deceased, who was serving in army, was 
present in his house, the place of occurrence, at the
relevant time.
37. For all that has been stated and discussed above,
conviction and sentence of the appellant under Section
302 RPC is set aside. However, conviction and sentence
under Section 498-A RPC is upheld and the appeal to 
that extent is dismissed. Having disposed of appeal as
above, reference made by the trial Court is answered
accordingly.
38. Record of the trial Court be remitted back along
with copy of this judgement. Trial Court shall modify
execution warrant accordingly.
39. Disposed of along with connected Conf. No.
9/2011.
(Janak Raj Kotwal) (Hasnain Massodi) 
Judge Judge 
Jammu:  
29.08.2013 
Karam 
28
