

HIGH COURT OF JAMMU AND KASHMIR AT JAMMU             
Petition under section 561-A Cr P C No. 211 OF 2012 AND Cr M A No.  
242 OF 2012 AND Cr M A No.  247 OF 2012    
Maj Rajni Kant Tiwari.
Petitioners
State and ors
Respondent  
!Mr. M. M. Baru, Advocate.
^Mr. Salim Malik, Dy. AG vice Mr. Gagan Basotra, Sr. AAG for Nos. 1 and 2 R-3 set
ex parte

Honble Mr. Justice Janak Raj Kotwal-Judge
Date: 27.09.2013 
:J U D G M E N T :

1. This petition seeks invoking of the inherent jurisdiction of
this Court under Section 561-A of the Code of Criminal
Procedure (for short the Code) for quashing First
Information Report (FIR) No. 15/2012 dated 14.01.2012
under section 363 RPC of Police Station, Akhnoor.
2. Heard. I have perused the record.
3. I may state, briefly, the facts emerging from the record
produced by the petitioner, which are essential to dispose
of this petition:
2
4. Petitioner and respondent No. 3 are husband and wife.
They got married on 08.07.2003 and are blessed with a
male child, Ruchir Tiwari. Their matrimonial life, however,
remained disturbed inasmuch as respondent No. 3 had  
lodged an FIR under secs. 498-A, 323, 504, 506, 427 IPC
read with Sec.3/4 Dowry Prohibition Act against the
petitioner and his family members at Police Station,
Lanka, District, Varanasi (UP) which was registered as
Crime No. 89/2009 dated 14.3.2009. However, at a later
stage parties had arrived at a compromise. In April, 2011
petitioner, who is Major in Indian Army, was transferred
to Akhnoor in J&K State. Respondent No. 3 along with
their son joined the petitioner at Akhnoor. On
30.12.2011, petitioner filed application under section 100
of the Code in the court of learned Judicial Magistrate, 1st
Class, Akhnoor. He alleged that on his return to Akhnoor
after availing leave, he found his house locked from
outside. Whereabouts of his wife and son were not
known. On breaking open the locks of the house, he
found that gold items and cash were also missing. He
came to know that his father-in-law with the help of
some goons has forcibly removed his wife and child and
has confined both of them in his house at Varanasi.
Petitioner, therefore, sought issuance of search warrant
under section 100 of the Code for their search and
producing them before the court. Learned Judicial
3
Magistrate after hearing petitioners counsel, issued
search warrant directing SHO, Police Station, Akhnoor to
search the house of the father(Chander Dev Pandey) of
respondent No. 3, situate at Plot No. 36/37, Madhav
Market, Colony Lanka, Varanasi (UP) and produce the 
respondent No. 3 and child, Ruchir Tiwari, in the Court on
21.01.2012.
5. Order passed by the learned Magistrate on 28.01.2012,
copy whereof has been produced by the petitioner,
would show that the respondent No. 3 and the child were
produced before the learned Magistrate on 12.01.2012 in
compliance with the search warrant issued by him. As
respondent No. 3 wanted to make her statement in 
presence of her father so the learned Magistrate kept
them on sapurdari of one K. P. Dubey with a direction to
appear on 14.01.2012 and posted the matter for
14.01.2012. Respondent No. 3 attended the court on 
14.01.2012 but the petitioner did turn up. The order
passed by the learned Magistrate on 28.01.2012 (supra)
read with FIR No. 15/2012 (supra) registered with Police
Station, Akhnoor on 14.01.2012 would show that on 
14.01.2012, respondent No. 3 had filed an application
before the learned Magistrate alleging that on that day
she along with her family members was sitting in the
court room. Suddenly her husband (petitioner herein) and
his two brothers, Krishan Kant Tiwari and Ajay Tiwari
4
came there and forcibly removed the child, Ruchir Tiwari,
from her lap and took him away by an Army Jeep to some  
unknown place. She, thus, alleged that the child has been
kidnapped by the petitioner along with four army
personnel. Learned Magistrate forwarded the complaint
to SHO, Police Station, Akhnoor with a direction to
register FIR against the accused and take strict necessary
action under law. On this application FIR No. 15/2012
under section 363 RPC has been registered, which is
sought to be quashed in this petition.
5. Petitioner seeks quashing of the FIR on the ground that
the allegations leveled by the respondent No. 3 are false,
baseless and frivolous and do not disclose any prima facie
case against the petitioner even if the contentions in the
FIR are taken at their face value. No offence is made out
against the petitioner. Since the petitioner is natural
guardian of the child, he cannot be legally accused of
kidnapping his own son. While not refusing that on
14.01.2012 he had removed the child from the court
premises, the petitioner has contended that on
12.01.2012 when respondent No. 3 along with the child
of the petitioner had appeared in the court, the child on
seeing him had started shouting saying PAPA PAPA 
and wanted to come in his arms. However, he was not 
allowed by his mother. On 14.01.2012, he came to attend
the court proceedings, he was standing in the court
5
premises, the child on seeing him came to his arms
shouting PAPA PAPA and started saying that he does 
not want to go back to his mother and wants to stay with
him. On seeing this, respondent No. 3 and her father
thought that the minor may not agree to go with them so
father of respondent No. 3 started extending threats to
the petitioner.
6. Mr. M. M. Baru, learned counsel for the petitioner
submitted that the petitioner, being father and thereby
natural guardian of the minor, cannot be said to have
committed offence of kidnapping his own son even if he
had taken the child with him from the court premises.
Learned counsel, therefore, submitted that no prima facie
case of kidnapping is either disclosed in the FIR or is
constituted and the FIR is liable to be quashed. In
support, Mr. Baru relied upon Khyali Ram and others v.
State of U. P. 1971 CRI. L. J. 1365.
7. Per contra, Mr. Salim Malik, Dy. AG appearing vice Gagan
Basotra, Sr. AAG submitted that the judgment relied upon
by the learned counsel for the petitioner would not apply
in this case. The petitioner by invoking judicial process
had secured the presence of the child in the court had
taken him away without waiting for the judicial order in
this regard.
6
8. High Court under section 561-A of the Code (sec. 482 of
the Central Code) is vested with inherent jurisdiction to
make such order as may be necessary to give effect to any
order under the Code or to prevent abuse of process of
any Court or otherwise to secure the ends of justice. This
jurisdiction of the High Court can be invoked to seek
quashing of FIR and investigation by the police or any
criminal proceedings pending in any Court if it is shown to
the satisfaction of the Court that such proceedings is the
abuse of process of that Court or tends to cause
miscarriage of justice or the quashing is otherwise required
to secure the ends of justice. The jurisdiction of the High
Court is vast indeed but this jurisdiction is to be exercised
cautiously, carefully and sparingly and the Court has not to
function as a Court of appeal or revision. Supreme Court in
State of Haryana v Bhajan Lal, AIR 1992 SC 604, has given
categories of cases by way of illustration wherein such
power can be used either to prevent the abuse of process
of Court or to secure the ends of justice. The categories
are:
108    
1. Where the allegations made in the First Information Report
or the complaint, even if they are taken at their face value
and accepted in their entirety do not prima facie constitute
any offence or make out a case against the accused.
7
2. Where the allegations in the First Information Report and
other materials, if any, accompanying the FIR do not
disclose a cognizable offence, justifying an investigation by
police officers under S. 156(1) of the Code except under an
order of a Magistrate within the purview of S. 155(2) of the
Code. 
3. Where the uncontroverted allegations made in the FIR or
complaint and the evidence collected in support of the
same do not disclose the commission of any offence and 
make out a case against the accused. 
4. Where, the allegations in the FIR do not constitute a
cognizance offence but constitute only a non-cognizable
offence, no investigation is permitted by a police officer
without an order of a Magistrate as contemplated under S.
155(2) of the Code.
5. Where the allegations made in the FIR or complaint are so
absurd and inherently improbable on the basis of which no
prudent person can ever reach a just conclusion that there
is sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused.
6. Where there is an express legal bar engrafted in any of the
provisions of the Code or the Act concerned (under which a
criminal proceedings is instituted) to the institution and
continuance of the proceedings and/or where there is a
specific provision in the Code or the Act concerned,
providing efficacious redress for the grievance of the
aggrieved party.
8
7. Where a criminal proceedings is manifestly attended
with mala fides and/or where the proceeding is maliciously
instituted with an ulterior motive for wreaking vengeance
on the accused and with a view to spite him due to private
and personal grudge.
9. In Khyali Rams case (supra) Allahabad High Court in
somewhat but not exactly similar situation has observed that
Applicant Khayali Ram is admittedly the father of the minor
Kalua. as Khyali Ram is the natural guardian even if he has
removed the minor from the custody of the mother there is
no question of committing an offence under section 363
Indian Penal Code. High Court has gone further observing
that in order to constitute an offence under section 363 IPC
there must be kidnapping of a person from lawful
guardianship. Here Khyali Ram is himself the lawful guardian
of the child. It cannot, therefore, be said that he committed
an offence under section 363 of IPC by getting the custody of
his own son from his wife.
10. High Court made further observation in para 5, which
reads:
No doubt, under Section 6 of the Hindu Minority and
Guardianship Act, 1956, the custody of a minor who
has not completed the age of five years shall
ordinarily be with the mother but the father being the
natural guardian of a Hindu minor cannot be held to
have committed an offence of kidnapping by
9
removing his minor son from the custody of the
mother.
11. The High Court therefore, quashed the order passed by
learned Magistrate taking cognizance under section 363
IPC.
12. The Khyali Rams case, however, would not apply in this
case given the significant difference in fact situation of
the two cases. In Khyali Rams case, as the order
rendered by the High Court would show, child was
removed from the custody of the mother and High Court
was of the view that offence of kidnapping under section
363 IPC is not made out. Situation in this case, however,
is not only different but peculiar and raises a serious
question about the conduct of an Army Officer, who after
submitting himself to legal process as long as it suited him
has violated law when it suited him otherwise. Petitioner
secured presence of the mother and the child in the court
by invoking jurisdiction of the Magistrate under section
100 of the Code. In his presence the mother and the child
were produced before the Magistrate on 12.01.2012 and 
both of them were kept on Supardari of one K.P. Dubey
with a direction to appear before the court on
14.01.2012. Petitioner has admitted his presence before
in the Court of learned Magistrate on 12.01.2012 in para
31 of his petition. All of them came in the court on
14.01.2012. On 14.01.2012, the child as a matter of fact
10
was not in the custody of his mother only but was in
custodia legis, having been kept on sapurdari by order of
the Magistrate. The alleged forcible removing of the child
by the petitioner, therefore has taken place at a time
when the child was in custodia legis so the benefit of the
judgment in Khyali Rams case, in Khyali Rams case, 
relied upon by the petitioners counsel would not be
available.
13. Petitioners contention that his child has of his own come
to the petitioner too would not weigh against respondent
No. 3s allegation that petitioner and his accomplice had
removed the child forcibly and left the court premises by
an army jeep. Petitioners contention, though not
sufficient to dislodge respondent No. 3s allegation at this
pre investigation stage, however, loses its genuineness by
the conduct of the petitioner himself. Petitioner having
secured presence of the child in the court by using the
process of the court, has not stated in the petition as to
why he did not feel it proper to bring the incident to the
notice of learned Magistrate immediately or when the
case would have been called and why did he left the court
without attending the hearing. Allegation of the
respondent No. 3 when considered in light of petitioners
admission that he had removed the child from the court
premises on that day, makes out not only a prima facie
case but a strong prima facie case of kidnapping against
11
the petitioner and question of quashing of FIR at pre
investigation stage does not arise.
14. For the aforementioned, petition is dismissed as without
any merit.
(Janak Raj Kotwal)
Judge 
Jammu:  
27.09.2013 
Rakesh 



