

HIGH COURT OF JAMMU AND KASHMIR AT JAMMU             
561-A No. 337 OF 2014 AND Cr MA No. 392 OF 2014         
Rajinder Kumar and ors.
Petitioners
State and ors
Respondent  
!Mr. B. B. Kotwal, Advocate & Mr. Ravinder Parihar, Advocate
^Mr. Sunil Sethi, Sr. Advocate with Mr. Deewakar Sharma, Advocate 

Honble Mr. Justice Janak Raj Kotwal, Judge
Date: 08.05.2015 
:J U D G M E N T :

        1. Petitioner No. 1, Rajinder Kumar alias Munna, is the husband of
respondent No. 2, Payal. They got married on 22.11.2010. Petitioner
Nos. 2 & 3 are parents of petitioner No. 1 and petitioner No. 4 is his
unmarried sister. Petitioner Nos. 5 & 7 are other two sisters of petitioner
No. 1 and petitioner Nos. 6 and 8 are their respective husbands. All the
petitioners are resident of Jammu city. Respondent No. 2s parents reside
at Main Bazar, Udhampur. 

        2. Respondent No. 3 lodged a complaint against the petitioners in
the court of the Chief Judicial Magistrate (CJM) Udhampur and on the
direction of learned CJM in terms of section 156 (3) of the Code, SHO
Police Station, Udhampur registered FIR No. 18/2014 under sections
498-A & 354/34 RPC against the petitioners on 23.08.2014 and 
commenced the investigation. 

        3. Petitioners by the medium of this petition invoke inherent
jurisdiction of this Court under section 561-A of the Code seeking
quashing of the FIR lodged against them on the ground that the
allegations stated in the complaint and incorporated in the FIR are false
and leveled with mala fide intention and that no part of the alleged
occurrence has taken place within the jurisdiction of Police Station,
Udhampur so registration of FIR and investigation by Police Station,
Udhampur is without jurisdiction.

        4. Briefly stated, respondent No. 2 (complainant) has alleged in the
complaint that ever since her marriage, petitioners had been harassing
her while making demands for dowry. She has alleged that after her
marriage with petitioner No. 1 she remained in the house of her in-laws
at Jammu till 08.07.2013 and during this period she lead almost a
secluded life as slave and bounded labourer. The conduct and behavior
of all the petitioners was very much harsh, and inhuman towards her
inasmuch as they had been making constant demands of dowry and    
taunts for bringing less dowry and using most abusive and insultive
language causing mental torture and frustration to her, which caused
harm and endangered to her health.

        5. Respondent No. 2 has alleged also that on 09.07.2013, the
petitioners brought her from her matrimonial house under the guise of
going for a picnic at Patni Top and took her to the house of her parents
at Udhampur, where they made a demand for Swift car and cash worth  
ten lac rupees from her mother and brothers and openly and clearly said
that she should not be send back to her matrimonial house unless and
until their demand is satisfied.

        6. Heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the record.

        7. Mr. B. B. Kotwal, learned counsel for the petitioners, submitted
that the complaint lodged by the respondent No.2/FIR on plain reading
shows that no part of the alleged occurrence did take place within the
territorial jurisdiction of Police Station, Udhampur so registration of FIR
and investigation by that Police Station is without jurisdiction and
deserves quashing on that ground itself. Mr. Kotwal relied on the
decision of a Co-ordinate Bench of this Court in Prikshit Pathanias and
others v. Anuradha Dadwal, 2011 (1) JKJ 459. Besides, Mr. Kotwal
submitted that the allegations made in the complaint/FIR on their face
value do not constitute commission of offences under sections 498-A
and 354 RPC or any other cognizable offence justifying registration of an
FIR and investigation under section 156 (1) Cr.P.C. Contextually, Mr.
Kotwal submitted that the allegations stated in the complaint/FIR are so
absurd and inherent in probable that no prudent person can draw the
conclusion that there is sufficient ground for proceeding against the
petitioners. Mr. Kotwal relied on the decision of a Co-ordinate Bench of
this Court in Manav Mishra v State of J&K ors 2012 (4) JK 608.

        8. Per contra, Mr. Sunil Sethi, learned Senior Advocate submitted
that section 154 of the Code read with section 156 authorizes and
imposes a duty on the Station House Officer of a Police Station to
registered FIR, if on a report lodged/information received commission of
cognizance offence is disclosed and to investigate the case. Mr. Sethi
submitted further that as per sub-section (2) of section 156, investigation
cannot be quashed on the ground that Police Station in question is not
empowered under that section to investigate. Mr. Sethi concluded by
submitting that the allegations stated in the complaint/ FIR make out
commission of cognizable offences under section 498-A and 354 RPC  
against all the petitioners and no case for quashing the FIR is made out.
9. First question to be taken up is whether FIR should be quashed if no
part of cause of action for lodging the FIR as per section 156 (1) of the
Code has arisen within the territorial jurisdiction of the Police Station
where the FIR has been registered. Reply to this question would be no
in view of the Supreme Court Judgment in Satvinder Kour vs. State (Govt.
of N.C.T. of Delhi), (1999) 8 SCC 728. Supreme Court while dealing with a
similar question arising in an appeal against an order of the High Court in
a petition under section 482 of the Code (section 561-A State Code) has
held in para 8 of the reporting :

 (1) The S.H.O. has statutory authority under Section 156 of the Criminal
Procedure Code to investigate any cognizable case for which an F.I.R. is lodged.
(2) At the stage of investigation, there is no question of interference under Section
482 of the Criminal Procedure Code on the ground that the Investigating Officer
has no territorial jurisdiction.
(3) After investigation is over, if the Investigating Officer arrives at the conclusion
that the cause of action for lodging the F.I.R. has not arisen within his territorial
jurisdiction, then he is required to submit a report accordingly under Section 170
of the Criminal Procedure Code and to forward the case to the Magistrate
empowered to take cognizance of the offence.
        10. Supreme Court while interpreting sections 156, 177 and 178 of
the Code has held further in para 12 of the reporting:
 A reading of the aforesaid sections would make it clear that section 177
provides for ordinary place of enquiry or trial. Section 178, inter alia, provides
for place of enquiry or trial when it is uncertain in which of several local areas an
offence was committed or where the offence was committed partly in one local
area and partly in another and where it consisted of several acts done in different
local areas, it could be enquired into or tried by a court having jurisdiction over
any of such local areas. Hence, at the stage of investigation, it cannot be held that
the SHO does not have territorial jurisdiction to investigate the crime.
        11. Prikshit Pathanias case (supra) relied upon by learned
petitioners counsel is distinguishable because question involved in that
case relates to the jurisdiction of a Court to try a criminal case and this
court had held that to permit a court having no jurisdiction to continue
with trial would be against the interest of justice and abuse of process of
the court. The question involved in case on hand relates to the
jurisdiction of Police Station to investigate a case which however, cannot
be raised at investigation stage.
        12. The other ground of challenge to the FIR and investigation too
would not prevail for the simple reason that, having regard to the
allegations stated in the complaint, it cannot be said that the same do
not make out a prima facie for registration of the FIR and investigation. It
is now well settled by catena of judgments of the Supreme Court, in
particular landmark judgment in Bajan Lals case, AIR 1992 SC 604, that
inherent jurisdiction of the High Court under section 482 of the Code
(section 561-A State Code) though very vast should be exercised carefully
and sparingly in exceptional circumstances to give effect to any order
under the court or to prevent abuse of process of the court or otherwise
to secure the ends of justice. This jurisdiction can be invoked for
quashing an FIR and investigation if it is shown to the satisfaction of the
court that the allegations on their face value do not constitute any
cognizance offence justifying investigation by the Police. I may usefully
refer to para 14 of Sativender Kours case (supra):

Further, the legal position is well settled that if an offence is disclosed the Court
will not normally interfere with an investigation into the case and will permit
investigation into the offence alleged to be completed. If the F.I.R., prima facie,
discloses the commission of an offence, the Court does not normally stop the
investigation, for, to do so would be to trench upon the lawful power of the police
to investigate into cognizable offences. (Re: State of West Bengal v. Swapna
Kumar, [1982] 1 SCC 561.) It is also settled by a long course of decision of this
Court that for the purpose of exercising Us power under Section 482, Cr. P,C. to
quash an FIR or a complaint, the High Court would have to proceed entirely on
the basis of the allegations made in the complaint or the documents
accompanying the same per se; it has no jurisdiction to examine the correctness
or otherwise of the allegations. (Ref. Pratibha Rani v. Suraj Kumar and another,
[1985] 2 SCC 370 at 395).
        13. The Manav Mishras case, 2012 (4) JKJ 608 relied upon by
learned petitioners counsel relates to facts situation of that case and
cannot be applied to the case on hand given the nature of allegations
stated in the impugned complaint/ FIR.
        14. Viewed as aforementioned, no case for quashing the FIR (supra)
and investigation of the case is made and in the result this petition is
dismissed as without merit.

(Janak Raj Kotwal)
Judge 
Jammu:  
08.05.2015 
Karam Chand*  



