

HIGH COURT OF JAMMU AND KASHMIR AT JAMMU             
Cr Appeal No. 40 OF 2012  
Darshan Singh and anr 
Petitioners
 State of J & K
Respondent  
!Mr. A. K. Shan, Advocate
^Mr. Ravinder Sharma, AAG  

Honble Mr. Justice Mohammad Yaqoob Mir, Judge   
Honble Mr. Justice B. S. Walia, Judge
Date: 02.03.2015 
:J U D G M E N T :

Per-Yaqoob J. 
1. Vide Judgement impugned dated 03.04.2012, learned Sessions Judge, Poonch   
has convicted the appellants for having committed offences punishable under
Sections 302, 498-A read with section 34 RPC and vide order dated 04.04.2012
has awarded rigorous imprisonment for life and fine of Rs.5,000/- under Section
302 read with Section 34 RPC and two years imprisonment for the offences under
Section 498-A read with Section 34 RPC. All the sentences to run concurrently. In
case of


2
default in paying fine, the accused shall have to undergo
imprisonment for two months. The record of the case has been
submitted in terms of Section 374 CrPC for the confirmation of the
sentence of life imprisonment.
2. Learned counsel appearing for the appellants projected:
(a) None of the prosecution witnesses have seen the actual
occurrence.
(b) The dying declaration EXPW-6-I-S has been cited as a sole basis to
the actual occurrence, when the said dying declaration is suspicious
as the manner and method of recording such statement is shrouded 
in mystery. Same has not been recorded in presence of any 
independent witness.
(c) The investigating officer is shown to have recorded the statement
in presence of Sardar Ishar Singh and Surinder Singh, relatives of the
deceased. No explanation has been tendered for non inclusion of
any independent witness. 
(d) The physical condition as emerge from the evidence both
medical and another is such which would suggest that the
deceased was not in a position to make any statement. 


3
(e) The dying declaration has numerous defects, so in absence of
corroboration, same could not be a sole base for recording
conviction.
(f) FIR is shown to have been lodged and registered on 19.05.2007
but copy of the FIR has been received in the office of the Magistrate,
Poonch on 22.05.2007, when the office of the magistrate is located
at a short distance from the police station. Therefore, concoction in
the content of the report and in FIR has taken place.
3. While relying on various judgment of the honble Apex Court,
which shall be referred to hereinafter, submitted that the judgment
impugned is unsustainable.
4. Learned Additional Advocate General appearing for the State
with all vehemence submitted that:
(i) a young 28 years old lady just after three months of her marriage
has been burnt to death.
(ii) Immediately after her marriage, her life was made hell by the
accused by taunting and torturing her mentally for want of dowry.


4
(iii) The prosecution witnesses have fully supported the prosecution
case. The evidence as produced is sufficient which beyond any
shadow of doubt has proved that the accused have committed the 
offences for which they have been convicted.
(iv) The judgment impugned passed by the learned Sessions Judge 
does not suffer from any illegality or infirmity. Learned trial Court has
appreciated the evidence correctly.
(v) The dying declaration as recorded by the investigation officer is
inconsonance with law. Investigation officer has explained that he
had asked the doctor to remain present which the doctor has
refused by saying that the hospital at Ludhiana being a private
hospital, therefore, they do not associate themselves with recording
of the statements. He has also relied on the judgment rendered by
honble Apex Court which shall be referred to hereinafter finally
prayed for dismissal of the appeal.
5. The prosecution as unfolded is that deceased Manmeet Kour was  
married to accused no. 1 just three months prior to the occurrence.
During those three


5
months, accused no.1 and 2 used to taunt her and used to ask her as
to why she did not bring dowry. On the date of occurrence i.e.
19.05.2007 at about quarter to 5 PM when Manmeet Kour  
(deceased) was in her home, her husband accused no.1 (Darshan  
Singh) was also there, accused no. 2 Amrit Kour (sister of accused no.
1) came there and asked Manmeet Kour (deceased) to pick up the  
tin as had fallen due to wind which she refused. As a result whereof in
furtherance of common intention, accused no. 1 (Darshan Singh)
caught hold of the arms of the deceased on the verandah of the 2nd
storey of the house in front of the kitchen, whereas accused no. 2
(Amrit Kour) poured kerosene oil on her head and set the deceased
on fire. The deceased cried, inhabitants of the area (Mohallawalas)
reached on spot and extinguished the fire and took her to hospital
at Poonch, wherefrom she was shifted to Jammu and then from  
Jammu to Ludhiana hospital, where the deceased breathed her last 
on 07.06.2007.
6. The statement of the deceased is shown to have been recorded
by the Investigating Officer on 24.05.2007. Initially a case FIR no.
46/2007 PS Poonch was registered for commission of offences 
punishable under Section 307/34 RPC. After death, 307 was omitted 
and 302 


6
RPC was added. After completion of the investigation of the case,
charge-sheet (challan) has been presented before the court of
Chief Judicial Magistrate, Poonch on 18.08.2007. On the same day,
case has been committed to the court of Sessions Judge, Poonch. 
7. The charge has been framed against the accused on 13.11.2007 
to the following effect that the accused after few days of the
marriage started taunting deceased for not bringing the dowry, on
19.05.2007 at quarter to 5 PM when deceased refused to pick up the
tin as had fallen due to wind, with criminal intention in the 2nd storey
of the house on the verandah in front of kitchen, accused no.1
caught her by arms and accused no. 2 sprinkled kerosene oil and set
her on fire. Finally, she succumbed to the burn injuries in the CMC
Hospital, Ludhiana on 07.06.2007. Both the accused pleaded not
guilty as such claimed to be tried.
8. All the listed witnesses except PW 1 who had died were examined.
After closure of the prosecution evidence, the incriminating
circumstances as had appeared were put to the accused  
separately. Both the accused denied complicity in the crime,
claimed to be innocent and added that at the time of occurrence,
accused no. 1 (Darshan Singh) was not at his home. He 


7
being owner of a Tent House was in connection with collection of
rent away from home. When he returned to home, at that time 
deceased was taken to the hospital. Further has added that
deceased has not given any statement as she was not in a position
to speak. At Poonch hospital, police tried to record her statement
but she was on oxygen as she had suffered 100 per cent burns. PW-5 
Opinder Singh brother of the deceased and PW-3 Parmeet Singh the  
cousin of the deceased have given false statements so as to
implicate him. Further has added that the deceased having
suffered 100 per cent burns was on oxygen. Her hand and fingers
were burnt. She was unconscious, therefore, was not in a position to
make any statement. Regarding demands of dowry or taunting, has  
said that the same is a concoction.
9. The accused no. 2 Amrit Kour has also qualified that she being
resident of ward no.10, occurrence had taken place in ward no. 7,
she had no knowledge about the occurrence as she was not present  
on spot. She only came to know about the matter when the 
deceased was in the hospital. She being a married lady had no
occasion to go to the house of the deceased and to taunt her. A
concocted story has been prepared so as to wreak vengeance. The  
statement as shown to have been 


8
recorded of the deceased is totally fabricated as she was not in a
position to speak. Statement has not been recorded in presence of
any magistrate or the doctor.
10. In defence, the accused have produced as many as four
witnesses.
11. For appreciating the grounds of attack as raised by the counsel
for the appellants and the grounds to support the judgment, as
raised by the learned AAG, it shall be advantageous to precisely
notice as to what has emerged after perusing and considering the
evidence as has been brought on record in connection with the
points as raised.
12. The occurrence has taken place at quarter to 5 PM on
19.05.2007. Regarding the actual occurrence i.e. asking the
deceased to collect the tin which had fallen due to wind, her refusal
and then being caught by arms by the accused no. 1 (husband) 
and pouring of kerosene oil by the accused no. 2 (sister of accused),
setting her on fire, none of the witnesses has seen the same. In this
connection it shall be relevant to refer to the depositions of the
witnesses as cited witnesses to the occurrence i.e. PW-2 Amrit Kour,
PW-3 Parmeet Singh, PW-4 Manjeet Singh, PW-5 Opinder Singh, PW-8      
Balkrishan:-


9
(a) PW-2 Amrit Kour( Aunt of the deceased) has stated that on
19.05.2007, accused present in the court had put oil on the head of
the deceased and husband had caught her and burnt her. She  
(witness) was told the same by her nephew and then she (witness)
went to the hospital. In the cross-examination, has stated that she
did not see the occurrence with her own eyes. However, brother of
the deceased had seen the same who told her. It is clear that this
witness has not seen the actual occurrence.
(b) PW-3 Parmeet Singh has stated that the deceased was burnt on  
19.05.2007. At that time, he was on his shop. Some man then said 
Opinder Singh informed him that she was burnt and has been taken 
to hospital. He also went to the hospital. Deceased was burnt.
Deceased said in the hospital that accused (Darshan Singh) caught
hold of her arms whereas the accused no. 2 (Amrit Kour) had poured
kerosene oil on her and set her on fire. In the cross examination has
qualified that in his presence, deceased was not set on fire by
anyone. On the date of occurrence, his statement was recorded. He
has further qualified that the statement of the


10
deceased was recorded in hospital, Poonch and it is incorrect to say
that in that statement she had stated that she herself got burnt. The
deceased was talking in the hospital, Poonch. Her statement was
recorded on a paper. He (witness) had not asked Manmeet Kour  
(deceased) about the occurrence but when she was making the  
statement, he was standing therein. Doctor was also present but
doctor did not attest that statement. ASI whose name is not known
to him recorded the statement. Balkrishan was present there.
Parents of the deceased were also present. Other relatives were also
present in the hospital at Poonch. This witness too has not seen the
actual occurrence. After occurrence he has seen the deceased first
time in the hospital. Further, he has stated that the deceased had
made a statement in hospital, Poonch that she was set on fire by
accused after she was caught hold of her. It is to be made clear that
no statement is shown to have been recorded by the investigating
agency, nor any such statement has been placed on record what to 
speak of proving the same.
(c) PW 4 Manjeet Singh (relative of the deceased) has stated that on
19.05.2007,


11
approximately at half past 4 PM when he was in his own home, he 
heard that the deceased is burnt and the inhabitants of the area
(Mohallawalas) have taken her to the hospital. He went to the
hospital and saw her in a burnt condition. She was referred to
Jammu hospital and then to CMC Ludhiana. On the cross  
examination has stated that in hospital at Poonch, deceased was not
talking. She was badly burnt, so could not talked. He heard at his
residence that the deceased is burnt and straight away from his own
home, he went to the hospital. This witness too has not seen the actual
occurrence.
(d) PW 5 Opinder Singh (brother of the deceased) has stated that
Manmeet Kour is his real sister, who on 12.03.2007 was married to
accused (Darshan Singh). On 19.05.2007, his sister was burnt by the
accused. Accused no. 1 had caught arms of the deceased and the  
accused no. 2 (Amrit Kour) poured kerosene oil as such set her on
fire. Such statement was made by the deceased in CMC Ludhiana in  
his presence to the police. The said statement was recorded on
24.05.2007 in his presence. Ishar Singh and Surinder Singh were kept
as witnesses to the said statement. In the cross


12
examination has stated that the statement of the deceased was
also recorded in Hospital Poonch. His house is at a distance of half a
kilometre from the house of the accused. At quarter to 5 PM,
deceased was taken to the hospital, Poonch. This witness too has not
seen the actual occurrence.
(e) PW 8 Balkrishan in the cross examination on a specific question,
has stated that the he was not present at the place of occurrence
where deceased was burnt. He has not made any such statement to   
the police that the deceased was burnt in his presence. This witness
too has not seen the actual occurrence.
(f) PW-10 Davinder Singh has stated that he has a shop in Mohalla
Saray. On 19.05.2007, he was on his shop, heard noise, came out 
and found Manmeet Kour in a burning condition came down from  
the stairs of her house, residents of mohalla and he also went,
Darshan Singh (accused) was also present on spot, mohallawalas  
did extinguish the fire. Thereafter, she was taken to the hospital then
referred to Jammu hospital, then to Ludhiana. In his cross
examination, he has qualified that his wife Balbinder Kour was not
present on spot nor she went


13
on spot. Adjacent to his shop is the shop of Mohd. Fiyaz and shop of
Tirath Singh. The witness too extinguished the fire by putting tent on
her. Worn clothes of the deceased were burnt, did not see as to
whether hairs of her head were burnt but little bit were burnt, hand
and mouth was also burnt. Further stated the when he reached on
spot, the deceased was lying on the road, he did not go to the roof of
the house. He did not see the deceased being set on fire.
(g) PW 11 Balbinder Kaur (wife of PW 10), on 19.05.2007, the accused
had burnt the deceased, she was taken to the hospital, then to
Jammu and from Jammu to Ludhiana where she died. In the cross  
examination has stated that deceased was burnt. She went to the
hospital and saw her there. She was at her shop when deceased in a
burning condition came down, people extinguished the fire, then
was taken to the hospital. She was present on spot. Her husband was 
also present there along with her. This witness too has not seen the
actual occurrence. Even otherwise according to her, she was present
on spot when according to her husband (PW 10), she was not present 
on spot.


14
(h) PW 12 Raju Sharma has qualified that he did not see any one
setting the deceased on fire. Instead has qualified that at quarter to
5 PM, he heard that the girl has been burnt, who has been taken to
the hospital. He also heard that accused Darshan Singh has caught
her by arms whereas accused Amrit Kour has poured kerosene oil  
and ser her on fire. But in the cross examination, he has totally
qualified that he did not see himself anyone setting the deceased on
fire.
13. Prosecution has not been able to produce or examine any other
witnesses who would have seen the actual occurrence which in turn
gives rise to a question as to how deceased caught the fire. Whether
she was set on fire or accidentally she caught the fire. The position
has remained in the region of suspicion.
14. The case hinges on the statement of the deceased styled now as 
dying declaration. The dying declaration is shown to have been
recorded by PW 22 Mohd. Iqbal ASI in presence of two witnesses i.e.
PW 6 Ishar Singh and PW 7 Surinder Singh. Furthermore, brother of the
deceased PW 5 Opinder Singh has also stated that the statement of 
the deceased was recorded in his presence at Ludhiana.


15
15. What is the value of dying declaration and what is the evidence
brought on record in support thereof is now to be dealt with herein.
(a) The dying declaration has been recorded on 24.05.2007,
occurrence is of 19.05.2007, whereas the declarant died on
07.06.2007. The statement is recorded by the Investigating Officer
PW 22 Mohd. Iqbal. Before recording statement, he appear to have
requested in writing to Medical Officer CMC, Ludhiana on the same
date i.e. 24.05.2007 which application is on the records. The doctor is
shown to have recorded on the same day as under: 
the patient is fit for statement.
This application and the opinion of the doctor has not been proved
at all. The witness when examined in the Court has stated that at
CMC Ludhiana, first of all, he submitted an application to the doctor
who opined that the deceased is fit to make the statement. In the
cross examination has stated that earlier he had moved an
application before doctor at Poonch on which doctor recorded that
the


16
deceased was not fit to make any statement. He too had verified
and found that she was not fit to make statement. Then on
23.05.2007, he went to Ludhiana where he did not move any 
application before the magistrate for recording the statement of the
deceased. In presence of real heirs, he recorded her statement. He
had requested the doctor to attest the statement but doctors said
that they do not attest the statement of a person from outside the
State as the hospital is a private one. Witness has further stated that
he had recorded the statement of Opinder Singh, S/o Joginder
Singh on 24.05.2007 at the residence of the accused, means at
Poonch. When he has said that on 23.05.2007, he reached to 
Ludhiana and recorded the statement of the deceased on 
24.05.2007, then how could he reach to Poonch on the same date  
i.e. 24.05.2007, where he claimed to have recorded the statement of
Opinder Singh on the same date. He has further stated that the
deceased was 95 per cent burnt as recorded by the doctors.


17
The head, neck, abdomen, arms and hands were swathed/banded.    
(b) The important condition which has emerged is that the
application seeking opinion from the doctors about the fitness of the
patient to make statement then opinion of the doctors that the
patient is fit to make statement has remained to be proved. The
doctor who is shown to have recorded that patient is fit for
statement is neither cited as witness nor produced, therefore, such
position has remained to be proved, more so when the deceased 
had suffered 95 per cent burns, she was not able to make any
statement immediately after the occurrence in the hospital. The
physical condition of the deceased as it would have remained in
Jammu hospital or then in Ludhiana hospital has not been explained
by any one as to whether she was able to speak whether she was on  
oxygen, whether she was in coma, whether she was served food.  
Under such circumstances, the doctor who allegedly had opined 
that the patient is fit to make statement


18
was required to be examined so as to attach genuineness to the
statement of the deceased. In our view, we are fortified by the
judgement rendered by the honble Apex Court in case of
Kamalakar Nandram Bhavsar and ors. -Appellants v. State of
Maharashtra 2003 (8) Supreme 424. In the reported judgement, the
patient had suffered 95 per cent burns, she was put on oxygen right
from the moment she was brought to the hospital and continued to
be on oxygen till she died. Under such circumstances, it was
observed that it is difficult to believe that she could have made a
dying declaration when she was not even capable of breathing by
herself.
(c) In the instant case, admittedly, the deceased had suffered 95 %
burns, she was not able to make any statement at Poonch hospital.
Her physical condition was very bad. The IO in his statement has not
explained as to whether in his opinion patient was fit to make the
statement.
(d) On 24.05.2007, statement of the deceased has been recorded at
Ludhiana.


19
She died on 7.6.2007. Why investigation officer under such
circumstances has not requested a Magistrate for recording the
statement of the deceased or why he has not requested any 
independent witness to be present while recording the statement is
a question which has remained to be answered by the PW- 22, IO of 
the case. Same casts serious doubt and exclusion of such dying 
declaration. In our considered view, we are fortified by the judgment
rendered by honble Apex Court in the case of Manu Raja and anr.
V. State of Madhya Pradesh AIR 1976 SC 2199. Para 11 is  
advantageous to be quoted: 
11. We might, however, mention before we close that the High
Court ought not to have placed any reliance on the third dying
declaration. Ex.P-2, which is said to have been made by the
deceased in the hospital. The investigating officer who recorded
that statement had undoubtedly taken the precaution of keeping a
doctor present and it also appears that some of the friends and
relations of the deceased were also present at the time when the
statement was recorded. But, if the investigating officer thought
that Bahadur Singh was in a precarious condition, he ought to have
requisitioned the services of Magistrate for recording


20
the dying declaration. Investigating officers are naturally interested
in the success of the investigation and the practice of the
investigating officer himself recording a dying declaration during
the course of investigation ought not to be encouraged. We have
therefore excluded from our consideration the dying declaration,
Ex-P-2, recorded in the hospital.
(e) For such exclusion, there are other reasons also. The two witnesses
in whose presence the dying declaration EXPW-6-I-S has been 
recorded are PW-6 Sardar Ishar Singh and PW-7 Sardar Surinder  
Singh. Deceased was the niece of the wife of Ishar Singh whereas
PW-7 Surinder Singh is the father of the deceased, so close two
relatives. In addition thereto, Opinder Singh (brother of the
deceased) also claimed to have been present at the time her
statement was recorded but not cited as witness to the dying
declaration. When it was so, requirement of associating an
independent witness was imperative. That apart, PW 22 IO Mohd 
Iqbal has stated that the deceased spoke in Pahari language and
he translated it into Urdu and recorded it in Urdu language whereas
PW-6 Ishar Singh stated that


21
the deceased made the statement in Punjabi language, PW-7  
Surinder Singh also stated that the deceased made the statement in
Pahari language. Who among the three is to be believed. When a 
statement is not recorded in the language in which spoken by the
deceased, then atleast the officer recording the statement had to
record the certificate that the statement contains the true facts as
stated by the deceased. In this connection, it shall be quite relevant
to quote para 19 of the judgement rendered by the honble Apex
Court in the case of Muralidhar @ Gidda and anr. V. State of
Karnataka AIR 2014 SC 2200.  
19. The sanctity is attached to a dying declaration because it
comes from the mouth of a dying person. If the dying declaration is
recorded not directly from the actual words of the maker but as
dictated by somebody else, in our opinion, this by itself creates a lot
of suspicion about credibility of such statement and the prosecution
has to clear the same to the satisfaction of the court. The trial court
on over-all consideration of the evidence of PW-25, PW-30 and
PW-36 coupled with the fact that there was over-writing about the
time at which the statement was recorded and also insertion of two
names by different ink did not consider it safe to rely upon the dying
declaration and acquitted the


22
accused for want of any other evidence. In the circumstances, in
our view, it cannot be said that the view taken by the trial court on
the basis of evidence on record was not a possible view. The
accused were entitled to the benefit of doubt which was rightly
given to them by the trial court.
(f) Looking at the details of the statement (dying declaration), it
appears to have been a doctored one. When the position of the
deceased was such that she had suffered 95 per cent burns, could
she make such a long statement with such type of accuracy is 
difficult to be believed. More so, when the Doctor Fahmida Wani
PW-20 who had examined the deceased at Hospital Poonch had    
stated that the condition of patient was deteriorating. The head of
the patient was also roasted. The another Doctor PW-19 Sekhi Mohd 
who had conducted the post mortem at Poonch hospital has stated  
that burns all over the body sparing hands were more than 90 per
cent. The eyes were ecchymosed, nostril swollen, burnt mouth
partially with lips swollen, scalp burnt, membrane found shrunken,
melted with


23
hemorrhaged, brain substances shrunken with hemorrhaged, all the 
internal organs were found congested, heart was full of blood and
there was curlings ulcer present in the stomach. Then has further
qualified in the cross examination that above 90 per cent burns
means could be 95 per cent. There are no chance of survival of
person who burns up to 90 per cent. After burns the patient has
remained alive for 20 days, he could not say what was the condition
of the patient from the date of occurrence till date. Under such
circumstances, a person can talk till death if has not gone in deep
coma. Then has qualified as under:
In this particular case, she had about 100 per cent burns and it is
possible that she might have gone into shock after burns
immediately. When a person goes in shock, there are no chances of 
talk.
(g) No doctor from the hospital CMC Ludhiana has been produced 
or examined as 


24
a witness who would say as to what was the condition of the patient
during the period she remained admitted there. Even the two
witnesses PW-6 & 7 and the IO himself have not anywhere qualified
as to what was the condition of the patient for the period she was
admitted in CMC Ludhiana. The position of statement having been
doctored is strengthened by the fact that the IO of the case has not
given any reason or justification for not including an independent
witness to the statement nor has given any justification for not
requesting magistrate for recording her statement. PW Opinder
Singh brother of the deceased has stated that when deceased 
made the statement at CMC Ludhiana, he was present but about  
his presence, PW-6, PW-7 who are signatory to the statement have 
not said anything nor IO has said that he was present, his deposition
gets exposed if he would have been present there, then he too
would have singed the statement the way his father has singed.
Further more, according to IO statement under Section 161. Opinder
Singh 


25
was recorded at Poonch on 24.05.2007, which also casts doubt 
about as to whether IO was at CMC Ludhiana or at Poonch, same is  
true about Opinder Singh.
(h) The detailed statement (dying declaration) under said
circumstances as has been recorded with coherence at length can 
be safely concluded to be a doctored one. In this connection from
the judgment rendered by the honble Apex Court in four appeals
with lead case Balbir v. Vazir and ors, AIR 2014 SC 2778. Para 15 is
advantageous to be quoted: 
15. The prosecution heavily relied on the dying declaration
allegedly made by deceased Krishna Gir to PW-3 Prithvi Gir. It is
submitted that the fact that PW-3 Prithvi Gir took deceased Krishna
Gir to hospital at Pilani is corroborated by PW-2 Dr. Bedwal. Presence
of PW-3 Prithvi Gir has also been mentioned in the inquest
proceedings conducted by PW-31 Prem Singh Huda after the death   
of deceased Krishna Gir. It is submitted that PW-2 Dr. Bedwal stated
that deceased Krishna Gir was in a position to talk. Assuming,
however, that deceased Krishna Gir could talk and make a dying
declaration, the question is how far the narration of the facts
contained in the alleged dying declaration is true and whether
dying declaration is true and whether it inspires any confidence.
Deceased Krishna Gir was seriously injured. He


26
succumbed to those injuries in the Hissar hospital. He must have
been in great pain. It is inconceivable that deceased Krishna Gir
would make such a dying declaration giving minute particulars like
fathers name, caste an village of each alleged conspirator when he
was on death bed with excruciating pain. It would have been
natural for him to just give the names. But he is stated to have given
details of each of the ten alleged conspirators and that makes this
dying declaration suspect. A bare reading of this dying declaration
makes it evident that it is a doctored document. Such details could
not have been given by deceased Krishna Gir at that stage. It is
possible that they have been supplied by PW-3 Prithvi Gir. The High
Court in our opinion has rightly observed that such a dying
declaration does not appear to be natural, but portrays an attempt
by the successor of Balakdera I.e. PW-3 Prithvi Gir to plant names of
all those with whom Balakdera had axe to grind through the
statement attributed to deceased Krishna Gir. We find it difficult to
place reliance on this dying declaration.
15. The copy of the FIR no.46/2007 dated 19.05.2007 has been sent 
to the magistrate on 22.05.2007 when the Magistrates office was at
a small distance. The delay in sending copy of the FIR to the
Magistrate has not been explained by anyone of the prosecution
witnesses. When it is so, there is every possibility that the FIR must have
been registered later in point of time and ante-dated which position
is strengthened by the position of


27
the case i.e. in the report it has been recorded that on 19.05.2007,
the accused Darshan Singh husband of the deceased and the  
deceased were available in the second storey of the house. In the
meantime, accused no. 2 (sister of the accused Darshan Singh) 
came, who asked the deceased to pick up the tin, as had fallen due
to wind, which she refused. As a result whereof, accused no. 1
caught arms of the deceased and the accused no. 2 poured 
kerosene oil on her and set her on fire.
16. No witness has stated as to whether there was any wind on the
date of occurrence, neither any witness has said as to what type of
tin had fallen, then refused to be picked up by the deceased. It
appears a theory introduced later in point of time, otherwise
witnesses would have in clear terms stated about wind, then fall of
tin and type of tin. The situation gets further strengthened by the fact
that no witness has seen the actual occurrence. Presence of the two
accused persons at the actual place of occurrence is not stated by
any of the witnesses. Only PW-10 Davinder Singh has stated that
when Manmeet Kaur in a burning condition came down the stairs 
from her home, mohalla people were moving towards her and he 
also went, Darshan Singh was present on spot at that time but he has
not said that he has seen


28
Darshan Singh in the house at the time of occurrence. He is the only
witness who said that Darshan Singh was present on spot i.e. when
the fire was being extinguished; no other witness has said so.
Regarding accused no.2 also, none of the witnesses has said about
her presence at the place of occurrence. The theory of wind and
falling of tin due to wind appears to be introduced. In such situation
non-explanation of not-sending the copy of the FIR to the Magistrate
up to 22.05.2007 gives rise to a suspicious situation and the report
appears to have lodged after consultation. In this connection, it shall
be quite advantageous to quote para 5 of the judgment titled State
of Punjab v. Tarlok Singh, AIR 1971 SC 1221.
5. First, the High Court noticed the suspicion created by the
circumstance that the copy of the First Information Report purported
to have been lodged at 3.45 p.m. did not reach the Magistrate at
Dasuya till 8. a.m the next day even though it was sent through a
special messenger. The distance between the scene of occurrence 
and Dasuya was only 15 or 16 miles. The inference sought to be
drawn is that, in fact, the report was not lodged at 3.45 p.m. but at a
much later hour, after the police had arrived at the scene of
occurrence and there were consultations to decide what version
should be put forward and who should be implicated for the murder.
The prosecution in fact, made no attempt to explain this delay. Such
delay thus, cast doubt on the prosecution version that


29
the Report was lodged at 3.45 p.m without lapse of unnecessary
time.
17. The post mortem report EXPW-19-SM would suggest that right  
thumb pulp of the deceased was stained with stamp ink. Picking the
thread from there, it was highlighted that in fact investigating
agency has taken the thumb impression on the statement of the 
deceased in Hospital at Poonch over which her impression of right
thumb was taken. The defence set up that in fact deceased in the
hospital at Poonch had made a statement which was recorded  
wherein she had not said anything against the accused and might
have given the actual account as to how she caught the fire, same
has been withheld. Such situation has remained in suspicion as
PW-20 Dr. Fahmida posted in hospital Poonch has stated that the 
patient had not narrated the story about occurrence. When the
PW-3 Parmeet Singh S/o Bhajan Singh had stated that the statement  
of the deceased was recorded by the police in hospital at Poonch
and has added that it is incorrect to say that the deceased had said
that she got burnt herself. He further stated that deceased in
hospital Poonch was talking when her statement was recorded, he 
was present,


30
though he states opposite to what other witnesses have said.
18. In the facts and circumstances of the case and keeping in view
the depositions of the witnesses, no one has seen the actual
occurrence nor anyone had seen the accused present in the house 
where occurrence took place. The dying declaration assumed 
greater importance. It is settled that dying declaration has to be
considered with caution, not to be acted upon unless it is
corroborated and is such which may inspire confidence to hold that
the statement is such as was actually made by the maker thereof. In
certain cases, there may not be immediate scope for securing
presence of Magistrate or of an independent witness. The dying
declaration as shall be recorded is not to be discarded as having
been recorded by the IO but statement in its content must be such
which may inspire confidence that the maker thereof in fact had
made such a statement and the statement in any manner is not 
doctored.
19. When the dying declaration is recorded and it is possible to
secure the presence of the independent witnesses and there is
scope for requesting a Magistrate to record the statement or there is
scope for requesting a doctor to be present during the recording of
the


31
statement, then same is not done and no explanation for that is
tendered, then it shall be unsafe to rely on such statement in view
the investigating officer being interested in the success of the case.
20(a) The dying declaration in fact is a statement regarding which
cross examination is impossible, statement is not also on oath,
therefore, such declaration has to be analysed with caution.
AIR 1953 SC 420 in the case of Ram Nath Madhoprasad and ors. V.   
State of Madhya Pradesh, it has been held that it is not safe to
convict person merely on the evidence furnished by dying declarant
without further corroboration because such a statement is not made
on oath and is not subject to cross-examination and because the
maker of it might be mentally and physically in the sate of confusion
and might well be drawings upon his imagination while he was
making the declaration.
(b) It is true that a certificate of the doctor may not be necessary but
as a rule of caution when doctor is available, opinion and presence
of the doctor must be ensured before recording the dying
declaration.
(c) From the judgment reported in AIR 2002 SC 2973 captioned 
Laxman v. State of Maharashtra, following portions from Para 3 are
relevant to be quoted:


32
......................... The court however has to always be on guard to see
that the statement of the deceased was not as a result of either
tutoring or prompting or a product of imagination. The court also
must further decide that the deceased was in a fit state of mind and
had the opportunity to observe and identify the assailant. Normally,
therefore, the court in order to satisfy whether the deceased was in a
fit mental condition to make the dying declaration, looked up the
medical opinion,................................,what evidential value or weight is
to be attached to such statement necessarily depends on the facts
and circumstances of each particular case. What is essentially
required is that a person who records a dying declaration must be
satisfied that the deceased was in a fit state of mind. Where it is
proved by the testimony of the magistrate that the declarant was fit
to make the statement even when examination by the doctor the 
declaration can be acted upon provided the court ultimately holds
the same to be voluntary and truthful. A certification by the doctor is
essentially a rule of caution and therefore the voluntary and truthful
nature of the declaration can be established otherwise.
(d) applying the ratio of the said judgment to the facts of the present
case as noticed hereinabove. The dying declaration so made is
shrouded in mystery.
(e) Looking at the physical condition of the deceased as it
appeared from the medical opinion coupled with the post mortem
report then keeping in view the manner and method of recording
the


33
statement, then the lengthy narration show made by the declarant
in hindi/pahari language and then the stand of investigating officer
that he could understand the pahari or hindi language, what
actually was spoken by the declarant is totally doubtful.
21. For the stated reasons, the offence punishable under Section 302
RPC can safely be said not to have been proved beyond shadow of 
doubt.
22. The another position of the case is that within three months of the
marriage, the deceased was being subject to torture for not having
brought sufficient dowry, which fact on the information of the
deceased is stated by the close relatives of the deceased and the
deceased in her dying declaration. Whether that has any origin or
not is not fully corroborated from the depositions of the witnesses. On
the one hand, the theory of the prosecution is that deceased was
being taunted for not having brought sufficient dowry and on the
other hand, the occurrence of burning is related to the situation
which had arisen at the place of occurrence i.e. a theory that in
view of wind, tin had fallen, accused no. 2 asked the deceased to
pick up the tin, on refusal, she was caught hold of and burnt. It is not
the case of prosecution that the deceased was being tortured and
taunted and finally


34
on that basis, she has been burnt. There is a big gap in the theory as
set up.
23. It is unfortunate that a young lady who yet had to see so many
summers of her life is silenced for ever. Equally it is unfortunate that
the investigation of the case has been such which has left yawning
gaps leaving much scope for such doubts enough to inspire
confidence for not holding the accused as guilty. Accused who
were shown to have been arrested on 21.06.2007 continued to be in
the custody till date. Doubtful situation of the case is to the
advantage of the appellants.
24. Judgment referred to by learned AAG, AIR 2002 SC 2973 is of no
help because in the reported judgement, magistrate an
independent witness had appeared as witness who had stated that 
declarant was fit to make the statement which has been acted
upon as having been found voluntary and truthful which is not the
position in the case in hand. Similarly another judgement relied upon
by the learned AAG, AIR 2011 SC 1562 is not of any help to the
prosecution as in the reported judgment, dying declaration was
recorded by Tehsildar which was not in question and answer form.
There was no certificate of fitness issued by the doctor. The dying
declaration was held valid because Tehsildar an


35
independent witness had recorded the same. His statement was  
such which inspired confidence for holding the statement to be
truthful, whereas in the case in hand, the statement has been
recorded by the IO not by an independent witness. It shall be quite
relevant to quote para 20 of the said judgment so as to make the
position clear.
20. this now brings us to the submissions with regard to the dying
declaration. Factually, it is to be noticed that the Tehsildar, who
recorded the dying declaration appeared as PW-6, he has clearly
stated that although no doctor was present in the hospital, he was
informed by the pharmacist that Rishipal Singh was in a fit state to
make a statement. He, thereafter, isolated the injured Rishipal Singh
and recorded his statement. He further stated that he wrot down
word by word what Rishipal Singh had stated. The contents of the
statement were read to the injured who stated that he understood
and accepted the same. Only thereafter, he put his thumb
impression on the statement. It is undoubtedly true that the
statement has not been recorded in the question and answer form.
It is also correct that at the time when the statement was recorded
Rishipal Singh was in a serious condition?.
The another judgment as relied upon by the learned AAG reported
in 2014 (2) JK 257, is the judgment rendered by the Division Bench of
this Court, but in the reported judgment, facts and circumstances
were altogether different, as said earlier, every case has its own facts
and 


36
features and the dying declaration has also to be considered in the
background of its own position i.e. what was the condition of the
maker of the declarant and other host of circumstances as noticed
hereinabove.
25. It is not made clear by any of the witnesses as to whether the
accused more particularly the accused no. 1 husband of the
deceased after gaining information about the position of his wife
had visited the hospitals at Poonch, Jammu and Ludhiana. None of
the witnesses has said anything about that nor any such
circumstances have been put to the accused while having been 
examined in terms of Section 342 CrPC. 
26. The facts, circumstances, flaws as quoted and referred to
hereinabove have not been properly taken care of by the learned
trial Court meaning thereby that the evidence has not been
appreciated properly and it is in view of that position, we have
undertaken the exercise of reading the entire evidence and on its
appreciation, , we have found that the flaws, defects which
demolished the prosecution case have not been taken note of by
the learned trial Court.
27. For the stated facts, circumstances and reasons, in the upshot we
have reached to a firm conclusion that the guilt against the
accused has not 


37
been proved beyond shadow of doubt. Therefore, the accused 
deserve acquittal, as such acquitted. The judgment and the order of
sentence under challenge are set-aside. Accused be released 
forthwith, if not required in connection with any other case. The
reference for confirmation registered as confirm. No. 40/2012 in the
aforesaid backdrop does not survive for any consideration,
accordingly, rejected.
28. Copy of the judgement and the trial court record be sent to the
trial Court for follow-up. Appeal file after due completion shall be
consigned to the records.

(B. S. Walia)           (Mohammad Yaqoob Mir)   
Judge                           Judge 

Jammu 02.03.2015 Raj Kumar   



