

 IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

Crl Rev Pet No. 3474 of 2006()


1. PRAKASH, AGED 44 YEARS,
                      ...  Petitioner

                        Vs



1. STATE OF KERALA, REPRESENTED BY THE
                       ...       Respondent

                For Petitioner  :SRI.P.V.ANIL

                For Respondent  : No Appearance

The Hon'ble MR. Justice R.BASANT

 Dated :06/10/2006

 O R D E R
                                R. BASANT, J.
                        - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                       Crl.R.P.No.  3474  of   2006
                        -  - - - -  - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                 Dated this the 6th  day of   October, 2006


                                    O R D E R



       The  petitioner herein faces indictment in a prosecution, which


was initially lodged under Section 498A and 306 I.P.C.  In the nature


and facts of this case, I shall carefully avoid any detailed discussion


of  the factual allegations, lest it may cause prejudice to the parties, if


any expression of opinion is made by this court.


       2.   The petitioner is the husband of a deceased woman.   Her


death was caused by hanging.  The prosecution alleged that there was


demands for dowry made by the petitioner  from the mother and other


relatives  of the  deceased.    The death  had  taken  place  within  seven


years of the date of marriage.  The case was committed to the court of


Sessions.     Charge   was   initially   framed   by   the   court   only   under


Sections  498A  and 306  I.P.C.   There is  no dispute  that  the  charge


under Section 498A was framed on the basis of the allegations under


clause (b) of   the   Explanation to Section 498A.


Crl.R.P.No.  3474  of   2006                 2



       3.  Before the trial, it was brought to  the notice of the learned Judge


that there has been a grievous omission in not framing charge under Section


304B I.P.C.   The learned Judge, after hearing  all concerned, came to the


conclusion   that   there   was   an   error   in   not   framing   charge   under   Section


304B   I.P.C.     Accordingly,   the   learned   Judge,     held   that   charge   under


Section 304B I.P.C. was liable to be framed.   The learned Judge invoked


the   powers   under   Section   216   Cr.P.C.   and   directed   amendment   of   the


charge.   The amended charge was read over and explained to the accused


and his plea was recorded.  At that stage, the petitioner wanted the charge to


be altered.  He came forward with a petition for alteration of the charge and


to delete the charge under Section 304B.   That petition was dismissed by


the learned Sessions Judge.


       4.  Various contentions were urged.  It was contended that the power


under Section 216 Cr.P.C. should not have been invoked in the absence of


any better evidence after framing of the initial charge.   This contention is


obviously unsustainable.   It is not the law that powers under Section 216


Cr.P.C. can be invoked only when further material is available in evidence


before court than what was available  initially at the stage of framing the


Crl.R.P.No.  3474  of   2006                  3



charge.     The   omission     by   the   court   to   frame   proper   charges   can   also


certainly   be   corrected   by   invocation   of   the   powers   under   Section   216


Cr.P.C.




       5.  It is next contended that the allegations, even if accepted, cannot


justify the framing of charge under Section 304B.  It is in this context that I


have noted that the allegation is that the wife had committed suicide; that


such suicide was committed within seven years of the date of the  marriage


and  that soon before her death she was subjected to the matrimonial cruelty


of   the   variety   explained   in   explanation   (b)   to   Section   498A.       These


allegations together, on the basis of which the charge under Sections 306


and 498A have been raised,   must justifiably lead to the invocation of the


presumption   under   Section   113B.     Consequently   the   framing   of   charge


under   Section   304B   cannot   by   any   stretch   of   imagination   be   held   to   be


incorrect   and   improper   as   to   justify   the   invocation   of   the   revisional


jurisdiction of superintendence and correction vested in this court.


       6.   In these circumstances this revision petition is dismissed.   But I


may hasten to observe that I have not at all  intended to express any opinion


Crl.R.P.No.  3474  of   2006                4



on the  acceptability  of  the  allegations  raised  and  it  will  be  for  the  court


concerned   at   the   end   of   the   trial   to   consider   whether   necessary


circumstances   have   been proved to justify invocation of the presumption





under   Section   113B   and   whether   all   the   requisite   allegations   have   been


established.





                                                         (R. BASANT)
                                                              Judge


tm



