

 IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

Death Sentence Ref No. 6 of 2005()


1. STATE OF KERALA.
                      ...  Petitioner

                        Vs



1. POOTHALA ABOOBACKER @ BABU
                       ...       Respondent

                For Petitioner  :PUBLIC PROSECUTOR

                For Respondent  : No Appearance

The Hon'ble MR. Justice K.S.RADHAKRISHNAN
The Hon'ble MR. Justice V.RAMKUMAR

 Dated :24/08/2006

 O R D E R
                      K.S.Radhakrishnan & V. Ramkumar, JJ.
                                  ...................................
                                    D.S. R. No.6/2005
                                                 &
                                  Crl. A. No.2051/2005
                                  ...................................


                   Dated, this the    24th   day of  August,  2006


                                         JUDGMENT


Ramkumar, J.


       The   above   death   sentence   reference   has   been   registered   upon


submission   of   proceedings   by   the   Sessions   Judge,   Manjeri,   under   Sec.   366


Cr.P.C. for confirmation of the death sentence awarded to Poothala Aboobaker


@ Babu for his conviction under sec.302 IPC along with other offences by the


Addl.   Sessions   Court   (Fast   Track   Court   No.I   -   Ad   hoc),   Manjeri   in


S.C.No.113/2005.     The   above   criminal   appeal   has   been   filed   by   the   said


accused challenging the conviction entered and the sentence passed against


him  by  the aforesaid  court  for offences  punishable  under  secs.376  377,   302


and 201 IPC.


       2.     With  the   consent   of   both   sides   the   death   sentence  reference   was


heard along with the above criminal appeal.


       3.  The case of the prosecution can be summarised as follows:-


       On 8.9.2004 at  or about 9.30 a.m. inside the common bathroom on the


upstair   portion   of   the   partially   built   house   belonging   to   one   Manakkadavan


DSR 6/05 AND CRL. A. 2051/05                 -:2:-


Beerankoya   at   Muchirakkad   near   Kondotty   in   Ernad   Taluk   of   Malappuram


District,   the   accused   viz.   20   year   old   Poothala   Aboobaker   @   Babu   who   was


employed as a labourer under a building contractor, forcibly abducted a minor girl


aged 12 years by name Khairunissa on her way to school and committed carnal


intercourse on her body against    the order of nature and thereafter committed


rape on her after gagging her mouth with a towel and tying her legs on to two


laterite stones and tying both her hands behind her body with a coir rope and


tying a towel around her face closing her eyes.  After sexually assaulting the girl


as above, the accused committed murder of the girl by tying one end of the towel


around her neck and tightening the same by lifting  the other end to make sure


her   death.     Thereafter   with   the   intention   of   causing   disappearance   of   the


evidence of the offence and   to screen himself from punishment, the accused


concealed the dead body by carrying the same into the nearby building of Abdul


Latheef   under   construction   and   dumped   the   dead   body   on   the   loft   above   the


bathroom   attached   to   the   bedroom   on   the   upstair   of   the   said   house.     The


accused then closed the loft using laterite stones and thereafter made himself


scarce.     The   accused   has   thereby   committed   offences   punishable   under


secs.376, 377, 302 and 201 IPC.


       4.  On the accused pleading not guilty to the charge framed against him by


the court below for the aforementioned offences, the prosecution was permitted


to adduce evidence in support of its case.  The prosecution altogether examined


DSR 6/05 AND CRL. A. 2051/05                    -:3:-


44 witnesses as PWs.1 to 44 and got marked 53 documents as Exts.P1 to P53


and 38 material objects as M.Os.1 to 23, 23(a) to 23(e), 24 to 26, 26(b) and 27 to


33.


        5.     After   the   close   of   the   prosecution   evidence,   the   accused   was


purportedly   examined   under   Sec.313   (1)(b)Cr.P.C.   with   regard   to   the


incriminating circumstances allegedly appearing against him in the evidence for


the prosecution.       He denied   the incriminating circumstances put to him and


maintained his innocence.


        6.    Soon  after  the  completion  of   the   examination   of  the  accused  under


sec.313 Cr.P.C., he was called upon to enter on his defence.  He examined  as


DWs 1 and 2 the reporter and news editor of the  malayalam daily Mathrubhumi


and   got   marked   Exts.D1   to   D7   series   of   newspaper   reports   and   three


photographs as Exts.D7(d), D7(e) and D7(f).


        7.   After the conclusion of trial, the learned Addl. Sessions Judge as per


judgment dt. 31.10.2005 found the accused guilty of all the offences with which


he was charged.    After hearing the accused on the question of sentence,  the


learned Sessions Judge imposed the extreme penalty of death for the conviction


under   sec.302   IPC   subject   to   confirmation   by   the   High   Court.     In   view   of   the


capital punishment awarded for the offence of murder, no separate sentence was


imposed for the conviction under secs.376,  377 and 201 IPC.       It is the said


judgment   which is  assailed   in  the  above  appeal by the   accused.    The D.S.R.


DSR 6/05 AND CRL. A. 2051/05                    -:4:-


comes   up   before   us   to   consider   whether   the   death   sentence   imposed   by   the


court below is liable to be confirmed or not.


        8.   We heard Adv.Sri T.K.Ajithkumar, the learned counsel who defended


the accused and Adv.Sri Sujith Mathew Jose, the learned Public Prosecutor who


defended the State.


        9.  Both sides argued at length their respective contentions.


                     ARGUMENTS OF THE PUBLIC PROSECUTOR


        10.       Canvassing  for confirmation of the death sentence imposed on the


accused     and  for   dismissal   of   the     criminal   appeal   filed   by  the   accused,     the


learned Public Prosecutor made the following submissions before us:-


        The   prosecution   has   proved   the   following   circumstances   from   which  an


inference of the guilt of the accused can indubitably be drawn:-


               i)  The 12 year old girl who  had  left her  house for school at about 9 '0
               clock in the morning on 8-9-2004 to write her quarterly examination did
               not reach home and  was found missing from 4.30 p.m. onwards.   A
               frantic search for the girl in the nearby houses and her school, was in
               vain. This is proved by P.Ws 1 to 3 and 5 and 9.  P.W.1,  the father of
               the girl thereupon   lodged Ext.P1 F.I. statement before the Kondotty
               police  at 8.30 p.m. 8-9-2004.


               ii)  The evidence of P.Ws 3 and 5 and Ext.P6 will show that  the girl did
               not attend the  school  on 8-9-2004.


               iii)   A thorough search for the girl made by the local people and the
               police on  8-9-2004 and subsequent days  was futile.  The evidence of
               P.Ws 1 to 9 and 27 proves this circumstance.


               iv)     The deadbody of the girl was found in the   unfinished house of
               Abdul Latheef  at about 2 p.m. on 11-9-2004  This is proved by PWs 1


DSR 6/05 AND CRL. A. 2051/05               -:5:-


         to 5, 8, 9 and 44 and Ext.P7  inquest  report.


         v)  The girl used to take a short - cut to her school along the pathway in
         between the house of Manakkadavan beeran Koya and Abdul Latheef.
         This is proved by P.Ws 1 to 6 and 9.


         vi)   The accused was a worker under P.W.6, a building contractor   in
         the  construction of the house of Beerankoya and  he was engaged for
         applying black oil on the iron panels used for concreting work.    This
         is proved by P.Ws  6, 7, 24 and 34.


         vii)    Eventhough there was no work in Beeran Koya's house on 8-9-
         2004   (as   spoken     to   P.Ws   6   and   7)   the   accused   was   seen   in   the
         vicinity of Beeran   Koya's house on that day.   (See P.Ws 10,11 and
         38).


         viii)  After the body of the missing girl was found in the house of Abdul
         Latheef   on   11-9-2004     P.W.6   who   was     the   building   contractor   of
         Beerankoya's     house   was   asked     by   the   police   to   produce   all   his
         workers with a view to rule out the possibility of any of them being the
         culprit.     All   the   workers     except   the   accused   presented   themselves
         before   the   police.   The   abscondence   of   the   accused   evoked   the
         suspicion of the police and the local people . (See PWs 6 and 44).


          ix)  MOs 4 to 12 which  were the  belongings of the deceased when
          she left for the school on 8-9-2004  were recovered from the house of
          the accused on 14-9-2004 at 5 p.m. as evidenced by Ext.P9 search
          list and the testimony of P.W.44.


          x)  Autopsy  on the dead body by P.W.39 doctor showed evidence of
          rape   on   the   girl   whose   death   was   found   to   be     due   to   ligature
          strangulation.  (See Ext. P36).


          xi)  Recovery of incriminating articles consequent on the arrest of the
          accused at 7 p.m. on 16-9-2004.

                          a) Sec. 27 recovery of MOs 23 to 25 (5 pieces of coir
                  ropes,   red   towel,   white   towel)   incriminating   materials   as   per
                  Ext.P30   mahazar   at   the   instance   of   the   accused     from   the
                  house of Beerankoya pursuant to Ext.P30 (a) confession.

                          b)   Sec.   27   recovery   of   MOs   14   to   16     dress   of   the


DSR 6/05 AND CRL. A. 2051/05              -:6:-


                 deceased from beneath a culvert as per Ext.P 31 mahazar at
                 the   instance   of   the   accused     who   had   given   Ext.P3   (a)
                 confession.

                         (c )  Sec. 27 recovery of  MO 13 series of three pieces of
                 writing   pad   carried     by   the     deceased,     as   per   Ext.P34
                 mahazar   from   the   bushes   in   the   paramba   situated   near   the
                 culvert   at   the   instance   of   the   accused   who   gave   Ext.P34(a)
                 confession.



        xii) The seizure of MOs 27 dhoti and MO 28 underwear from the person
  of  the accused  and M.O. 29 yellow shirt     from his  house  as   per Ext.P35
  mahazar.



        xiii)  The conduct of the  accused in showing  the houses of Beerankoya
  and Abdul Latheef.


        xiv)  Scientific evidence:- Ext.P24 F.S.L. report shows the following:-


                (a) Eight black hairs found inside the  depth of the vagina of the
                deceased by P.W.39 (Autopsy Surgeon) and 3 of the five hairs
                obtained from the house of Beeran Koya by P.W.35 (Scientific
                Assistant, F.S.L.) as per Ext.P33 were similar to the specimen
                pubic hair of the accused taken by P.W.15 (Dr. Shaukathali) as
                per Ext.P12 certificate.



                 b)  MO3  skirt,   MO15 blouse , MO16 petticoat, MO16 (a) & (b)
                 pieces of petticoat, MO14  Scarf (Maftha), MO24 red towel and
                 some soil, small stones, paper etc. (taken from Abdul Lateef's
                 house) contained human blood.



                 (c   )    MO27   (dothi)   of   the   accused   ,   MO29     (shirt)   of   the
                 accused,   MO28   (underwear)   of   the   accused     MO25   white
                 towel,   some   soil,   paper   pieces   taken   from   Beeran   Koya's
                 house a white soiled polythene cover and some soil stones and
                 paper pieces (taken   from Beeran   Koya's   house)   contained
                 blood  which was insufficient  for determining the origin.


DSR 6/05 AND CRL. A. 2051/05                    -:7:-


                      d)  MO16 petticoat of the deceased and MO 28 underwear of
                      the accused contained human  spermatozoa and semen.



                      ARGUMENTS ON BEHALF OF THE ACCUSED


        11.     Countering the above arguments,  Advocate Sri. Ajith  Kumar made


the  following submissions before us:-


        It may be true that   12 year old Khairunnissa who had left her house for


her quarterly examination on 8-9-2004 never returned   home and   thereafter it


was     her   deadbody     which   was   found   in     the     incomplete   building   of   Abdul


Latheef on 11-9-2004.  But there is absolutely no evidence to conclude that the


accused was the culprit.   In the first place,   even according to the prosecution


witnesses the  accused was engaged in the construction work of Manakadavan


Beeran   Koya's   house     but   the   deadbody   of   the   girl    was   recovered   from   the


house of Abdul Latheef.  The prosecution witnesses were giving false evidence


to   the   effect   that   the   accused   was  absconding   after   the   occurrence.     If,   as  a


matter of fact, the accused   had committed rape of the girl and   had thereafter


murdered   her       sometime   after   9   a.m.   on   8-9-2004,   one   would   not   have


expected him to get into the nearby tea shop of P.W.38 to  have a cup of tea and


a cake.  Equally incredible is the prosecution case that after the occurrence the


accused carried the school bag of the deceased to his house so as to facilitate


recovery of   her books and other belongings (MOs 4 to 12)   from his house on


14-9-2004 at 5 p.m. as evidenced  by Ext.P9 search  list.  Still more  unbelievable


DSR 6/05 AND CRL. A. 2051/05                 -:8:-


is the prosecution story that   MO 27 dhothi and MO 28 underwear   which the


accused was allegedly wearing on 8-9-2004 was continued to be worn by him on


16-9-2004 also when he was arrested  so as to facilitate scientific  evidence to


establish his nexus with the occurrence.  The further case of the prosecution that


the accused took out MO 29 blood stained   yellow shirt from the cloth line of his


bedroom  on 17-9-2004 and not from any concealed place is also too artificial to


be believed, having regard to the fact that the very same shirt would not have


escaped the attention of the police on 14-9-2004 when a search of the house of


the   accused   was   undertaken   by   the  police.       MO4  plastic   cover     bearing   the


name "Oasis" is available to anybody   who purchases articles from the shop of


P.W.21. MOs 5 to 12 were allegedly carried by the deceased   in M.O.4 plastic


cover.     The victim was a student of standard VII whereas MO7 notebook is of


standard   VI.     MO9    allegedly   recovered   from  MO4  cover   is  a  question   paper


pertaining to Malayalam examination which was already over.  The examination


which   was   scheduled   for   the   girl     on   8-9-2004   was   Science.     MO10   is   a


Malayalam non-detailed by name  "                                "    which was prescribed


for standard VI.  MO13 writing pad belongs to Sadiya, the daughter of the sister


of the deceased.  P.W.12 who is the witness to the search and seizure would say


that one  book was taken from the sunshade on the left side of the house of the


accused .   But P.W.44 the investigating officer would say that the   said house


has no   sunshade and its roof is tiled roof.   The chances are that MOs 4 to 12


DSR 6/05 AND CRL. A. 2051/05                   -:9:-


were conveniently taken   by the investigating officer from the   residence of the


deceased and planted in the house of the   accused to enable their recovery in


the course of a search of the house of the accused.   The alleged confessional


statements       namely   Exts.     P30   (a),   P30(b),   P31   (a)   and   P34   (a)   are   not


disclosure statement falling under Sec. 27 of the Evidence Act and   they also


lack in  authorship of concealment.  P.W.12 who was the solitary witness to the


recovery   deposed   before   court   that   the   recovered   items     were   packed   and


sealed by the police officer.  According to him each item was separately packed


and sealed.   But the evidence of  P.Ws 1 and 2 will show that these witnesses


were shown the blouse, the scarf, the books, pen, torn petticoat and the slippers


of the deceased girl on two occasions by the police. If so, the seal on the packets


must have been tampered with.   There is sharp contradiction   between P.W.35


the   Scientific   Assistant       and   P.W.44   the   investigating   officer   regarding   the


despatch  of  the properties  for  chemical  analysis.    According  to P.W.35   there


were altogether   six packets   of the properties  for chemical analysis.   P.W.35


would say that all the six packets were entrusted by him   with the investigating


officer, P.W.44.  But P.W.44  would say that there were only two sealed packets


handed over by P.W.35.     Similarly, there was every chance of tampering with


regard to the sample hair of the accused collected by P.W.15 and forwarded  for


chemical examination.       The prosecution case that the accused was arrested


only   on   16-9-2004   at   7   p.m.   is   belied     by   Exts.D1   to   D7   newspaper   reports


DSR 6/05 AND CRL. A. 2051/05                    -:10:-


proved by DWs 1 and 2 as per which the police had already taken the accused


into custody on 12-9-2004.       Ext.D3(a)   report shows that the   slippers (MO17


series)   of   the   deceased   were   actually   recovered   on   12-9-2004   and   not   17-9-


2004.  The very mode of collection of the hair by cutting  the same using a pair of


scissors as  spoken to by P.W.15  will show that the samples were not properly


collected.   All   the   authorities   in   Forensic   Medicine     including     Modi   are   of   the


opinion  that such specimen hairs should be plucked and not cut.  P.W.15  is the


doctor  who claims to have extracted samples  of scalp hair, pubic hair and a hair


of  the  mustache   of the accused.   He would depose that he had taken each


category  of hair   samples  in separate  containers and packed and  sealed   the


same.  But P.W.15 was unable to give any convincing answer regarding the type


of seal  put on each packet and whether a specimen impression of the seal was


separately sent.  According to P.W.44 , the doctor  had used the seal available in


the investigation kit of P.W.44.   When the alleged samples of hair extracted by


P.W.39  (autopsy surgeon) from the deadbody have not reached the expert in a


tamper-proof   condition     before   the   apprehension   of   the   accused   and     the


investigating officer had ample opportunities to substitute  the said  hair samples


with  that   of   the   accused,   the   opinion   based  on   comparison   of   hair  cannot   be


accepted or used against the accused.   The scalp hair of the deceased was not


recovered nor sent for chemical  examination.  The 4 black hairs (item 11 (a) in


Ext.P24 F.S.L. report) obtained from Abdul Latheef's house, the 5 hairs  (item 12


DSR 6/05 AND CRL. A. 2051/05                  -:11:-


(a) in Ext.P24) taken from Beeran Koya's house, the single black hair (item 12 (f)


in   Ext.P24)   recovered   from   Beeran   Koya's   house   were   not   similar   to   the


specimen scalp   hair (item   13(a) in Ext.P24) of the accused.   No attempt has


been made to identify the persons to whom those hairs belong.  Similarly,  there


was    no    seminal  stains  on   MO3 shirt, MO15 blouse,  MO16 (a)(b)  pieces of


petticoat,   MO14   scarf,   MO27   dhoti   of   the   accused,   MO29   yellow   shirt   of   the


accused, and MO25 white towel taken from Koya's house.   Likewise, no blood


was detected on the above 4 black hairs, 5 hairs, 1 black hair and the safety pin.


Moreover, the prosecution has not been able to establish a complete   chain of


circumstantial     evidence   so   as   to   justify   the   conviction   entered   against   the


accused.


                                 JUDICIAL EVALUATION


        12.     Had   it   not   been   for   certain   grave   illegalities   and   infractions


committed by the trial court, we would have considered the elaborate contentions


raised       on  either side  and  would  have  arrived at a conclusion one way or


the other.  This is a case in which,  upon a perusal of the oral and documentary


evidence, the lower court records and the judgment passed by the court below,


we are of the considered view that many of the salutary principles of criminal trial


have   been     thrown   to   the   winds   by   the   trial   judge   who   has     exhibited   an


unfoundedly hostile prejudice towards the accused.


        13.     The judgment impugned in this appeal presents a rather disquieting


DSR 6/05 AND CRL. A. 2051/05                    -:12:-


and disturbing feature.          Right from the stage of framing   of the court charge,


the elementary principles of criminal trial were  not adhered to in this case.   The


following is the text of the charge framed by the trial judge in this case.


       "I,   .............................................(name   omitted),   Additional   District   and
       Sessions Judge, Manjeri do hereby charge you,



                 Poothala Aboobacker @ Babu, S/o. Late Alavi, Muchirikkad Veedu,
       Arimbra, Morayur as follows:



                 That at about 9.30 a.m. on 8-9-2004 you had  forcibly took a minor
       girl   of   12   years     namely   Khamarunnisa   on   her   way   to   School   to   the
       partially  built  house  of  one  Manakkadan  Beeran  Koya,  where you were
       working   as   a     labourer   under   the   building   contractor   and   that   you   had
       committed unnatural sexual intercourse on her body  after tying her  mouth
       and eyes with two towels and tying her hands behind to the     body and
       thereafter you had tied her   legs with two laterate stones kept on either
       side of her body by using coir pieces  and committed rape on her, from the
       common bathroom on the upstair of the building.

                 And that you had committed her murder by tying the towel around
       her neck and inflicted constructive force by partial hanging of the body by
       holding both ends of the towel till she  breathed her last.

                 And   that,   with   an   intention   to   screen   the   crime   you   have     had
       carried the dead body to the upstair of the partially built house of Abdul
       Latheef, in the same compound and concealed the corpse on the extreme
       posterior side of the rack built on the roof of the bathroom attached to a
       bedroom and enclosed the rack with stones to obstruct the visibility.

                 And  that   you had   kept  various  incriminatory   articles  including  the
       dress, chappals   and books in various places to cause disappearance of
       evidence at Morayoor amsom desom, Kondotty.

                 And therefore  you have committed  the offences punishable under
       Sections 302,   376 377  and   201  of I.P.C.  within  the cognizance  of this
       Court.

                   1. And  that I do hereby direct that you be tried under the above
                   charge."


DSR 6/05 AND CRL. A. 2051/05                     -:13:-


         15.        The court charge does not contain separate head or   count for


each of the offences.  The alleged acts of unnatural carnal intercourse and rape


after tying  the hands and legs of the victim and gagging her  mouth etc. are not


discernible   from   the   statements   of   any   of   the   prosecution   witnesses.     Those


details are available  only in the  elaborate record of interrogation of the accused


by   the     investigating   officer   officer,   (P.W.44).     None   of   those   statements


amounting to  confession were  admissible being hit  by Secs. 25 and  26 of the


Evidence Act.   It is well settled that the charge need not set out the manner in


which the alleged offences were committed.   The detailed   mode of committing


the   offence   is   not   an   ingredient   of   the   charge.     Similarly,     for   every     distinct


offence of which the   accused is charged there should be a separate   head   or


count of charge.   The court charge framed     in this case is an apology for the


same.


         16.     The manner of recording the       deposition  of witnesses  has also


been in the most unsatisfactory manner   without adherence to the principles of


criminal   trial.     The   height   of   illegality   in   this   regard   is   discernible   from   the


deposition   of   the   investigating   officer   examined   as     P.W.44.     The   following


extracts   from   the   testimony   of     P.W.44   demonstrates   the   manner   in   which


inadmissible evidence has been freely let in by the trial judge:-







DSR 6/05 AND CRL. A. 2051/05                     -:14:-


                                                                                          .

                               xxxxxx      xxxxx    xxxxx

















                                                                     .   Physically verified

            and found that two pieces  of coir are not old and appears

            to be strong).













                                                                     .                 ......

            M.O..25.






DSR 6/05 AND CRL. A. 2051/05                  -:15:-








                                                        Legature



                       "                                   .  MO 24 & MO 25 identified.





The   above   deposition   of   the   investigating   officer   (PW44)   that   when   he


interrogated the accused  the latter confessed his guilt and the coir ropes (MO16


series) were taken out and handed over by the accused  stating that he had used


them for tying the legs of the victim apart and MO3 red towel was used by him for


tying the eyes of the victim while he committed rape on her, makes   shocking


reading.


        17.      In several places of the deposition of P.W.44 we find that questions


were   freely   put   and   answered   with   regard   to   the   contents   of   the   case   diary


statements of several witnesses in flagrant  violation of the embargo under Sec.


162   (1)   Cr.P.C.     Some   of   the   witnesses   such   as   P.Ws   22,   23,   24   and   34


examined by the prosecution were for the purpose of proving the previous bad


character of the accused.   In view of Section 54 of the Evidence Act it was not


permissible for the prosecution to adduce any evidence in this regard nor was it


DSR 6/05 AND CRL. A. 2051/05                   -:16:-


permissible for the trial judge to allow such evidence to come on record.


        18.     Eventhough   Sec.   310   Cr.P.C.   gives   power   to   the   Judge   at   any


stage of any inquiry, trial or other proceedings to conduct a local inspection of the


place   of     occurrence,   such   power   is  given     only   for  the   purpose     of   properly


appreciating the evidence   already on record and it does not empower the judge


to assume the role of a witness.  In this case, the trial judge after conducting a


local inspection  on  19-10-2005  has prepared  two diagrams which    have been


incorporated in paras 22 and 58  of the judgment.  In the second diagram the trial


judge   has   shown   the   track   chosen   by   the   girl   to   cross   the   compound   lying


adjacent   to the  place  of   occurrence  and  from where  the girl could  have been


carried to the spot  on the upstairs of Beeran Koya's house from where the culprit


allegedly   had     carnal   knowledge   of   the   victim   and     thereafter   allegedly


strangulated her to death.   No witness has spoken about such a track leading to


the   spot     where   the   alleged   incident   took   place.   During   the   course   of   local


inspection   the  trial judge   even  made  an  inquisitive   expedition  at   the   scene  of


crime to locate a rubber basket kept in the room where the occurrence allegedly


took place and made the following observation in para 59 of the judgment.


               "I have seen a rubber basket kept in   this room.   Other thing
               are also kept. Then possibility of getting coir pieces is seen
               disputed   by   the   accused,   as   the   prosecution   has   marked   5
               coir pieces.  These are marked  as MO.23(a), 23(b), 23(c), 23
               (d) and 23(e).  Th length of these pieces are  measured before
               the court to see whether it is possible to tie the legs and hands
               of the girl by the  offender as contended by the prosecution.  I


DSR 6/05 AND CRL. A. 2051/05                   -:17:-


                am convinced  that these pieces of coir are strong enough and
                could be used for tying things.   Curiously I have noticed the
                presence of similar coir kept in the rubber basket in this room.
                The vision I got is that this room, is being used for storing  the
                implements   and   the   incidental   materials   in   connection   with
                the  house construction".


We   do   not     know   whether   the   trial   judge   wanted   to   boast   whether   she   had


stumbled upon  something  which even the investigating  officer had omitted   to


notice.     But   by   indulging   in   such   an   exercise,   the   trial   judge   was   virtually


transforming herself into a witness .


        19.      Yet another   serious illegality  committed by the trial judge is with


regard to the   manner of examination  of  the accused  under  Sec. 313  Cr.P.C.


Eventhough   as   many   as   280   questions   were   prepared   by   the   Judge,     the


questions have not been assigned any serial number.  Hence, it is not possible to


pinpoint   any     particular   question   or   the   answer   given   to   such   question.     We,


therefore,   had   to   undertake     the   task   of   assigning   serial   numbers   to   the


questions.       Many   of   the   questions   are   complex   and   multiple   questions.     For


instance,  two of the questions which  we have  numbered as question numbers


244 and 245 read as follows:


              "244.








DSR 6/05 AND CRL. A. 2051/05         -:18:-



































                                                         . "


         245.


DSR 6/05 AND CRL. A. 2051/05                   -:19:-


            PARTY








                                                ,























                                                                                    P.W.44


                                                                       ."


  Examination       of   the   accused   under   Sec.   313   Cr.P.C.   is   not   merely   an   idle


formality.   The questions should be framed in an easily understandable manner


and they should not be  lengthy or complicated.  (Vide State v. Kachara Sada -


AIR 1961 Gujrat 20; State of Karnataka v. Dashrath - 1991 (3) Crimes 22).


DSR 6/05 AND CRL. A. 2051/05                   -:20:-


Several distinct matters  of evidence  should not be rolled up in a single question


(Rama  Shanker   v.  State  of West Bengal  - AIR 1962  S.C.  1239).   Long  and


involved questions   embracing   a number   of matters   are not to be put to the


accused.  (State of A.P. v. Cheemalapati Ganeswar Rao - AIR 1963 S.C. 1850


and State  of Punjab  v. Swaran Singh - 2005 (6) SCC 101).


        20.     What is still more atrocious is the fact that out of the 280 questions


prepared   by   the   trial   judge   she   omitted   to   put   86   questions   to   the   accused.


Those   86 questions for which no answer has been   elicited from the accused


cover several incriminating circumstances.   But     all those circumstances have


been   relied   on   by   the   learned   judge   for   recording   the   conviction   against   the


accused.  It is well settled that incriminating circumstances which have not been


put to the accused and an opportunity given to the accused to   explain those


circumstances will have to be totally eschewed from consideration and cannot be


relied on for entering a conviction against the accused.    (Vide Sharad v. State


of Maharashtra - AIR 1984 SC 1622; Thankappan v. State of Kerala - 1965


KLT 501).    The attention of the accused should be drawn   to every inculpatory


material and   failure in this regard may gravely imperil the validity of the   trial


itself.  (Shivaji v. State of Maharashtra - AIR 1973 SC 2622;  S. Harnam Singh


v.  The State (Delhi Administration).  AIR 1976 SC 2140.


        21.     If   we   are   to   consider   the     submissions   made   by   the   Public


Prosecutor   and   confirm   the   conviction   which   is   interalia   founded   on   certain


DSR 6/05 AND CRL. A. 2051/05                    -:21:-


important   incriminating   circumstances   which  were   not   put   to   the   accused,   we


also will be guilty of the  very same mistake committed by the trial judge.   At the


same   time   it   may   not   be   fair   to   the   prosecution   as   well   by   excluding     those


circumstances   from   consideration   and   recording   an   order   of   acquittal   if   those


circumstances   after   being   put   to   the   accused   exhibit   a   sure   tendency     of


completing the  chain of circumstantial evidence against the accused.


        22.      We are left with the only alternative of   remitting the case back to


the lower court   in view of  yet  another important infirmity in the trial.  There is


nothing discernible either from the proceedings paper or from the judgment that


there   was  compliance   with   the   provisions   of   Sec.   232   Cr.P.C.     That   this   is   a


mandatory requirement is now well settled.  (Vide  Sivamani v. State of Kerala -


1992 (2) KLT 227; Radhanandan v. State of Kerala - 1990 (1) KLT 516).  The


accused cannot be called upon to enter on his defence before reaching the stage


of hearing under Sec.232 Cr.P.C  On the contrary, what is revealed by the record


of  examination of the accused under Sec. 313 (1)(b) Cr.P.C. is  that immediately


after  the examination of the accused he was asked whether he   had  defence


evidence to be adduced.  That was certainly not the stage at which the accused


could be called upon to enter on his defence under Sec. 233 Cr.P.C.


        23.      A perusal of the judgment under appeal makes shocking reading.


                 In paragraph 60 of the judgment we find the following statement:


               "Prosecution case as deposed by P.W.44 is that the accused


DSR 6/05 AND CRL. A. 2051/05                    -:22:-


              had snatched the girl from the kitchen door and she tried to
              cry   aloud.     But   the   accused   pressed   her   mouth   with   one
              hand and forcibly dragged her inside the kitchen".


P.W.44 who is   the investigating officer has no case that he had witnessed the


occurrence.     What   he   had   allegedly   extracted   during   the   interrogation   of   the


accused could not have been permitted to be deposed nor recorded by the  trial


judge.   The case of the prosecution as discernible from the police report (final


report   under   Section   173   (2)   Cr.P.C.)   need   not   be   the   same   when   the


prosecution lets in evidence to establish its case.  What can be permitted during


trial   is   only   legal   evidence   which   is   admissible   as   per   the   provisions   of   the


Evidence Act.   Again in para 63 of the judgment it has been observed as follows:


               "P.W.44 has   identified M.O. 30 and M.O. 31.   These are two
               laterite   stones   seized   from   the   common   bathroom     on   the
               upstairs, on the basis of  the confession made by the accused
               that he had tied both legs of the girl with these stones  by using
               coir   pieces   which   are   marked   as   M.O.   23   series.       As   per
               confession  statement, he had also seized both hands of the girl
               behind the body  with coir pieces".


Such statements given by P.W.44 in contravention of Sections 25 and 26 of the


Evidence   Act   and   Sec.   162   (1)   Cr.P.C.     should   not   have   been   admitted   in


evidence.   Yet another observation found in para 63 of the judgment reads as


follows:


                "The cruel attack made on the girl could be  perceived at this
                juncture.     Her   both   hands   were   turned   back   and   her   legs
                were tied on two laterite stones kept on   either side of the
                body.    The intention behind this is to get the posture of the
                body, legs apart.   The remaining  act of the accused is  left


DSR 6/05 AND CRL. A. 2051/05                          -:23:-


                      for perception and imagination of the reader.  I am not trying
                      to explain the cruel and heinous sexual intercourse enjoyed
                      by the accused on a tiny girl".


Was   the   trial   Judge   writing   a   crime   thriller   or     giving     vent   to   her   righteous


indignation ?


          Again   in   para   64   of   the   judgment,       after   adverting   to   inadmissible


evidence,  the trial judge made a conjuncture as follows:


                      According   to    P.W.44     accused  used   M.O.25    while towel
                      (thorth)   to     tie   the   eyes   of   the   girl   and   M.O.24   red   towel
                      (thorth) was used as a   ligature.   MO 25   was   used as a
                      ligature.       Firstly he used this red towel (thorth) to tie the
                      mouth of the girl.  I could agree   with the prosecution that by
                      that   time  the   girl  might     have   completely   exhausted.     The
                      possibility  of slipping into unconscious  state could not also
                      be overlooked.    Therefore it is possible for the accused to
                      remove the red towel (throth) used for tying the mouth and
                      use it as a ligature for committing the murder".


          Again  the learned judge made the  following surmise:-

                               Therefore the absence of semen and spermatozoa in
                       9   and   0   (M.O.   24   and   M.O.   25)   would     corroborate   the
                       prosecution   case   that   these   articles   are   used   by   the
                       accused for tying the eyes, mouth and for hanging the body.
                       That is why no spermatozoa and semen could be detected
                       from that items".

          Again imagination of the trial judge ran riot to observe as follows:


                      "P.W.2   has   given   evidence   that   the   girl   was   wearing   a
                      muftha and it   was pinned   in front side below the chin, to
                      tight the muftha around the face.  This muftha is marked as
                      M.O.14.    It is recovered as per Sec. 27 recovery on  17-9-
                      2004.         This   item   is   seen   in   a   torn   condition.     M.O.16
                      pettycoat   is  seen  torn  and   its two  parts  came  out.     These
                      parts  are  marked as M.Os 16(a)  and 16(b).       The blouse
                      marked as M.O. 15 is also torn in its front side.       The skirt


DSR 6/05 AND CRL. A. 2051/05                     -:24:-


              M.O.3  is also torn.   Therefore, it is   quite evident  that the
              offender had removed these items from the body of the girl
              by applying substantial force.  He had no time to take off the
              dress from the body in the normal was as he was in an urge".


       The   trial   judge     did   not   stop   her   imagination     there.     She   has
observed as follows:


               "The accused has   no explanation for the appearance of
               healing   wounds   on   his   body.     Therefore,   it   could   be
               legitimately inferred that he sustained some aberrations in
               the incident   as he was applying  substantial force.   More
               over he was carrying   the girl through the staircase up to
               the first floor of both houses.  The stair cases are yet to be
               plastered     and   no   flooring   was   done.     I   find   every
               possibility for   sustained minor aberrations on the person
               of   the   accused   particularly   on   his   knees   and   wrist     as
               described in Ext.P12.   In the first house he was   carrying
               the   girl   alive  and   brought   down   the   dead   body   after   the
               incident.     In   the   second   house   he   was   carrying   a   dead
               body   up   to   the   first   floor.     The   girl   was   dumped   in   the
               upstair, may be in an exhausted condition.  then he came
               down stair to collect coir pieces from the ground floor.  The
               laterite stones can be expected at any place in a building
               under construction".



Was the trial Judge watching a movie or was it really  an "aberration" as wrongly


spelt in the judgment ?


       Another figment of   fertile imagination by the trial judge can be obtained


from paragraph 78 of the judgment.  It runs as follows:


                    "I   have   already   perceived   that   the   girl   was   subjected   to
                    forceful and horondorous attack, by using all the   possible
                    force by a strong person.   The vaginal tear and the other
                    injuries   indicate   the     the   fierceness   and   cruel   and   violent
                    sexual intercourse.  Under such situation  the falling of pubic
                    hair   could   not   be   overruled.     Moreover,   I   have   justified


DSR 6/05 AND CRL. A. 2051/05                  -:25:-


                 P.W.44 in filing a report   for   addition of Section 377.   The
                 pettycoat   of   the   girl   was   smeared   with   semen   and
                 spermatoza.     Whereas   the   skirt    M.O.3  is  devoid   of   such
                 stain indicating the fact that    sexual intercourse was done
                 after removing the entire dress from the body.  Maftha  was
                 tear off.   On the dead body, M.O.3 skirt was found as per
                 the evidence and photographs.  This skirt might have been
                 replaced   after   the   murder.     Therefore   semen   and
                 spermatozoa     found   in   pettycoat   indicate   an   ejaculation
                 outside.   Being so, I find every possibility of loosening and
                 falling down of pubic hairs.   It might have been sticked on
                 the penis.   During the course of penetration the pubic hair
                 already   loosened   and   that   sticked   on   penis,   might   have
                 been deposited   in the depth of the vagina of the girl.   As
                 the   vaginal   swab   was   devoid   of   any   semen   and
                 spermatozoa it can also be inferred that   ejaculation might
                 have been occurred outside the body.    But the vaginal tear
                 will   give     a   message   that   there   was   violent   penetration.
                 Therefore, I do not agree with the learned defence counsel
                 that there was no possibility of depositing item No. 16 hairs
                 in the vagina of the girl and it might have been planted by
                 the doctor to support the prosecution".



In   paragraphs    87   and   88  of   the  judgment   the   trial   judge   has   considered   the


evidence of P.Ws 22 and 23 with regard to the previous   bad character of the


accused.  It is not  as if the  judge was ignorant of  the interdict in Sec. 54 of the


Evidence Act as per which   the previous  bad character of the accused in a case


of this nature is totally irrelevant.   Such evidence should not have  been allowed


to   go   in.     It   was   not   only   admitted   in   evidence   but   had   also   considerably


influenced   the trial Judge in her conclusions.


        In para 91  of the judgment the learned judge concluded as follows:


        "Thus on appreciation of the entire evidence brought   on record


DSR 6/05 AND CRL. A. 2051/05                 -:26:-


      before     me   by   the   investigating   agency   would   definitely
      established   the   extreme   culpability   of   the   accused.     I   have   to
      make it clear that P.W. 44   was going on in the correct direction
      even at the threshold  of the  crime and that he has succeeded in
      proving   the   hypothesis   of   guilt   of   the   accused,   beyond     all
      reasonable   doubt.     The   circumstantial   evidence   is   seen
      thoroughly    corroborated by the scientific evidence  and  medical
      evidence.   The circumstantial evidence means a   combination of
      the facts creating a net work, through which there is no escape for
      the accused because the facts taken as a whole, do not admit of
      any inference, but the guilt of  the accused.  In that conclusion is
      drawn, I find that I have to hold that presumption of the innocence
      of   the   accused   is   thoroughly   destructed.     i   have     to   already
      concluded that the criminal mind of the accused is manifested in
      the horondorous nature of the crime committed.   Regarding the
      motive aspect nothing more is required to hold a view that it was
      nothing   but   lust.     Therefore,   I   have   no   hesitation   to   find   the
      accused guilty under Secs. 302, 376, 377 and 201 of I.P.C."


      24.     After   entering   the   sentencing   sphere   also   the   trial   judge


enumerated eight reasons   in paragraph 95 of the judgment which persuaded


her to award the extreme penalty of death to the accused.   Out of those eight


reasons the    first and second are mere figments of creativity. Reasons  4 to 8


given by the trial judge read as follows:


        "(4)  As  the  Hon'ble  Supreme  Court has recently    reminded  the
        subordinate courts to consider the possibility of  retribution by the
        aggrieved parents and relatives of the victim.   Trial   in a classic
        case of retribution taken place before this court last week wherein
        a father had committed murder in retribution of the murderer of
        his   school   going   daughter   of   12   years     namely   Krishnapriya.
        Unfortunately   this   court   was   constrained   to   award   life
        imprisonment   for   the   most   aggrieved   father   of   the   victim   in   a
        similar   and   identical   case.     Being   so,   I   have   to   consider   the
        gravity of the punishment awardable to the present accused.   If
        the   life   sentence   awarded   to   the   present   accused,   the
        performance   of   this   court   will   render   meaningless.     In


DSR 6/05 AND CRL. A. 2051/05                  -:27:-


          Krishnapriya's case I have even observed that the accused might
          have apprehended unmerited acquittal or inadequate punishment
          and that might be the reason  for retribution.


           (5)   The heart wrenching pain and plight of an innocent tiny girl
           when her both hands were tied behind the body and both legs to
           the   stones   placed   on   either   side   of   her   body   and   committing
           sexual   intercourse   in   such   a   heinous,   posture   should   be
           visualized.  Then nobody can take a lenient view by attributing to
           the age of the accused.



           (6)   Now a days, 'rarest   of rare' case are being degraded not
           only   as   'rare',   but       common   as   similar   offence   are   gradually
           become  rampant.    Even  two  year old  infants  and  70 year old
           women   are   not   being   spared.     Therefore,   I   prefer   sterner
           sentence provided under law.


            (7)   The   heart wrenching pain of the aggrieved parents of the
            girl, who have reposed total faith in this court, for justice could
            not be ignored.


            (8)    The court should hear the cry of the society for justice".


It is really unfortunate that the trial judge was more influenced by her personal


predilections   and   other   extraneous     considerations     than   the   proved


circumstances in this case to justify the extreme penalty of death imposed by her


on   the   accused.     Most   of   the   factors   which   influenced   the   Court   below   were


irrelevant,  having regard to the tests laid down by the apex court while identifying


the species of "the rarest of the rare case"   for awarding the capital sentence.


Advertence   by the trial judge to the fate of another case (Krishnapriya's case)


tried by her was  wholly unwarranted.   A Judge cannot import into the case his


own knowledge or belief of particular facts.  (Vide Haro Pd. v. Sheo Dayal, L.R.


DSR 6/05 AND CRL. A. 2051/05                  -:28:-


3 I.A. 286 (PC) and Milhian Bibi  v. Basher Khan - 11 Moo I.A. 213 (PC).  The


sixth   reason   stated   by   the   learned   Judge   also     stems   out   of   her   extra-legal


perception.  Such considerations should never enter the mind of a dispassionate


repository of judicial power.  A sentence has to suit not only the offence  but also


the   offender.     It   should   inter-alia   be   commensurate   with   the   manner   of


perpetration   of   the   offence   and   should   not   therefore   be   unduly   harsh     or


vindictive.       Before   concluding   the   judgment   the   trial   judge   was     virtually


proposing    her  vote  of   thanks     to  the  participants  of   the   trial  by  observing   as


follows:


            "Before  departing, I have to appreciate the efforts taken by the
            investigating   officer   namely   C.K.   Sankaranarayanan,   Circle
            Inspector of Police, Kondotty and the team work of his special
            squad.  I do not forget the special responsibility undertaken by
            the   Dy.   S.P.   Sri.   P.Raju   for   giving   appropriate   direction   and
            orders   to   his   subordinate   officers   for   unfurling   the   crime.
            Investigation was completed a short span of time, as he was
            supervising the work of the special team.   At this context I have
            to appreciate the Learned Public Prosecutor Sri. Saju George
            for making his role meaningful.    Finally,  I  have  to extend my
            hearty   appreciation     to   the   learned   counsel   Sri.   K.
            Radhakrishnan,   who   volunteered   his   valuable   service   to   the
            accused   under   legal   aid   scheme.     I   am   satisfied   that   I   can
            render justice to the accused by appointing him as the defence
            counsel.


                    I   am   bound   to   extend   my   appreciation   to     all   the
            witnesses who have joined their hands for a common cause, in
            quest of justice.  I do not forget to extend a word of pacification
            to the aggrieved parents of the girl Khairunnisa".


The   above   extracts   from   the   trial   Courts'   judgment     demonstrates   the


DSR 6/05 AND CRL. A. 2051/05                        -:29:-


unpardonable lack of maturity, sobriety and moderation expected of a  Sessions


Judge.  While a puritanical approach  of 'untouchability' towards the cause under


trial  and rank escapism from the  the ground realities  are eschewable heritage


of the past, too much identification with the agonies of one of the parties to  the


lis   before   court   is   certainly     not   a   befitting   quality   for   a     judge.     It   is   indeed


desirable   that     given   the   opportunity   offered   officially   to   remedy   a   social


pathology   one should find a judge at the service of the suffering humanity.  But


it   should not  also be forgotten that  a judge who with an outburst of empathy


towards   the   victim   of   a   crime   involves   himself     too   much   with   the   lachrymal


scenes of social tragedies   played   before him in the court room, is sure to be


mistaken as a partisan or biased arbiter.   With all the dynamism   and   activist


potential   at   his   command   the   judge   should   be   free   from   the   syndrome   of


functional overstepping which,   very often than not,  is likely to be misunderstood


as the exploits of a prejudiced  mind.  Although it is the substance rather than the


form which really matters in every human enterprise, the facade of  "appearance"


is  an illusion which we, in the larger fraternity of law, have unfortunately fostered.


Justice should not only be done   but should also   appear to have been done.


Every judge who has disciplined himself with this lofty ideal is sure to steer  clear


of  an accusation of partisanship.


         25.      Criminal trial is not like a fairy tale wherein one is free to give flight


to   one's   imagination   and   fantasy.     It   concerns   itself   with   the   question   as   to


DSR 6/05 AND CRL. A. 2051/05                    -:30:-


whether the accused  arraigned at the trial is  guilty of the crime with which he is


charged.  Crime is an event in real life and is the product of interplay of different


human emotions.    In arriving at the conclusion about  the guilt of  the  accused


charged with the commission of a crime, the court has to judge the  evidence by


the yardstick of probabilities, its intrinsic worth and the animus of the witnesses.


Every case in the final analysis would have to depend upon its own facts.  (Vide


State of Punjab v. Jagir Singh - AIR 1973 SC 2407).  It must  be remembered


that  criminal trial is meant  for doing justice not  only  to the victim but  also the


accused     and   the   Society   at   large.    (Vide   Ambika   Pd.   v.   State     (Delhi


Administration) - 2000 SCC Crl. 522 and T.H. Hussain v. M.P. Modkakar -


AIR 1958 SC 376).




        26.      Rape     and   murder   are   undoubtedly   brutal   and   diabolic   sins


constituting  the worst  forms  of criminal incursions  on  the human body.  The


perpetrators of  such crimes are indeed so despicable that,  in appropriate cases,


the   award   of   the   extreme   penalty   of   death   alone   may   be   the   most   condign


punishment   for   them.     But   a   criminal   court   can   do   so  only   on   proof   before   it


according   to   law.       Until  such   proof,   the   whole   case   remains   in   the   realm   of


allegations  and accusations.  Judges cannot act on such  allegations or on the


spicy versions supplied by the print or visual media.     The temptation which   a


judge in his hermit-like existence  should consciously resist is  the populist media


DSR 6/05 AND CRL. A. 2051/05                   -:31:-


publicity for his deeds as a Judge.  In the divine function of a Judge, there is no


place for popularity.   A judge who falls a prey to this weakness   is sure to be


guided by the heart  rather than the  head.  A judge cannot be  living in a world of


fantasy   while     marshalling   the   evidence   before     him   in   the   process   of


dispensation   of   justice   in   order   to   reconstruct   a   story   different   from   the   one


propounded by the prosecution.         The wealth of judicial experience gained by


him should  make him more and more  informed, detached and  objective  rather


than  publicity- oriented.


        27.   Yet another disturbing feature which has come to our notice is the


undue  media publicity with regard to the occurrence.  Exts.D1 to D7 are reports


in a Malayalam daily giving their own  stories about the disappearance of the girl


and the  tardy investigation of the case by the police.  Sustenance is even seen


drawn from sources within the police in order to boost those garbled versions.


Reliance was placed  on them by the accused as well for certain purposes .  Way


back   in   the   year   1959   a   Full   Bench   of   this   Court   gave   expression     to   its


displeasure  as follows:


            "The trial court as also the learned Judges of the Division Bench
            have animadverted upon the apathy or indifference which the
            police   showed   with   respect   to     this   case,   I   am   sure   the
            authorities   will    take   appropriate   action   in  the   matter.    in that
            connection   I   may   also   state   that  several   exhibits   filed   in   the
            case from the side of the defence showed that the investigating
            officers have been freely giving out the  progress  made in the
            investigation from day to day to the Press.  Exts. D1, D14, D21,
            D22,   D23,   D24,   D25   D26,   D27   and   D28   showed   that   some
            newspapers   were   taking   rather   undue       or  unhealthy   interest


DSR 6/05 AND CRL. A. 2051/05                  -:32:-


            about the case.   It is unfortunate that information gathered by
            the police during the course of the investigation should   have
            been made available to the Press.  It is not the  first time such
            an   instance   comes   to   the   notice   of   this   Court   and   learned
            Judges have had occasion to state that the practice was highly
            objectionable.  It is hoped that the  authorities will take notice of
            this matter also and see that their officers as also the Press are
            not   allowed   to   ride   rough-shod   over   the   provisions   of   the
            Criminal   Procedure   Code   or   the   Evidence   Act.     Information
            obtained during the course of the police investigation has to be
            kept confidential and police officers are not entitled to give out
            the contents of confessional statements of accused persons or
            the contents of statements made by witnesses interviewed by
            them for the benefit of the public or the Press".

       (Vide para 29 -  Sivarajan v. State -  ILR (1959)  Kerala  319).


       The   apex   court   was   also   not   in   a   different   vein     when   it   observed   as


follows:


                "We agree with the High Court that a great harm had been
       caused   to   the   girl   by   unnecessary   publicity   and   taking   out
       morcha by the public.  Even the case had to be transferred from
       Kohlapur   to   Satara   under   the   orders   of   this   Court.     There   is
       procedure established by law governing the conduct of trial  of a
       person accused of an offence.  A trial by press, electronic media
       or public agitation is very antithesis of rule of law.       It can well
       lead   to   miscarriage   of   justice.     A   Judge   has   to   guard   himself
       against any such pressure and he is to be guided strictly by rules
       of law".

      (Vide para 37  - AIR 1997 SC 3986 - State of Maharashtra v. Rajendra
Jawanmal Gandhi)


       Again in    M.P.Lohia v. State of West Bengal - (2005) 2 SCC 686   the


Apex Court has deprecated the  unwholesome practice of the trial by media  in


respect of a matter which is sub judice.   The following observations are most


appropriate:


DSR 6/05 AND CRL. A. 2051/05                    -:33:-


          "Having   gone   through   the   records,   we   find   one   disturbing   factor
          which   we   feel   is   necessary   to   comment   upon     in   the   interest   of
          justice.   The death of Chandni took place on 28-10-2003 and the
          complaint in this regard was registered and the investigation was in
          progress.  The application for grant of anticipatory bail was disposed
          of   by  the   High  Court   of   Calcutta   on  13-2-2004   and   special   leave
          petition  was pending  before this Court.    Even then an article has
          appeared   in   a   magazine   called   "Saga"   titled   "Doomed   by   Dowry"
          written by one Kakoli Poddar based on her interview of the family of
          the deceased, giving version of the tragedy and extensively quoting
          the father of the  deceased as to his version of the case.  The facts
          narrated   therein   are   all     materials   that   may   be   used   in   the
          forthcoming trial in this case and we have no  hesitation that these
          type of articles appearing in the media would certainly interfere with
          the   administration     of   justice.     We   deprecate   this   practice     and
          caution the publisher, editor and the journalist who were responsible
          for the said article against indulging in such trial by media when  the
          issue  is sub judice.     However,   to  prevent   any  further  issue  being
          raised in this regard, we treat this matter as closed and hope that
          the   others   concerned   in   journalism   would   take   note   of   this
          displeasure expressed by us for interfering with the administration of
          justice".


        It   appears  that   notwithstanding  the  fact  that  a  Full  Bench  of   this  Court


more than   four decades ago,   had deprecated the reprehensible tendency of


police   officials     going   to  the   Press   with  details     of   investigation   of   cases,   we


unfortunately find that the tendency continues with increased vigour.  Officers in


the higher   echelons   of the police force appearing in the print and electronic


media giving interviews  and  narrating  stories unravelled  through  investigation,


are not, infrequent sights these days.   When superior police officers indulge in


freely  passing on such information to the public it puts unnecessary pressure on


the subordinate officers who are de facto investigation of the cases.   It is well


DSR 6/05 AND CRL. A. 2051/05                    -:34:-


known that many of the materials collected by the police during investigation are


comprised   of   hearsay   or  inadmissible   stuff     and   at   times  extracted     from   the


alleged   accused   persons   themselves     by   employing   third       degree   methods.


Such material will not stand the scrutiny of a court of justice.  The   Fourth Estate


also does not seem to realise the irreparable damage inflicted on the victims  of


crimes   and   the   alleged   culprits   and   those   close   to   them     through   the


sensationalised     journalistic   adventures.       Truth   is   very   often   suppressed,


exaggerated or distorted to add flavour and   spice to the stories.     Trial by the


media can do more harm  than good to the society at large.  Instances are not


rare   when   test   identification   parades   are   reduced   to   mere   farce   due   to   the


injudicious   publicity   given     to   the   alleged   assailants   by   publishing   their


photographs.     Every such act of adventurism exert unnecessary pressure   on


the courts which are to eventually try the alleged offenders. The fickle minded


public which has been    conditioned to believe a particular  version through    a


calculated   process   of   media   indoctrination   will   be   loath   to   accept   a   different


conclusion.   Hence, if   the   court   which finally tries the alleged culprit were to


ultimately record an order of acquittal for want of  legal evidence before it, it may


not be out of place  for the public at large to conclude that the verdict of the court


is  wrong.     They     may   even   attribute   motives   in   the         Presiding   Judge.     No


disciplined   society   which   believes   in   the   rule   of   law   can   afford   such   state   of


affairs   to     come  to  stay.     We  wish   to  express  our     strong   displeasure   at   the


DSR 6/05 AND CRL. A. 2051/05                     -:35:-


increasing trend of investigation  lapses and trial by media in respect of matters


which are sub judice. After the case under investigation is in the seizin of the


court it is not open to the investigating agency or other busy - bodies to give their


own   versions   about   a   crime   and   influence   the     mind   of   the   public   without


realising     the   worth   or     otherwise   of   what   has   been   collected   during


investigation and placed before  the court concerned.    Lapses in this regard will


be viewed very seriously and the erring police officers and media persons will be


proceeded against appropriately.


          The     Registry   shall   forward   an   extract   of   this   judgment   to   the   Director


General   of   Police   and   the   Director   General   of   Prosecutions   for   suitable


prophylactic measures  to ensure that recurrence  of such lapses does not take


place.


          28.     The failure to impose punishment for the   conviction under Secs.


376,  377 and 201 I.P.C.     is also  not   proper.    The law does not envisage a


person being convicted for an offence without  a sentence being imposed.  Every


conviction   should   be   followed   by   a   sentence.    (Vide     T.K.   Musaliar   v.


Venkatachalam   -   AIR   1956   SC   246,   Varghese   v.   State   -   1986   KLT   1285;


Thampi   Sebastian   v.   State   of   Kerala   -   1988   (1)   KLT   247   and   Saidu


Mohammed v. State of Kerala - 2005 (4) KLT 46).  The proper course should


have been to impose separate  sentences for each of the offences and to direct


that those sentences would  lapse upon the execution of the death sentence.


DSR 6/05 AND CRL. A. 2051/05                  -:36:-


        29.  No judge with a sense of responsibility and seriousness  could have


conducted the trial in a grave crime in such a cavelier and careless manner as


has been done by the learned Sessions Judge in this case.   It is important to


note that the accused standing in the dock before the presiding judge has the


insulation (penetrable, no doubt) by way of the presumption of innocence in his


favour during the trial.  He is also entitled to the benefit of all reasonable  doubts.


For him the fate of the case may be a question of life and death.  Hence it is all


the   more   necessary   for   the   trial   Judge   to   conduct   the   trial   in   a   fair   and


transparent manner giving no room for the accused to engender a  fear that right


from the very start of the trial he was presumed to be guilty rather than innocent


and dealt with accordingly.


        30.     After  bestowing our anxious consideration to the entire aspects  of


the matter, we are constrained to remit the case  back to the trial court for  fresh


disposal after completing the examination of the accused under Sec. 313(1)(b)


Cr.P.C. and for proceeding  with the case from  that stage  onwards.     It shall be


open to the court below  amend the court charge, if need be,   in order to make it


in    conformity   with  the  Cr.P.C.   The  judgment  under  appeal   is  accordingly   set


aside and the matter is remitted  to the court below for disposal afresh in the light


of  what  has  been  stated  above.      Since  the   judgment   appealed  against  has


been set aside the question of confirming the death sentence does not arise and


consequently the D.S.R. is disposed of accordingly.


DSR 6/05 AND CRL. A. 2051/05                    -:37:-


        31.         The   parties   shall   appear   before   the   court   below     on   18-9-2006


without  any further notice.  The case shall thereafter be disposed of  within three


months  from that date.  In as much as the accused has been in custody during


the trial before the court below he shall continue to be an undertrial  prisoner till


the disposal of the Sessions Case.


             32.      The Registry shall send  back the records  forthwith to the court


   below.


           A copy of this judgment  together with a copy of the paper book shall be


forwarded to the   Director, Kerala Judicial Academy to have a feedback of the


performance of the officer concerned  and to consider  whether an intensive and


personalised training is warranted for the deficiencies and short comings in the


impugned judgment as well as in the conduct of trial.




                                                              K.S.Radhakrishnan,
                                                                   (Judge)





                                                                  V.Ramkumar,
                                                                   (Judge)





ani.


DSR 6/05 AND CRL. A. 2051/05       -:38:-










                                     -----------------------------



                                     K.S.RADHAKRISHNAN,
                                JUDGE


                                     &



                                     V.RAMKUMAR, JUDGE.




                                     ----------------------




                                     D.S.R. 6/05 &


                                     & CRL. A. 205105


DSR 6/05 AND CRL. A. 2051/05      -:39:-




                                    JUDGMENT





                                      DATED:



