

 IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

CRL.A.No. 708 of 2006()



1. KRISHNANKUTTY @ KUNJUM0ON
                      ...  Petitioner

                        Vs

1. THE STATE OF KERALA
                       ...       Respondent

                For Petitioner  :SRI.E.S.ASHRAF(STATE BRIEF)

                For Respondent  :PUBLIC PROSECUTOR

The Hon'ble MRS. Justice K.HEMA

 Dated :07/11/2006

 O R D E R
                             K. HEMA, J.
                  ---------------------------------
                       Crl. A. No. 708 of 2006
                  -----------------------------------
            Dated this the 7th day of November, 2006

                             JUDGMENT



      Appellant challenges the conviction and sentence passed against

him under Section 498-A of Indian Penal Code (IPC, for short) and

Section 4 of Dowry Prohibition Act.      He was charge-sheeted for

offences under Sections 304-B, 498-A of IPC and Section 4 of Dowry

Prohibition Act.  The accused was found guilty and sentenced to

undergo rigorous imprisonment for one year and to pay a fine of

Rs.10,000/- and in default to undergo simple imprisonment for six

months for offence under Section 4 of Dowry Prohibition Act and

rigorous imprisonment for two years with fine of Rs. 5,000/- and in

default to undergo simple imprisonment for three months for offence

under Section 498-A of IPC.     The sentences were directed to run

concurrently. The said conviction and sentence are challenged in this

appeal.

      2.   According to prosecution, deceased Sujatha committed

suicide because of the mental agony suffered due to the harassment

from the side of the accused. Therefore, deceased Sujatha left her

parental house on 23.11.00 at about 9.00a.m and committed suicide

on 24.11.00 at 6.00a.m, by jumping into the river with her two

CRA 708/2006                        2

children. The son was rescued by the people, but Sujatha and her

daughter died.

      3.    To prove the prosecution case, prosecution has examined

PWs 1 to 15 and marked Exhibits P1 to P13. Accused did not adduce

any evidence. The court below found that the evidence of PWs 1 to 3

was believable and it has proved the harassment of the accused on

deceased Sujatha, which has driven her to commit suicide and hence

an offence under Section 498-A of IPC is made out. It was also found

from their evidence that there was demand for dowry and hence the

accused was convicted for offence under Section 4 of the Dowry

Prohibition Act.

      4.    The case set up by the prosecution was that because of the

torture deceased Sujatha was undergoing severe mental agony which

driven her to commit suicide. To prove the death, prosecution relies

upon mainly the medical evidence tendered by PW12 doctor and the

postmortem certificate Exhibit P9.      PW12 gave evidence that he

conducted postmortem examination on the body of Sujatha on

30.11.00 (ie. after six days of the incident). He opined that the cause

of death was due to drowning. The mere fact that deceased died due

to drowning is not sufficient to conclude that the deceased committed

suicide. The drowning can be homicidal, suicidal or even accidental.

CRA 708/2006                        3

      5. In this connection, it is relevant to scan through the evidence

and consider whether deceased Sujatha had any reason for committing

suicide. Apart from the medical evidence, no evidence is adduced to

conclude the cause of death. No circumstantial evidence is adduced to

indicate that deceased Sujatha had committed suicide. The evidence

adduced only proves that she died due to drowning. On an analysis of

the evidence of the near relatives PWs 1 to 3 and PW13 and also PW4

the independent witness, it cannot be held that deceased Sujatha had

any reason to commit suicide on the alleged date of occurrence.

      6. PW1 deposed that deceased Sujatha left his house on

23.11.00 at about 9.30a.m stating that she would go to her husband's

house and come back in the evening. Deceased Sujatha did not come

back on that day. PW1 deposed that he waited in the bus stand till

7.30p.m till the last bus also left. He returned only thereafter. PW3,

the brother of deceased Sujatha stated that on reaching home on 23rd

evening, his father had told him that his sister had gone to her

husband's house and did not return. On the next day, he went for

coolie work, as usual. PW1 stated that deceased Sujatha while leaving

the house had told him that she is going to her husband's house to get

the dresses of her children.

      7. Though deceased Sujatha did not come back on the same

CRA 708/2006                          4

night, none of the near relatives of deceased Sujatha including her

father or brother made any enquiries about her. They did not, in fact,

feel the need for making any enquiries about deceased Sujatha,

though she had gone all alone with two minor kids and she failed to

return as promised. Even on the next day, her own brother while

going for work did not feel the need for making any enquiries about

deceased Sujatha. All these would indicate that nobody expected any

untoward incident or any cause for deceased Sujatha to commit

suicide. From the conduct of PW1 and PW3, the two male members in

the family, it is clear that in spite of the fact that deceased Sujatha did

not return in the evening as promised, they did not go in search of

deceased Sujatha at least to her husband's house.

      8. Neither PWs 1, 2, 3 or even PW4 has a case that deceased

Sujatha was found in a depressed state of mind on 23rd, when she was

found her last by them.        Admittedly, deceased Sujatha was in the

parental house for two months prior to the incident. Nobody has a

case that on 23rd, when she left the house or on the previous day, on

22nd, deceased Sujatha was in a depressed state of mind which gave

them any hint that she would commit suicide. Everything appeared to

be normal until information was received that something had

happened. PW1's case is that he went straight to the police station to

CRA 708/2006                       5

find out what happened. He was informed that his grandson Akhil was

in the hospital and accordingly he went to meet the child. PW3 has

also given evidence that he went to the hospital along with PW1 to

meet the child. PW4 stated that he had seen deceased Sujatha on

23rd morning from the bus stop and she allegedly told PW4 that she

was going to her husband's house and she would come back after two

days.    PW4 had no case that Sujatha was found in a mentally

depressed state or that there was anything abnormal in her behaviour.

Therefore, there was nothing on record to indicate that Sujatha was in

any peculiar mental condition which could have been driven to suicide.

      9. What exactly transpired immediately prior to the incident is

not available in evidence. In fact, there was no investigation into this

aspect at all. Admittedly, on 23rd morning at about 9.00a.m, (going by

the evidence of PW4, at about 8.30a.m) deceased Sujatha had left the

house of PW1.      She was found dead only after seven days, on

30.11.00.    As per the prosecution case, she committed suicide on

24.11.00 at 6.00a.m. What transpired in at least between a period of

about 24 hours has not been investigated into.      Deceased Sujatha

crossed a night after leaving the house of PW1 before she allegedly

committed suicide. Where exactly she resided and where she spent

the night of 23rd, where she was till 24th morning, has not been

CRA 708/2006                        6

investigated into at all.

      10. Though Akhil, the deceased's son, escaped death and was

rescued by the people, he was not brought to court.        He was not

examined in court. There is no explanation for non-examination of

Akhil. In fact, as per the evidence, the whereabouts of Akhil itself is

not clear. PW1 would say that Akhil was taken away by him, whereas

PW3 would say that Akhil is staying with him. The accused would

claim that his son Akhil is staying with the accused. The most crucial

evidence which can be procured regarding what transpired after

deceased left PW1's house is that of Akhil. The child is aged 8= years,

as per the evidence of PW2. But, his evidence is kept back by the

prosecution.

      11. The prosecution has not made any attempt to prove the

circumstances under which deceased Sujatha died. Whether it was a

case of accidental drowning or it was due to a homicide or whether it

was only a suicide, cannot be concluded from the evidences adduced in

this case.   Curiously, there is absolutely no investigation into this

aspect.    Even persons who rescued Akhil were not questioned by

investigating officers. What was the version of the boy immediately on

rescuing is not before court.     Certainly, the questioning of these

witnesses would disclose the circumstances under which deceased

CRA 708/2006                       7

Sujatha died. But, nothing is brought on record. No materials are

collected by the investigating machinery to ascertain the circumstances

which lead to the death of deceased Sujatha. In the absence of this, it

cannot be concluded that deceased Sujatha committed suicide, as

alleged by the prosecution.    This fact has not been proved by the

prosecution.

      12. In the light of the findings which I have already entered, it

may not be necessary to go into the question whether the conduct of

the accused drove the deceased to commit suicide. Still, I shall go

through the evidence to find out whether there is any satisfactory

materials regarding the same.     The case of the prosecution is that

there was demand of dowry and the accused is found guilty for offence

under Section 4 of the Dowry Prohibition Act. As per Section 4, "if any

person demands, directly or indirectly, from the parents or other

relatives or guardian of a bride or bridegroom, any dowry shall be

punishable" under the said section. The only evidence regarding the

demand of dowry from the father of the deceased Sujatha is that of

PW1. PW1 gave evidence that there was demand of dowry to him.

But, he has not stated when the demand was made. None of the

details regarding the date, time or place where the demand was made

are stated by PW1.       PW1 deposed that the marital relationship

CRA 708/2006                        8

between the accused and the deceased Sujatha was cordial for two

years after the marriage.

      13. PW2, the sister of the deceased Sujatha, would state that

there was no problem between the accused and the deceased Sujatha

for about 1= years after the marriage.        The trouble started only

thereafter.   They were living happily for 1= years.       As per the

evidence, the marriage between the deceased Sujatha and the accused

took place on 27.04.1995. So the demand of dowry might have been

made by 1997 if the evidence of PWs 1 to 3 are believed.          PW2

deposed that she had even seen injuries on the body of the deceased

Sujatha when she came to the house. But, she had no such case

before the police and it was brought out as an omission. If as a matter

of fact, PWs 1 to 3 are to be believed, the harassment from the side of

the accused would be known to the entire family members from 1997

onwards. But, the case now put forward by the witnesses is that the

harassment was there since after two years of the marriage.

      14. PW1 had no case to the police regarding dowry harassment

when he lodged the First Information Statement Ext. P1. His daughter

was missing on 23.11.2000 and the grandson was rescued by the

people of the locality from a river. There was ample time for PW1 to

ascertain from the grandson or from the family members, as to what

CRA 708/2006                       9

transpired. But, PW1 does not appear to have any doubt regarding the

possibility of commission of suicide on demand of dowry at a time

when Ext.P1 was lodged. Ext. P1 is totally silent about any demand of

dowry being made or any harassment made on the deceased by the

accused. Ext. P1 is lodged before the police only on the next day of

the incident, after about 32 hours of deceased Sujatha leaving the

house.

      15. The evidence of PW1 discloses that he had gone in search of

deceased Sujatha to the house of the accused and thereafter to

various other houses of the relatives. If, as a matter of fact, PW1 had

any doubt regarding the possibility of committing suicide due to dowry

harassment, this conduct is not probable. Anyway, the omission in the

First Information Statement speaks much about the absence of

demand of dowry and harassment. In the above circumstances, the

solitary piece of evidence of PW1 without the details as to when the

demand was made, where the demand was made etc. I find it difficult

to accept solitary evidence of PW1 to hold that there was demand of

dowry.

      16. There is also contradiction between evidence of PW1 and

PW3 the brother of deceased Sujatha regarding the nature of dowry

demanded. PW3 only stated that "if" the accused wanted 40 cents of

CRA 708/2006                       10

property or Rs. 50,000/-, they would have agreed to give the same.

At any rate, the omission in Ext. P1 regarding dowry demand, I find

that no much value can be given to the belated version given by PWs 1

or 3 at the time of evidence.

      17.     Now coming to the question of harassment under

Section 498-A of I.P.C, I find that    First Information Statement is

totally silent about the same. PW1 gave statement to the police, but

he did not even mention any possibility of commission of suicide

because of the ill-treatment by the accused. It can also be seen that,

the case of PWs 1 to 3 is that, deceased Sujatha had been in the house

of PW1 for the past two months. It has been admitted by PW1 and it

appears from the evidence of PWs2 and 3 also that Sujatha had come

home to look after the ailing mother and also the sister-in-law who had

undergone a surgery.

      18. PW2 stated that accused would not allow deceased to come

to her parent's house for this purpose. But, the accused put forward a

case that the deceased Sujatha was sent to her house when a request

was made to help the family members, since her mother was sick and

her sister-in-law had undergone a surgery.        This case has been

probabilized by the evidence of PWs 1 to 3. The conduct of the

witnesses PWs 1 and 3 also is relevant in this context.         Though

CRA 708/2006                       11

deceased Sujatha was found missing and PW1 expected her to come

back on the same day in the evening, they had not gone in search of

deceased Sujatha to the house of the accused.

      19. If PWs 1 or 3 anticipated some untoward incident, it is

unlikely that they would not go in search of Sujatha to the house of

the accused, especially that there was an alleged quarrel between the

couple and the deceased Sujatha was harassed by the accused. PW3

deposed that he had gone for his work even on hearing from his father

that Sujatha had not come back from her husband's house.              His

conduct would only indicate that the male members of the family never

expected anything untoward and they were peaceful until the news

came that Akhil, the grandson, was rescued by people.               Even

thereafter, till the evening, PW1 had sufficient time to think about what

would have transpired and he had absolutely no doubt regarding any

harassment being caused to deceased Sujatha by the accused and that

must be a reason why there is fatal omission in Ext. P1 regarding the

harassment from the side of the accused to deceased Sujatha.

      20.   At this juncture, it has to be borne in mind that PW1

deposed that, she had told PW1 that she used to be assaulted by the

accused on getting drunk, when she came to his house for a stay prior

to the incident and towards the end and that she used to speak about

CRA 708/2006                        12

her difficulties to her sister and mother. If this is accepted, even PW1

was aware of such harassment prior to the death of deceased Sujatha.

But, there is no explanation why he had omitted to make such

statements in Ext. P1.      In fact, it has been brought out from the

evidence of PW1 that the allegation made by PW1 regarding the

harassment from her husband and beating etc. were all omissions in

the case diary statement made by PW1. It was only a subsequent

development at the time of examination before the court.

      21. The evidence of PW2 also is of similar nature. PW2 deposed

that she had seen injuries on the deceased Sujatha after one week of

Onam. But, this fact was brought out as omissions in the case diary

statement. It appears that, in that instance, she had direct knowledge

about the alleged ill-treatment from the husband of deceased Sujatha

and this is a very important fact. But, this was also not stated to the

police and it was disclosed before the court at a highly belated stage,

while she was examined in court. Though PWs 1 to 3 would claim and

allege that the deceased Sujatha used to be harassed by the accused

demanding payment of money, he has no case that he was a witness

to any of these things. He only stated that Sujatha used to tell him

about the details of the harassment.

      22. PWs 1, 2 and 3 gave evidence to similar effect that certain

CRA 708/2006                          13

statements were made by deceased Sujatha to them regarding the ill-

treatment at the hands of the accused. PW2 deposed that on several

occasions the deceased Sujatha used to tell her that the accused used

to come home drunk and ill-treat her. But, these facts were brought

out as omissions in the case diary statement. It has also been stated

that on several occasions she had told PW2 that the accused used to

demand her to get the property sold and bring money etc. PW1 also

stated that his daughter used to tell him that she was ill-treated by her

husband. But, that fact was also brought out as omissions in the case

diary statement.       Therefore, the belated statement regarding the

alleged statement made by deceased Sujatha to PWs 1 to 3 regarding

the ill-treatment at the hands of the accused cannot be given much

weight to secure a conviction against the accused.

      23. Even otherwise, the statements made by Pws1 to 3 cannot

be admitted in evidence under Section 32(1) of the Evidence Act.

Prosecution has not proved that the deceased Sujatha has committed

suicide. It is only if the death is proved to be as a result of suicide, the

statements made by deceased Sujatha to other witnesses may become

relevant as a statement relating to cause of death or any of the

circumstances of the transaction which resulted in her death. Since

evidence is lacking to establish that drowning was as a result of

CRA 708/2006                        14

suicide, the statement allegedly made by deceased Sujatha to the

witnesses PWs 1 to 3 cannot have any connection to the cause of

death and it is not admissible under Section 32(1) of the Evidence Act.

      24. The court below has not looked into the evidence in this

perspective. The court has not considered the various aspects in the

judgment and hence the findings are unsustainable.          In the above

circumstances, I find that the conviction and sentence passed against

the appellant are unsustainable.

      In the result, the conviction and sentence passed against the

appellant under Section 4 of the Dowry Prohibition Act and

Section     498-A of Indian Penal Code are set aside. The accused is

found not guilty and he is acquitted of the above said offences. He is

set at liberty forth with. Registry is directed to issue release memo to

the jail authorities concerned accordingly.

      This appeal is allowed.

                                                 K. HEMA, JUDGE.




smp


