

 IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

Crl.MC.No. 218 of 2005(B)


1. M.MUHAMMED MUSTHAFA,
                      ...  Petitioner

                        Vs



1. STATE OF KERALA, REP. BY
                       ...       Respondent

2. SHEENA BEGUM, D/O.AYSHA BEEVI,

                For Petitioner  :SRI.M.RAJAGOPALAN NAIR

                For Respondent  :PUBLIC PROSECUTOR

The Hon'ble MRS. Justice K.HEMA

 Dated :11/10/2007

 O R D E R
                               K.HEMA,J.

               -----------------------------------------
                       Crl.M.C.No.218 OF 2005
               -----------------------------------------

           Dated this the 11th      day of October, 2007

                               O R D E R

       This petition is filed to quash all further proceedings against

the petitioner initiated on the basis of a complaint, Annexure-I. The

charge sheet is Annexure-II, as per which, the petitioner is charge

sheeted for offences under Sections 498A and 34 IPC.

       2. According to learned counsel for petitioner, the complaint

is filed only to tarnish the image of the petitioner in public and

thereby coerce accused 1 to 3 to concede to the demands made by

the defacto complainant and her father. The defacto complainant is

the second respondent.

       3.  It is also contended that the only allegation in the first

information statement, Annexute-I is that first accused harassed

defacto complainant, at the instance of accused 2 and 3. Such

allegation will not amount to cruelty, under Section 498A IPC, it is

contended. There must be wilful conduct of such a nature as is likely

to drive the woman to commit suicide or to cause grave injury or

danger to life, limb or health of the woman etc. as per the language

under Section 498A, it is argued.

Crl.M.C.218/05                       2




      4. On hearing and on going through the complaint, Annexure-I

it can be seen that there are specific allegations of harassment

stating that the dowry given is insufficient and also that ornaments

given to the defacto complainant were insufficient etc. and that

accused     used   to   physically   and  mentally   harass   defacto

complainant.      It is also alleged that petitioner's father used to

assault defacto complainant demanding dowry and also abuse her.

There is also specific allegation in the complaint that she was fisted

on the chest, back and shoulders and she was sent to her house etc.

      5. It is also alleged that her husband and mother had kept her

locked up in a room and left her there even without giving any food.

Several other allegations were also made in the complaint. On going

through the complaint, I am satisfied that this is not a fit case to

quash the complaint on the ground that no offence is prima facie

made out under Section 498A IPC.

      This petition is dismissed.




                                      K.HEMA, JUDGE

vgs.


