

 IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

Crl Rev Pet No. 554 of 1999()



1. AOPALAKRISHNAN
                      ...  Petitioner

                        Vs

1. VASLALA
                       ...       Respondent

                For Petitioner  :SRI.K.RAMACHANDRAN

                For Respondent  :SRI.JOHN JOSEPH(ROY)

The Hon'ble MR. Justice K.R.UDAYABHANU

 Dated :07/03/2007

 O R D E R
                             K.R.UDAYABHANU, J.

                         --------------------------------

                              Crl. R. P. 554 of 1999

                       ------------------------------------

                   Dated this the  7h  day of March, 2007




                                       ORDER



       The   revision   petitioner   is   the   husband/counter   petitioner   in


MC.No.7/96 the   proceedings initiated under Section 125 of Crl.PC.


After   considering   the   evidence   adduced   in   the   matter       that


consisted of   the testimony of   PW1 the petitioner in the M.C.   and


CPW1   who   is   the   revision   petitioner,   the   court   has   ordered   for


maintenance   allowance   @   Rs.300/-   per   month   from   the   date   of


petition.   The revision petition is filed setting aside that order,   on


the   ground   that   the   same   is     not   supported   by     reasons     and   is


vitiated   by   erroneous     appreciation   of   evidence.     The   revision


petitioner has admitted the  marriage.  According  to him they have


lived together  for one month and the wife  deserted him.  She had


alleged       misappropriation of       gold     ornaments   weighing     102


gms.     and   cash   of   10,000/-     given   by   her   parents   at   the   time   of


marriage  .   According to  the  petitioner,   she was  ill  treated by  the


revision   petitioner   and   she   was   left   at     the   parental     house,


demanding more dowry.  According to  the respondent, he is getting


only Rs.100 per day  from his employment in   a Coir Factory.  I find


Crl.RP NO.554 of 1999                          2



revision petitioner   had contended that the petitioner   is getting an


income of Rs.100/- per day  from tailoring works and she is getting


Rs.500/-   per   month   from   landed   property.     The   court   below   has


noted   that   the   defence   has   admitted       that   from   10.11.95   the


parties   are   living   separately.     There   is   no   case   for   the   revision


petitioner  that he was providing maintenance to the   respondent .


The   revision   petitioner   has   not   established   that   the     petitioner   is


having landed property. The evidence of  CPW2 is only with respect


to the fact that there was some mediation and he had attempted to


settle   the differences in between the parties.   I   find that amount


awarded i.e., Rs.300/- per month cannot be said to be unreasonable


in any way.  There is no ground to interfere .


         The revision petition is dismissed.








                                                         K.R.UDAYABHANU, JUDGE


jp



