

 IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

RSA No. 258 of 2007()


1. ALLOLATHIL HASSAN HAJI,
                      ...  Petitioner

                        Vs



1. ALLOLATHIL RAMLA AGED 43,
                       ...       Respondent

                For Petitioner  :SRI.C.KHALID

                For Respondent  : No Appearance

The Hon'ble MR. Justice M.SASIDHARAN NAMBIAR

 Dated :12/03/2007

 O R D E R
                   M.SASIDHARAN NAMBIAR,J.



                   ------------------------------------------

                       R.S.A.NO.258   OF  2007

                   ------------------------------------------


                    Dated    12th    March   2007




                            J U D G M E N T





              Defendant   in   O.S.114/98   on   the   file   of



Munsiff   court,   Thalassery   is   the   appellant.   Plaintiff



is   the   respondent.   Respondent   instituted   the   suit



seeking a decree for injunction contending that plaint



schedule   property   originally   belonged   to   the   uncle   of



respondent   as   per   partition   deed   dated   20/5/1974   and



under     Ext.A1   gift   deed   dated   8/11/1979   property   was



transferred to respondent reserving the right   to take



income   from   the   property   to   the   donor   till   his   death



and   delivery   has   also   been   effected   on   10/2/1998.



Contending   that   appellant   is   attempting   to   sell   the



property   and   he   has   no   right   to   do   so   the   suit   was



instituted.     Appellant   resisted   the   suit   contending



that   gift   deed   was   never   acted   upon   and   possession   of



the   property   was   never   delivered   and   gift   deed   was



executed to avoid threat of divorce for non payment of



dowry,   at   the   request   of   mother   of   respondent   and



subsequently   appellant   revoked   the   gift   deed   under


RSA 258/07                           2




Ext.B2   on   14/10/1997   and   respondent   is   therefore   not



entitled to get the  decree sought for.  Learned Munsiff



framed necessary  issues.  Respondent was examined  as PW1



and appellant as DW1. Exts.A1 to A13  and Exts.B1 series



and   B2   were   marked.   Learned   Munsiff   on   the   evidence



found   that   Ext.A1   gift   deed   was   acted   upon   and     the



essentials of a valid gift as provided under Mohammedan



Law   are   satisfied   and   delivery   has   also   been   effected



and   therefore   appellant   is   not   entitled   to   cancel   the



gift   thereafter   and   respondent   has   right   and   title   and



possession   to   the   property   and   granted   the   decree.



Appellant challenged  the  decree and judgment  before Sub



court, Thalassery in A.S.18/2003. Learned Sub Judge  re-



appreciated   the   evidence   and   confirmed   the   findings   of



learned   Munsiff   and   dismissed   the   appeal.   It   is



challenged in this second appeal.



        2.     Learned   counsel   appearing   for   appellant   was



heard.



        3.     Arguments   of   learned   counsel   appearing   for



appellant was that Ext.A1 gift deed was never acted upon



and unless delivery of possession of the property gifted



was   given   to   respondent,   there   is   no   valid   gift   under



Mohammedan   Law   and   in   view   of   Ext.B2   cancellation   of



Ext.A1   gift,   respondent   is   not   entitled     to   the   decree


RSA 258/07                                        3




granted   by   courts   below   and   therefore   judgments   are   to



be set aside.



        4.      It   was   argued   that   though   Ext.A1   gift   deed



was in 1979 mutation was not effected and respondent did



not pay basic tax till 1986 and for the first time   tax



was   paid   only   on   14/10/1986   and   evidence   on   record     is



insufficient   to   prove   that     gift   was   acted   upon   and



courts   below   therefore     should   have   upheld   the   case   of



appellant and dismissed the suit. Learned counsel   also



argued   that   in   the   light   of   Ext.B2   gift     deed,   courts



below should not have  granted the decree for injunction



without seeking a decree for  declaration against Ext.B2



cancellation             deed         and         therefore         judgments         are



unsustainable.



        5.         On   hearing   learned   counsel   appearing   for



appellant and on going through   the judgments, I do not



find   any   substantial   question   of   law   involved   in   this



appeal.     As   rightly   found   by   courts   below,     essential



ingredients of a valid gift under Mohammedan Law are 1)a



declaration     of   gift   by   the   donor     2)acceptance   of   the



gift   expressly   or   impliedly   by   or   on   behalf   of   the



donee   3)delivery   of   possession   of   the   subject   of   the



gift by the donor to the donee. Where a donor makes the



gift a corpus of a property, but  reserves the usufructs


RSA 258/07                             4




to   himself and continues in physical possession of the



property, payment of revenue to the government after the



date of the gift, amounts to  constructive possession of



the   property.   It   established   the   acceptance   of   gift.



Respondent has admittedly paid basic tax from   1986. On



the   evidence   courts     below   found   that   the   gift   was



accepted   and             acted   upon.   Both   the   courts   below



elaborately considered the  evidence and found that gift



deed   has   been   acted   upon.   The   factual   finding   was



arrived   at     in   the   light   of   settled   legal   position   and



evidence   on   record.   It     cannot   be     interfered       in



exercise   of   powers   of   this   court   under   Section   100   of



Code of Civil Procedure. When it is found that gift deed



was   accepted   and   acted   upon,   Ext.B2     cancellation   deed



has   no   validity   at   all.     In   such   circumstances,   courts



below rightly upheld the case of respondent and granted



the   decree.   As   no   substantial   question   of   law   is



involved, appeal is dismissed in limine.



        Appeal is dismissed.





                                            M.SASIDHARAN NAMBIAR,

                                                           JUDGE.




uj.


RSA 258/07    5



