

 IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

Crl L P No. 423 of 2007()


1. SINDHU P.R., AGED 38 YEARS,
                      ...  Petitioner

                        Vs



1. P.R.SUBRHAN @ SUBRAHAMANIAN,
                       ...       Respondent

2. STATE OF KERALA, REP. BY

                For Petitioner  :SRI.T.N.SURESH

                For Respondent  : No Appearance

The Hon'ble MR. Justice K.THANKAPPAN

 Dated :04/07/2007

 O R D E R


                                 K.  THANKAPPAN, J.

                          ------------------------------------------

                             CRL.L.P..NO.423 OF  2007

                          ------------------------------------------

                       Dated  this the  4th  day of  July,  2007.


                                      JUDGMENT





       This     is   an   application   for     special   leave   to   appeal   against   the


judgment   passed     in     C.C.No.1179/2004   on   the   file   of   the     Judicial


Magistrate of First Class-II, Aluva.   The petitioner/complainant  filed a


complaint   before   the   court   below   alleging   that   the     1st  respondent,


none   else     the     husband   of   the     complainant,     had   committed     the


offences  punishable   under   Sections   498   A   and   406   of   the   I.P.C.   The


marriage between the petitioner/complainant and the 1st   respondent


was conducted   on 30.8.2003.   The  allegation  in the  complaint  was


that     an amount of Rs. 30,000/=   and   gold ornaments weighing 15


soverings   entrusted  with the 1st respondent at the time of marriage,


were misappropriated by the 1st  respondent.       It was further alleged


that   even at the     date   of the marriage  itself,   the petitioner    was


neglected   by the 1st  respondent as   the petitioner   was left   alone at


the   marriage   reception.   Further   it   was   alleged   that                       the


petitioner/complainant was physically  assaulted  on several occasions


and   that     the   1st  respondent   used   to   have     the   company   of   one


Thankamma - a relative  of the 1st respondent  and the 1st  respondent


CRL.L.P.NO.423/2007                             2



even    asked the   petitioner to give   her  salary to   said Thankamma.


To   prove   the   above   allegations,     the   complainant   herself   was


examined  as  PW1  and    three     other    witnesses  were  also  examined.


Exhibits P1 to P3  were  relied on by the  petitioner/complainant.  After


closing   the   evidence   adduced     on   behalf   of   the   petitioner,     the   1st


respondent was  questioned under Section 313 of the Code of Criminal


Procedure. The 1st respondent  denied  the allegations in the complaint


and   had stated that   he had not   committed any offence as alleged.


After   considering the   entire evidence, the trial court   found that the


petitioner/complainant     miserably     failed   to   prove     the   allegations


levelled against the 1st respondent.    Hence, the  1st respondent  was


acquitted.        Against that  judgment,  this  special  leave   to  appeal   has


been filed.





2.      This   Court   heard   the   learned   counsel   appearing   for   the


petitioner/complainant  in detail.    The main contention of the learned


counsel   appearing   for   the   petitioner   is   that     there   was   evidence   to


show that the petitioner was physically  assaulted,  harassed and was


neglected by the 1st respondent   from the date of the marriage itself.


Further   it   is     contended   that     it   is     an   admitted       case     by   the   1st


respondent as  he  had   accepted dowry  of Rs.30,000/=  and     certain


CRL.L.P.NO.423/2007                         3



ornaments     at   the   time   of   the   marriage     from   the     parents   of   the


petitioner.   If so, the  finding entered by the trial court is  perverse.





3.     This   Court     had     considered   the     contentions     of   the   learned


counsel   and         perused   the     judgment   and   other   records   made


available to this court.  The specific  contention of the petitioner before


the   court  was that even on   the date  of  the marriage  onwards, the


petitioner was being neglected by the 1st  respondent and he    had  an


illicit   relationship with one Thankamma and on   some   times the   1st


respondent   asked   the   petitioner   to   give   her     salary   to   the     said


Thankamma.   From the  evidence  adduced before the court, it is not


possible to hold that the allegations in the complaint are true as it is


seen that the marriage between the petitioner and the 1st  respondent


had   been   conducted   on   30.8.2003.       The   complaint   as   alleged   has


been   filed   only   on   16.11.2004,     after   a   lapse   of   more   than       14


months.  In the mean while,  there is no evidence  to show that what


had happened   during     these     14 months   and there is no evidence


for    any     ill treatment   by the 1st  respondent or any member  of his


family.    The  only  allegation  stated in the  complaint was that  the


1st  respondent     assaulted   the   petitioner   on   5.11.2004         though   she


was   not     admitted   in   the   hospital,   that     was     seen   by   PW2   -     a


CRL.L.P.NO.423/2007                          4



neighbour   of   the   petitioner.       But,   there   is   no   evidence   to       show


actually     the     petitioner   was   ill   treated     or   assaulted   by   the   1st


respondent.             PW2   was not supporting the   case at all as he had


stated that he heard some  wordy altercations  between the  petitioner


and the 1st respondent and  nothing else.    There is no other  evidence


to   support   the   version   of   PW1-   the   petitioner   to   prove   that   the     1st


respondent had   actually assaulted   or   neglected her from 30.8.2003


onwards.         That   apart,   the   main   allegation   was   that     she   was


neglected because of the illicit   relationship between one Thankamma


and the  1st respondent.   It was  come out in evidence and  admitted


by PW1 that   Thankamma is an old woman who     brought up   the 1st


respondent at the very early ages and  she is having  doubled  the age


of the 1st  respondent.     If   so, the illicit   relationship   alleged by the


petitioner   cannot   be     accepted   by   this     Court.         That   apart,     the


evidence   adduced   by   Pws   3   and   4     would   not   prove   that     any


harassment   has   been   made   against   the   petitioner   by   the   1st


respondent as contemplated under Section 498 A of the I.P.C.   As per


the provisions of Section 498 A,  it should be proved that the husband


of a married woman or his   relative   should     commit     cruelty either


physical or  mental.   But, here there is no evidence adduced by PW1-


the   petitioner   to   prove     any   physical   assault   has   been   committed


CRL.L.P.NO.423/2007                          5



against her by the  1st respondent.    The only allegation  as stated in


the  complaint was that she was being neglected  only because of the


relationship between    Thankamma and the 1st  respondent.      That by


itself  is not a reason to hold  that the petitioner  was being  neglected


or    meted out any cruelty as   contemplated   under Section 498  A of


the  I.P.C.      Apart  from  the   allegation  of  cruelty,  it  was  alleged  that


dowry   and     the   gold   ornaments   given     to   PW1   -   the   complainant,


were misappropriated by the   husband - the respondent.       For that,


there is no evidence  except that of PW4, who had  stated that  he was


also   present   at   the   time   of   marriage     and     receipt   of   the   amount   of


dowry as  stated  by PW1.  But,  that by itself  do not  show that  the


said amount   or     ornaments     have   been   misappropriated     by  the     1st


respondent,   so as to attract an offence punishable under Section  406


of the  I.P.C.





         In the above   circumstances, this Court is of the view that  the


allegations   in   the   complaint   are   frivolous     and   the   petitioner


purposefully   brought   the     1st  respondent   before   the   court   to   face


criminal trial.          In the above  circumstances,   there is no evidence


to proceed  against the 1st respondent.    Accordingly,  the judgment of


the  trial court    is  confirmed  and  the special leave to  appeal stands


CRL.L.P.NO.423/2007                6



dismissed  imposing   compensation on the petitioner.





                                   K. THANKAPPAN, JUDGE.




     cl



