

 IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

SA No. 769 of 1993()



1. FRANCIS KALATHRON D'CRUS
                      ...  Petitioner

                        Vs

1. SEBAS5TIAN D'CRUS @ SUNNY D'CRUS
                       ...       Respondent

                For Petitioner  :SRI.V.CHITAMBARESH

                For Respondent  :SRI.P.V.RAMESH SHANKAR

The Hon'ble MR. Justice M.SASIDHARAN NAMBIAR

 Dated :29/03/2007

 O R D E R
                  M.SASIDHARAN NAMBIAR,J.

               ===========================

                 S.A.  NO.769    OF 1993

               ===========================



        Dated this the 28th day of March, 2007



                           JUDGMENT



     Third   defendant   in   O.S.52/1982   on   the   file   of



Munsiff Court, Thiruvananthapuram is the appellant.



First   respondent     plaintiff   and   second   respondent



is   the   first   defendant   and   third   respondent     4th



defendant   in   the   suit.        Second   defendant   died



before   filing   the   second     appeal.     4th  respondent



died   during   the   pendency   of   the   second   appeal   and



as   the   presence   of   the   legal   heirs   were   not



necessary,   they   were   not   impleaded.     Admittedly   27



cents   in   survey   No.2891   of   Muttathara   Village



originally belonged to Dr.A. Grihary D'cruz. Plaint



schedule property in O.S.52/1982 is the room of the



godown   bearing   door   No.T.C.41/1728.     4th  defendant



is his widow and first defendant and Josebel Albert



are   their   daughters.   Plaintiff   is   the   husband   of



first   defendant.Their   marriage   was   solemnized   on



20-5-1953.     Paul   Albert   Rozario   is   the   husband   of


S.A.769/93                      2


the other daughter Josebel Albert.   At the time of



marriage   of   the   daughters,   Grihary   D'cruz,   the



father   executed   two   dowry   deeds   whereunder   the



property was given in the name of the daughters and



their   respective   husbands   as   streedhanam.   Under



Ext.A2   dowry   deed   dated   5.10.1128   the   eastern   half



of   the   property   with   the   godown   therein   was   given



to     first   defendant   and   the   plaintiff.     Similarly



as per another dowry deed executed by the father in



favour   of   the   other   daughter   and   her   husband   in



1124   M.E.,   the   western   half   of   the   property   with



godown   situate   therein   was   given   to   Jospel   Albert



and   her   husband   Paul   Albert   Rozario.     Subsequently



first   defendant   assigned   her   right   over   the



property   in   favour   of     third   defendant/appellant



under Ext.A3 sale deed.  But Ext.A3 was executed as



if   first   defendant   had   right   over   the   entire



property   including   the   western   portion   of   the



property   transferred   by   the   father   in   favour   of



Jospel   and       her   husband.   Contending   that   under



Ext.A2 dowry deed plaintiff is also entitled to get



equal   right   over   the   property,   O.S.52/1982   was



filed   by   the   plaintiff.     Contending   that   as   he   is


S.A.769/93                            3


not   a   party   to   the   said   alienation   and   Ext.A3   was



executed   as   if   by   the   document   first   defendant   is



the absolute owner of the entire property and it is



being   transferred   to               third   defendant,   it   was



contended  that  Ext.A3    is  void.  Plaintiff  sought  a



decree   for   declaration   that   Ext.A3   is   void   to   the



extent   of   the   share   of   the   plaintiff   and   for



partition   and   separation   of   the   plaint   A   schedule



property into two equal shares and allotment of one



such   share   to   the   plaintiff.   Appellant   along   with



second   defendant   filed   a   joint   written   statement



admitting          the         marriage         but         contending         that



plaintiff   deserted   first   defendant   in   1959   and



thereafter   she   remarried   and   is   living   with   her



second   husband   and   there   is   only   one   godown   and



dowry   deed   in   favour   of   the   sister   of   the   first



defendant   did   not   come   into   force   and   even   if   any



right   accrued   on   the   strength   of   the   document,   it



was   lost   by   adverse   possession   and   limitation   and



plaint   schedule   property   was   purchased   by   third



defendant   under   Ext.A3   and   plaintiff   is   not



entitled   to   claim   any   share   and   in   the     property



given   as   dowry   husband   will   not   get   any   right   and


S.A.769/93                                4


therefore   the   suit   is   to   be   dismissed.     Learned



Munsiff framed the necessary issues.



       2. The sister of the first defendant along with



her         husband         filed         O.S.598/1976                 seeking         a



declaration of their right over the western part of



the  property  contending  that  as  per  the  dowry  deed



in their favour the property belongs to the husband



and wife and defendants have no right over the said



property.     That   suit   was   jointly   tried   along   with



O.S.52/1982.  Though evidence was jointly recorded,



learned            Munsiff         marked           the         exhibits               in



O.S.598/1976   separately.                       No   oral   evidence   was



adduced   in   O.S.52/1982   and   oral   evidence   was



adduced   only   in   the   other   suit.       Learned   Munsiff



disposed   both   the   suits   by   a   common   judgment.



Relying   on   the   provisions   of   Section   5   of   the



Travancore   Christian   Succession   Act,                                 learned



Munsiff   held   that   though   Ext.A2   was   executed   in



favour   of   both   plaintiff   and   first   defendant,



plaintiff is only a trustee and did not derive any



right   over   the   property   and   therefore   he   is   not



entitled to seek partition. Holding that  he is not



entitled   to   any   of   the   reliefs   sought   for,     suit


S.A.769/93                              5


was      dismissed.              A      decree      was      granted      in



O.S.598/1976  upholding  their  case  that    as  per  the



dowry   deed   plaintiffs   therein   got   the   right     and



defendants   in   the   suit   have   no   right   over     the



western   property   and   defendants   including   the



appellant   cannot   claim   any   right   over   the   western



property   under   Ext.A3   sale   deed.     The   judgment   in



O.S.598/1976   was   challenged   by   appellant   herein,



who   was   the   additional   sixth   defendant   in   that



suit,   in   A.S.148/1987.   The   judgment   in   O.S.52/1982



was   challenged   in   A.S.173/1987   by   the   plaintiff.



Both   the   appeals   were   heard   together.     As   per



common   judgment,     learned   District   Judge   allowed



A.S.173/1987  and  upheld  the  case  of    plaintiff  and



granted a preliminary decree directing partition of



the   plaint   schedule   property   and   granting   a



declaratory   decree in respect of the share of the



plaintiff.     Confirming   the   decree   and   judgment   in



O.S.598/1976,   A.S.148/1987   was   dismissed.                      This



Second   Appeal   is   filed   challenging   the   decree



granted   in   A.S.173/1987.     Challenging   the   decree



and   judgment   in   A.S.148/1987   appellant   filed



S.A.777/1993   which   was   subsequently   dismissed   for


S.A.769/93                         6


default   on   24.3.1997   and   the   judgment     has   become



final.



        3.        The   Second   Appeal   was   admitted   after



formulating   the   following   substantial   questions   of



law.



        1)  Has the extension of  Indian Succession



Act to the T.C. State any bearing on the right of a



Christian   bride   to   her   streedhanam   property   which



has always been treated as her absolute property.



        2)   Is   not   the   plaintiff   in   whose   name   Ext.A2



was   so   executed   along   with   that   of   the   first



defendant,   a   mere   trustee   without   any   beneficial



interest and if so whether plaintiff is entitled to



the decree for partition?



        3)     Whether   the   suit   is   barred   by   adverse



possession and limitation.



        4.   Learned counsel appearing for   appellant and



first respondent were heard.



        5.      Though   appellant   had   raised   a   contention



that   dowry   deed   executed   by   Grihari   D'Cruz     in



favour  of  the  sister  of  first  defendant  the  second



plaintiff   in   O.S.598/1976     was   not   acted   upon   and



under   Ext.A2   dowry   deed   first   defendant   obtained


S.A.769/93                        7


the   entire   property,   in   view   of   the     decree   in



O.S.598   of   1976   which   has   now   become   final,



appellant   is   not   entitled   to     contend   that   sister



of   first   defendant   and   her   husband   who   are



plaintiffs     in   O.S.598   of   1976   did   not   get   right



under   the   dowry   deed   executed   by   the     father   of



first defendant in their favour.    Appellant being



an   assignee   of   first   defendant,   could   only   claim



the   right   which   was   obtained   by   first   defendant



under Ext.A2.



      6.      Arguments   of   learned   counsel   appearing   for



appellant   was   that   though   under   Ext.A2     eastern



property   was   given   to   first   defendant   and   her



husband,   plaintiff     was   only   a   trustee   of   the



Streedhanam   property   of   first   defendant   and



therefore   plaintiff   did   not   derive   right   over   the



property   and   under   Ext.A3   entire   right   over   the



property   covered   under   Ext.A2   now   vests   with     the



appellant.   Case   of   plaintiff   was   that   under   Ext.A2



both   first   defendant   and   plaintiff   have     equal



rights and under Ext.A3 only the  one half right of



first   defendant          vests   with   the   appellant   and



plaintiff   is   entitled   to   the   remaining   half   right,


S.A.769/93                                 8


which   was   granted   by   first   appellate   court.



Learned   counsel   appearing   for   appellant   relying   on



the decision of this court in  Vedamami Palavva   v.



Ummini   Nadar   Kochukrishnan   and   another   (AIR     1974



Kerala 11) and Mathai Kunjamma v. Geevarghese Kochu



Kirian (1984 KLT 128)  and relying on  Section 5 of



Travancore   Christian   Succession   Act   argued   that   as



per         the         provisions         of         Travancore         Christian



Succession Act   streedhanam   is   always treated as



the exclusive property of the wife   and husband is



only   treated   as   a     trustee   and   therefore   under



Ext.A2 plaintiff did not derive any right and hence



the   decree   is   unsustainable.   Learned   counsel



appearing for  first respondent relying on decision



of Supreme court in  Mary Roy & Others   v. State of



Kerala  & others (1986 KLT 508)  argued that law as



declared  by  Supreme  court  establish  that    with  the



coming into force of Part B  States Laws Act, 1951,



which   came   into   force   on   1/4/1951,   Travancore



Christian   Succession   Act,   1092   is   repealed   in   its



entirety and therefore relying on  Section 5 of the



repealed   Act   appellant   is   not   entitled   to   raise   a



claim  and  the  decisions  relied  on  by  the  appellant


S.A.769/93                               9


were   basing   on   the                  provisions   of   Travancore



Christian   Succession   Act   and   hence                           are   not



applicable   and   as   rightly   found   by   first   appellate



court   plaintiff   is   entitled   to   get   his   half   share



separated.



      7.   A   learned   single     Judge   of   this   Court   in



Vedamani   Palavva     v.     Ummini   Nadar   Kochukrishnan



and another (AIR  1974  Kerala 11) another  learned



Single   Judge     in  Mathai   Kunjamma's   case   (supra)



relied   on   Section   5   of   Travancore   Christian



Succession   Act   and     held   that   it   is   settled   law



that   among   the   community   of   Travancore   Christian



there   is   a   practice   of   giving   streedhanam   to   the



female     children   in   lieu   of   her   share   in   her



father's   property   and   streedhanam   so   given   to   the



female children is her absolute property and though



name of her husband is also  shown in the document,



he is only a trustee.  The question is how far this



decision  could  be  followed,  when  very  basis  of  the



said   decisions   was   taken   away   by   the   later



pronouncement     of   law   by   Apex   court   in   Mary   Roy's



case.         Though         learned          counsel         appearing         for



appellant   argued   that   in     Mary   Roy's   case   Apex


S.A.769/93                                  10


Court           was   only   considering   the   intestate



succession   and   not   streedhanam     as   provided   under



Section   5   of   the     Travancore   Christian   Succession



Act,   and so that decision does not   apply to   the



case.



      8.   What   was   considered     by   Apex   court   in   Mary



Roy's case   was the   effect of Part B   States Laws



Act, 1951 in respect of the  States Laws prevailing



on   the   date   of   commencement   of   Part   B   States   Laws



Act. Supreme Court declared the law thus:



                    "But            admittedly              there                is


              nothing   in   Part   B   States   Laws


              Act,   1951   expressly   saving   the


              Travancore   Christian   Succession


              Act   1092.   The   only   argument


              urged           on          behalf            of               the


              respondents   was   that   S.29   sub-s.


              (2)   of   the                Indian   Succession


              Act,   1925   had   the   effect   of


              saving   the   Travancore   Christian


              Succession   Act,   1092   and   the


              latter Act therefore continued to


              govern   Indian   christians   in   the


              territories   of   the   former   State


              of         Travancore.                   Now                  this


              contention   of   the   respondents


              might   perhaps   have   required   some


S.A.769/93                                         11


              consideration,   if   the   Travancore


              Christian   Succession   Act,   1092


              had   not   been   expressly   repealed


              and   an   argument   had   been   raised


              that   by   reason   of   the   extension


              of     the   Indian   Succession   Act,


              1925,   there   was   implied   repeal


              of          the          Travancore                       Christian


              Succession                     Act,             1092.                     Then


              perhaps   an     argument   could   have


              been     advanced   that   though   both


              Chapter   II   of   Part   V   of   the


              Indian   Succession   Act,   1925   and


              the                Travancore                             Christian


              Succession Act, 1092 covered   the


              same   field   and   dealt   with   the


              same             subject             matter,                   namely,


              intestate                succession                                  among


              Indian   Christians,   there   was   no


              implied   repeal   of   the   Travancore


              Christian Succession Act, 1092 by


              the   extension   of   Chapter   II   of


              Part   V   of                      of   the   Indian


              Succession   Act   1925   and   the


              continued                     operation                   of               the


              Travancore   Christian   Succession


              Act   1092   was   saved     by   S.29   sub-


              s.(2)   of   the   Indian   Succession


              Act,   1925.   We   very   much   doubt


              whether   such   an   argument   would


S.A.769/93                                 12


              have   been   tenable   but   in   any


              event,   in   the   present   case,


              there   is   no   scope     for   such   an


              argument,   since   the   Travancore


              Christian   Succession   Act,   1092


              stood         expressly                 repealed             by


              virtue   of   S.6   of   Part   B   States


              (Laws) Act, 1951."



      The final conclusion reads;



                             "We   are   therefore     of


              the view that on the coming into


              force   of   Part   B   States   (Laws)


              Act,          1951         Travancore                 Cochin


              Succession                 Act,         1092           stood


              repealed   and Chapter II of Part


              V of Indian Succession Act, 1925


              became   applicable   and   intestate


              succession   to   the   property   of


              members   of   the   Indian   Christian


              community   in   the   territories   of


              the           erstwhile                      State           of


              Travancore                  was               thereafter


              governed by Chapter II of Part V


              of   the   Indian   Succession   Act,


              1925".



      9.  The result of the declaration of law by the



Apex   Court   is   that   Travancore   Christian   Succession



Act stood  repealed  by Part B States (Laws) Act in


S.A.769/93                       13


its   entirety.     Hence   relying   on   Section   5   of   said



repealed   Act   or   the   decisions   rendered   relying   on



the   provisions   of   the   said   Act,   appellant   is   not



entitled to contend that under Ext.A2 the  property



exclusively   belonged   to     first   defendant   or   that



plaintiff was only a trustee.



      10.     Though   learned   counsel   appearing   for



appellant   relying   on   Section   20   of   Indian



Succession   Act   argued   that   by   virtue   of   Ext.A2,the



husband will not get any right over the property of



wife,   on   the   facts   and   circumstances   of   this   case



and   in   the   light   of   Ext.A2,   Section   20   of   the   Act



has   no   application.   Section   20   provides   that   no



person   shall   by   marriage   acquire   any   interest   in



the property of the person whom he or she   marries



or become incapable of doing any act in respect of



his or her own property, which he or she could have



done     if   unmarried.   Argument   of   learned   counsel



appearing   for   appellant     could   have   been   accepted,



if   Ext.A2   is   only   in   the   name   of   first   defendant



and it was given as dowry and plaintiff as husband



claimed   a   right   over   the   property.   If   that   be   the



case,   Section   20   mandates   that   by   virtue   of   his


S.A.769/93                              14


status     as   husband   alone,   he   is   not   entitled   to



acquire any interest in the property of the   wife.



But   under   Ext.A2   an   equal   right     was       given   both



first   defendant   wife   and     the   plaintiff   husband.



Under Ext.A2 plaintiff is not claiming any right in



the   property   of   the   wife.   Property   transferred



under   Ext.A2   is                that   of   the   father.   First



defendant   is   getting   right   over   the   property,   only



by  virtue  of  Ext.A2.  When  Ext.A2  provides  that  the



right     transferred     thereunder     is   equally   to



plaintiff   and   first   defendant,   Section   20     has   no



application   and   finding   of   first   appellate   court



cannot be interfered on that ground also.



               11.    Learned          counsel         appearing         for



appellant   then   argued   that   Ext.A2   was   not   acted



upon. But appellant has no case that Ext.A2 was not



acted  upon  as  such.  Instead  what  was  contended  was



that            plaintiff   did   not   accept              Ext.A2   and



therefore,   he   did   not   get   any   right.   Fact   that



plaintiff married first defendant immediately after



Ext.A2   is   admitted.   Fact     that     they   were   living



together as husband and wife and children were born



in   that   wedlock     is   also   admitted.   If   that   be   the


S.A.769/93                      15


case,   if       Ext.A2,   which   could   only   be   treated   as



gift   by   the   father   to   first   defendant              and



plaintiff        was   accepted   and   acted   upon,          the



alleged subsequent desertion by the wife or husband



will   not   make   any   difference   with   regard   to   the



validity   of   Ext.A2.     First   appellate   court   rightly



found   that   under   Ext.A2   both   plaintiff   and   first



defendant   derived   equal   rights.     Appellant   under



Ext.A3   obtained   only   the   right   of   first   defendant



which is only half right over the   plaint schedule



property.   Plaintiff   is   therefore   entitled   to   get



his share separated.



      Appeal fails and is dismissed.





                                        M.SASIDHARAN NAMBIAR

                                                    JUDGE

tpl/uj




M.SASIDHARAN NAMBIAR, J.





    ---------------------

     W.P.(C).NO. /06

    ---------------------




        JUDGMENT





    SEPTEMBER,2006



