

 IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

Bail Appl No. 4184 of 2007()


1. RAMACHANDRAN, AGED 57 YEARS,
                      ...  Petitioner
2. MALINI CHANDRAN, AGED 52 YEARS,

                        Vs



1. STATE OF KERALA,
                       ...       Respondent

                For Petitioner  :SRI.P.VIJAYA BHANU

                For Respondent  :PUBLIC PROSECUTOR

The Hon'ble MR. Justice R.BASANT

 Dated :12/07/2007

 O R D E R






                                R. BASANT, J.

               -------------------------------------------------

                         B.A. NO. 4184 OF  2007

               -------------------------------------------------

               Dated this the   12th   day of July, 2007



                                     ORDER





       Application   for   anticipatory   bail.       The   petitioners   are


accused   2   and   3.       They   are   the   father   and   mother   of   the   1st


accused.       They   face   allegation   in   a   crime   registered   under


Sec.304-B of the IPC.    That crime was registered on the basis


of   a   complaint   lodged   by   the   father-in-law   of   the   1st  accused.


The   1st  accused   had   married   the   daughter   of   the   de   facto


complainant on 3/9/2000.     The spouses, after marriage, were


residing in California - U.S.A.    The wife of the 1st accused was


allegedly studying for a Post Graduate Degree.  The wife of the


1st  accused   is   no   more.       While   the   1st  accused   and   the


deceased were living in California, she allegedly suffered burn


injuries.  Information was conveyed to the de facto complainant


on 18/8/2004 and he along with his wife rushed to the U.S. to


attend on their daughter.   She succumbed to the burn injuries


 B.A. NO. 4184 OF  2007                -: 2 :-


on 3/9/04.  Long later, the 1st accused on his trip to India thought


of   calling   on   the   parents   of   his   deceased   wife.       He   allegedly


called on them on 10/6/07.     Some untoward incident   occurred


on   that   day   about   which   a   complaint   was   filed   by   the   de   facto


complainant   herein   alleging   physical   assault   by   the   1st  accused


against the wife of the de facto complainant.       The relationship


evidently soured on the basis of that incident and the subsequent


complaint.


      2.     Later, on 19/6/07 the de facto complainant preferred a


complaint   before   the   learned   Magistrate     which   has   been


referred by the  learned  Magistrate to the  police under  Sec.156


(3) of the Cr.P.C.     In that, it is alleged that the daughter of the


de   facto   complainant   had   met   with   her   death   under   suspicious


circumstances.       She   was   either   put   to   death   or   she   had


committed   suicide,   it   is   alleged.       It   is   alleged   that   the


matrimonial cruelty which emanated from the 1st accused as well


as   the   parents,   the   petitioners   was  responsible   for   such   death.


A   crime   has   been   registered.   Investigation   is   in   progress.     The


petitioners apprehend imminent arrest.


      3.       The   crucial   allegation   which   has   any   bearing   on   the


complicity  of the  petitioners  appear    in  para-3  of the complaint


which I extract below:


 B.A. NO. 4184 OF  2007             -: 3 :-


                  "3.   After the burial the complainant

            and   his   wife   returned   to   Palakkad   with

            entertaining   serious   doubts   about   the

            death   of   their   daughter.       The     suspicion

            grew   intense   in   the   light   of   the   demand

            for dowry made by the 2nd and 3rd  accused

            on   different   occasions.            It   is   also

            submitted   that   the   2nd    and   3rd  accused

            had   expressed   their   displeasure   and

            disappointment for  not having been given

            any   dowry   amount   or   gold   ornaments   at

            the time of marriage.     The deceased had

            on several occasions spoken painfully over

            telephone to the complainant and his wife

            about   the   demand   of   dowry.       She   had

            even gone to the extent of saying that her

            marital life is not safe unless and until the

            complainant   satisfy   the   greedy   demands

            made   by   the   accused.       The   complainant

            was   not   in   a   position   to   satisfy   the

            unreasonable demands of dowry made by

            the   accused   No.1   to   the   deceased.       But

            the   complainant   never   apprehended   that

            such   demands   would   snowball   into   a

            catastrophe as above mentioned."





      4.   The learned counsel for the petitioners submits that it is


transparently   evident   from   the   sequence   of   events   that   the


 B.A. NO. 4184 OF  2007              -: 4 :-


belated   complaint   is   not   genuine   or   bona   fide   and   that   the


unfortunate incident which occurred after the 1st  accused called


on   the   de   facto   complainant   is   the   motive   behind   the   present


complaint.     No   specific   allegation   of   demand   of   dowry   or


matrimonial cruelty emanating from the petitioners is even made


in the complaint.   In these circumstances,  the old parents of the


1st  accused   may   not   be   subjected   to   the   undeserved   trauma   of


arrest   and   incarceration   in   prison,   submits   the   learned   counsel


for the petitioners.


      5.   The learned Public Prosecutor, on instructions, submits


that the State has no objection against the grant of anticipatory


bail on condition that appropriate safeguards may be insisted in


the interests of a fair, efficient and expeditious investigation.


      6.     The de facto complainant has come on record and has


got himself impleaded  without any objection from the petitioners


and   the   State.     The   learned   counsel   for   the   additional   2nd


respondent/the   de   facto   complainant   submits   that   the   de   facto


complainant has received  a raw deal from the police.   There has


been no proper investigation in the crime.      Prompt action was


also not forthcoming.   Even though a complaint was filed earlier


before the police, no proper action was taken.   This had obliged


the de facto complainant  to go to the learned Magistrate and file


 B.A. NO. 4184 OF  2007                  -: 5 :-


a   complaint   and   get   the   same   referred   to   the   police   under


Sec.156(3)   of   the   Cr.P.C.       Even   thereafter,   there   is   no   proper


investigation by the police.     The 1st  accused, who was available


in   India   at   the   time     of   filing   of   the   complaint,   has   now   been


permitted to go abroad on account of want of proper and prompt


action   on   the   part   of   the   police.       The   learned   counsel   for   the


petitioners submits that, in these circumstances, the petitioners


may   not   be   granted   anticipatory   bail.                  There   are   no


circumstances   justifying   the   invocation   of   the   extraordinary


equitable   discretion   in   favour   of   the   petitioners,   submits   the


learned counsel for the de facto complainant.


       7.   I have considered all the relevant inputs.     At this early


stage   of   the   investigation,   I   shall   scrupulously   avoid   any


expression   of   opinion   on   the   acceptability   of   the   allegations   or


the credibility of the data collected.   Suffice it to say that, on an


anxious   consideration   of   all   the   relevant   inputs,   I   am   satisfied


that this is an eminently fit case where directions under Sec.438


of   the   Cr.P.C.   can   and   ought   to   be   issued   in   favour   of   the


petitioners.   In coming to this conclusion, I have taken particular


note   of   the   broad   probabilities,   the   belated   nature   of   the


complaint, the non-specific allegation against the petitioners, the


fact   that   the   spouses   were   residing   together   in   U.S.   for   a   long


 B.A. NO. 4184 OF  2007                    -: 6 :-


time while the  petitioners were residing in India as also the age


of   the   petitioners.       I   have   also   taken   note   of   the   fact   that   the


interests   of   a   proper   investigation   will   not   in   any   way   be


prejudiced   by   issue   of   such   directions   under   Sec.438   of   the


Cr.P.C.


       8.  In   the   result,   this   petition   is   allowed.     Following


directions are issued under Sec.438 of the Cr.P.C:


       (i)   The   petitioners   shall   appear   before   the   learned


Magistrate having jurisdiction at 11 a.m. on 19/7/07.    They shall


be   released   on   regular   bail   on   their   executing   bonds   for


Rs.25,000/- each with two solvent sureties each for the like sum


to the satisfaction of the learned Magistrate.


       (ii)   The   petitioners   shall   make   themselves   available   for



interrogation before the  Investigating Officer  between 10 a.m.


and 1 p.m. on 20/7/07 and 21/7/07 and thereafter on all Mondays


between   10   a.m.   and   12   noon   for   a   period   of   one   month.


Subsequently,   they   shall   so   make   themselves   available   for



interrogation   before   the  Investigating   Officer  as   and   when



directed by the Investigating Officer in writing to do so.


       (iii)     The   petitioners   shall   not   leave   India   without   prior


permission of the learned Magistrate.


       (iv)       If   the   petitioners   do   not   appear   before   the   learned


 B.A. NO. 4184 OF  2007               -: 7 :-


Magistrate as directed in clause (i),  directions issued above shall


thereafter   stand   revoked   and   the   police   shall   be   at   liberty   to


arrest the petitioners and deal with them in accordance with law


as if those directions were not issued at all;


      (v)  If the petitioners were arrested prior to their surrender


on 19/7/07 as directed in clause (i) above, they shall be released


on   their   executing   bonds   for   Rs.25,000/-   each   without   any


sureties undertaking to appear before the learned Magistrate on


19/7/07.


      9. Hand over a copy of this order to the learned counsel for


the petitioners.





                                                                  Sd/-




                                                      (R. BASANT, JUDGE)




Nan/




                    //true copy//


                                                 P.S. to Judge






 B.A. NO. 4184 OF  2007    -: 8 :-



