

 IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

Bail Appl..No. 6472 of 2008()


1. B.M. MOHAMMED DAVOOD,
                      ...  Petitioner

                        Vs



1. STATE, REPRESENTED BY THE STATION
                       ...       Respondent

                For Petitioner  :SRI.SURESH KUMAR KODOTH

                For Respondent  :PUBLIC PROSECUTOR

The Hon'ble MRS. Justice K.HEMA

 Dated :21/10/2008

 O R D E R
                               K.HEMA, J.
                     ------------------------------
                       B.A. No.6472 OF 2008
                     ------------------------------
             Dated this the 21st day of October, 2008


                               O R D E R


      This petition is for anticipatory bail.

      2. The alleged offences are under Sections 323, 498A read

with Section 34 of IPC. According to prosecution, the petitioner,

who is the husband of the defacto complainant, along with his

parents in furtherance of common intention physically and mentally

harassed the defacto complainant demanding more money and

dowry.

      3. Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the

petitioner was working abroad and specific allegations are all made

against his parents and not against petitioner. There is only general

allegation that more money was demanded by the petitioner and no

allegation of physical assault is made against petitioner. It is also

submitted that co-accused were granted regular bail but, there is no

guarantee that petitioner will be released on bail, since he is the

husband of the defacto complainant.

      4. Learned Public Prosecutor submitted that petitioner may be

directed to surrender before the Investigating Officer and

B.A.6472 of 2008
                                   2


co-operate with the investigation and subject to this, he has no

objection in granting anticipatory bail.

      After hearing both sides, I am satisfied that petitioner can be

granted anticipatory bail.

      Hence the following order is passed:

         1. The    petitioner   shall   surrender  before    the

             Investigating Officer within seven days from today

             and make himself available for interrogation and

             co-operate with the investigation.

         2. Thereafter, he shall be released on bail, in the

             event of his arrest, on his executing bond for

             Rs.25,000/- with two solvent sureties each for like

             sum to the satisfaction of the Arresting Officer on

             condition that he may not influence or intimidate

             any witness or commit any offence while on bail.

      The petition is allowed.




                             K.HEMA, JUDGE
pac


