

 IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

Bail Appl..No. 3470 of 2008()


1. MOHAMMED KUTTY, AGED 39 YEARS
                      ...  Petitioner

                        Vs



1. STATE OF KERALA, REPRESENTED BY
                       ...       Respondent

                For Petitioner  :SRI.C.V.MANUVILSAN

                For Respondent  :PUBLIC PROSECUTOR

The Hon'ble MRS. Justice K.HEMA

 Dated :05/06/2008

 O R D E R
                             K.HEMA, J.

                 -----------------------------------------
                        B.A.No. 3470 of 2008
                 -----------------------------------------

              Dated this the 5th day of June, 2008

                              O R D E R

      This petition is for anticipatory bail.

      2. A crime is registered against the petitioner under Sections

406 and 498A of Indian Penal Code on a complaint filed by his

second wife. According to prosecution, the petitioner has mentally

and physically tortured the defacto complainant demanding dowry.

      3. This petition is opposed. According to learned Public

Prosecutor, serious allegations are made against the petitioner.

Learned counsel for petitioner submitted that except bare

allegations, there is nothing to support the same. Though physical

harassment is stated, no injury is actually sustained by the

petitioner. According to him, he had questioned the defacto

complainant and warned her about the immoral ways of life that

she was leading.

      4. It is submitted that she was divorced by her earlier

husband, alleging that she was leading an immoral life. But the

petitioner, who is a friend of the defacto complainant's brother,

married her only to help the family. The petitioner is totally

innocent of the allegations made and this case is foisted against him

    BA.3470/08                     2

only to harass the petitioner. On hearing both sides, I find that the

following directions can be given:

       i) Petitioner shall surrender before the investigating officer

and in the event of his arrest, he shall be produced before the

Magistrate Court concerned.

       ii) On production of the accused and if any bail application is

filed, Learned Magistrate shall release the petitioner on bail on his

executing a bond for Rs.25,000/- with two solvent sureties each for

the like sum to the satisfaction of the court on condition that the

petitioner shall report before the investigating officer as and when

directed by him.

       This petition is allowed.




                                   K.HEMA, JUDGE

vgs.


