

 IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

AFA No. 7 of 1999()



1. M.KOLAPPA PILLAI
                      ...  Petitioner

                        Vs

1. K.VADIVULAKSHMI
                       ...       Respondent

                For Petitioner  :SRI.R.D.SHENOY (SR.)

                For Respondent  :SRI.G.S.REGHUNATH

The Hon'ble MR. Justice P.R.RAMAN
The Hon'ble MR. Justice V.K.MOHANAN

 Dated :25/03/2008

 O R D E R
          P.R.RAMAN & V.K.MOHANAN, JJ.
          ---------------------------------------------
                   A.F.A.No. 7 of 1999
           ---------------------------------------------
          Dated this the 25th day of March, 2008

                      J U D G M E N T

Mohanan,J:

          The defendants in a suit i.e., O.S.No.316/1982

in    the    Court       of     the      Subordinate     Judge,

Thiruvananthapuram are the appellants herein.            In this

appeal, the challenge is against the judgment dated

5.3.1998 of this Court in A.S.No.121 of 1994. The prayer

of the appellants herein          is to set aside the above

mentioned judgment dated 5.3.1998 and to restore the

revised preliminary judgment and decree dated 30.1.1993

in O.S.No.316 of 1982. According to the appellants, the

judgment of this Court in A.S.No.121 of 1994 is illegal,

arbitrary and perverse since the above judgment of this

Court was passed without jurisdiction as the same was

against the judgment of this Court in A.S.No.273 of 1984

whereby the case was remanded to the trial court for a

revised judgment in the light of the observations and

findings entered into by this Court in that judgment.

According to the appellants, the            revised preliminary

A.F.A.No. 7 of 1999

                             :-2-:

judgment and decree passed by the trial court is fully in

terms of the remand order passed by this Court in

A.S.No.273 of 1984 and hence the revised preliminary

judgment and decree passed by the trial court has to be

restored and the judgment of the learned Single Judge

in A.S.No.121 of 1994 is to be set aside.

      2.     The suit is for partition filed by the

respondents herein.       At the time of filing the suit,

originally there was only one defendant who is the first

appellant herein.     The second appellant herein was

impleaded as the second defendant in the suit on the

strength of the judgment of this Court in A.S.No.273 of

1984.

      3. The plaint averments are as follows:-

             The plaintiffs and the first defendant are the

children of late Madhavan Pillai and the plaint schedule

property belonged to him as per the partition deed of

1119 M.E. After his death, the plaintiffs and the first

defendant are entitled to the plaint schedule property in

equal shares as they are legal heirs of deceased

A.F.A.No. 7 of 1999

                            :-3-:

Madhavan Pillai. According to the plaintiffs, the parties

are Hindu Vellalas formerly governed by the Nanjinad

Vellala Act and are at present governed by the Hindu

Succession Act in the matter of inheritance and

succession.      So, according to the plaintiffs, they are

entitled to 2/3 share and the first defendant is entitled to

1/3 share in the property. It is their further case that in

spite of repeated demands and issuing lawyer notice

finally to the first defendant to effect partition and settle

the matter amicably, the first defendant was not

prepared for the same and hence the suit was filed for

partition and separate possession of 1/3 share each in

the schedule property.

      4.     The first defendant had filed a detailed

written statement raising the following contentions:-

      The deceased Madhavan Pillai had another son by

name Sankaralingom Pillai who died on 11.9.1976.        The

schedule property was the ancestral property in the

hands of Madhavan Pillai, to which the said Madhavan

Pillai and his two sons alone are entitled to.          The

A.F.A.No. 7 of 1999

                            :-4-:

deceased Madhavan Pillai had got 1/3 right only in the

schedule property and the first defendant and his

deceased brother Sankaralingom Pillai got 1/3 right

each.       It    is also averred  that   the    deceased

Sankaralingam       Pillai left  behind   his    daughter

Smt.Meena and she is entitled to get 1/3 share to which

her father was entitled to. The mother of the plaintiffs,

the first defendant and the deceased Sankaralingam

Pillai owned and possessed 1 acre of land in

Mannanthala in Trivandrum. According to the first

defendant, there was an oral agreement in the year 1964

that in case that property in Mannanthala having an

extent of 1 acre is given to the plaintiffs, they will not

claim any right over the plaint schedule property and

according to such settlement, the plaintiffs were given

that 1 acre of property which belonged to the mother of

the plaintiffs, the first defendant and the deceased

Sankaralingam Pillai and hence, according to the first

defendant, plaintiffs are estopped from claiming any

share in the plaint schedule property.  It is also averred

A.F.A.No. 7 of 1999

                             :-5-:

that the suit is bad for non joinder of parties as one of the

sharers, Smt.Meena is not impleaded in the suit. It is also

denied that the plaintiffs have requested for partition and

further stated that they have already sent a reply to the

lawyer notice sent by the plaintiffs.

       5. Based upon the rival pleadings, the trial court

initially framed seven issues and during the trial,

evidences were adduced and the plaintiffs' evidence is

only the oral testimony of PW1 and there was no

documentary evidence from the side of the plaintiffs.

From the side of defendants, Dws.1 to 3 were examined

and they have produced Exts.B1 to B3 documents.

Ext.X1 is also marked as the document produced by the

witnesses. While answering issue No.3, the trial court

has found that the plaint schedule property which was in

the hands of late Madhavan Pillai is an ancestral

property. Finally by judgment dated 31.3.1984, the trial

court had found that at the time of death of Madhavan

Pillai, he had 2/3 share in the plaint schedule property

and since Madhavan Pillai had died subsequent to the

A.F.A.No. 7 of 1999

                             :-6-:

commencement of the Hindu Succession Act, as per

Section 8 of the said Act, both the plaintiffs and the first

defendant would get the said 2/3 share of late Madhavan

Pillai in the plaint schedule property in equal shares and

thus the court below found that each of the plaintiffs is

entitled to get 1/3 of 2/3 share in the schedule property.

Accordingly, a preliminary decree was passed declaring

that each of the plaintiffs is entitled to 1/3 of 2/3 share in

the plaint schedule property and the plaintiffs would

apply for a commission to effect partition in the final

decree.

      6.     Challenging the above finding and allotment

of share, the first appellant, who is the sole defendant at

that time, preferred A.S.No.273 of 1984 before this

Court. Suffice to say, the plaintiffs therein who are the

respondents herein did not file any appeal or cross

objection against the finding of the trial court. Going by

the judgment of this Court in A.S.No.273 of 1984, dated

17.3.1992 it can be seen that the only point which was

materially raised before this Court was the paternity or

A.F.A.No. 7 of 1999

                           :-7-:

legitimacy of Smt.Meena who is the second appellant

herein. No other point was canvassed for the

consideration of this Court and as such, all other

findings arrived on by the trial court in its judgment

dated 31.3.1984 became final.     In the appeal also, this

Court found that admittedly, the plaint schedule

property was the ancestral property of the family. By

the same judgment, it was further found that the second

appellant herein who was not a party to the suit is the

legitimate daughter of late Sankaralingam Pillai who

was none other than the son of late Madhavan Pillai- the

father of the plaintiffs and the first defendant.      This

Court had also found that Smt.Meena was not made as a

necessary party to the suit in spite of objection raised by

the first defendant- the first appellant herein and

therefore, this Court found that the suit was bad for non

joinder of necessary parties. Thus, this Court remanded

the suit to the lower court so as to enable the plaintiffs

to implead Smt.Meena also as a party to the suit. Thus,

it can be seen that in appeal, this Court had found that

A.F.A.No. 7 of 1999

                            :-8-:

the second appellant herein is a necessary party to the

suit as she is also entitled to get share of the property

and for such adjudication, the matter was remanded.

The finding of this Court that the plaint schedule

property was an ancestral property of the family has also

become final as against the plaintiffs as the said finding

is not challenged before any higher forum and that

finding became final not only for the above reason, but

for the reason that the trial court had also found that the

property in question was the ancestral property of the

family and that finding was not challenged by the

plaintiffs.

      7.     Thus, on the basis of the remand order, i.e.,

judgment dated 17.3.1992 in A.S.No. 273 of 1984, the

suit was again taken for consideration and in terms of

the above judgment dated 17.3.1992, the second

appellant herein had been impleaded therein as the

second defendant      as per order dated 27.7.1992 in

I.A.No.2581 of 1992.        Finally, by judgment dated

30.1.1993 in O.S.No.316 of 1982, the trial court

A.F.A.No. 7 of 1999

                            :-9-:

disposed of the suit giving a decree for partition and

separate possession whereby it was held that each of

the plaintiffs is entitled to get 1/12 share of the suit

property and both the defendants are allowed to take

5/12 share each in the suit property. Further, as per the

trial court judgment, the equitable relief claimed by the

defendants would be considered in the final decree

proceedings at the time of actual division.

      8.     Aggrieved by the trial court judgment dated

30.1.1993 in O.S.No.316 of 1982, the plaintiffs who are

respondents herein preferred        A.S.No.121 of 1994

before this Court.    This Court by judgment dated 5th

March, 1998 found that the suit property originally

belonged to Mrs.Kolamma Ammal, mother of late

Madhavan Pillai and not an ancestral property in his

hands. On the basis of such finding, this Court further

held that on Madhavan Pillai's death, his four children,

who are two plaintiffs, first defendant and late

Sankaralingam Pillai     take <     share each and late

Sankaralingam Pillai's    share devolved on the second

A.F.A.No. 7 of 1999

                          :-10-:

appellant/second defendant.     Thus, accordingly, the

appeal was allowed and the revised preliminary decree

passed by the trial court is modified declaring that the

plaintiffs are entitled to = share, first defendant is

entitled to < share so also the second defendant is

entitled to < share in the property.  The above finding

and allotment of shares are challenged in this appeal.

      9.     We have heard learned Senior counsel

appearing       for the appellants  Sri.R.D.Shenoi     and

Mr.G.S.Reghunath, learned counsel appearing for the

respondents.

      10. In his persuasive argument, Mr.R.D.Shenoi,

the Senior Counsel submits that the ancestral property

of late Madhavan Pillai belongs to the plaintiffs, the first

defendant who are the children of late Madhavan Pillai

and Smt.Meena, daughter of late Sankaralingam Pillai.

According to counsel, the property in question originally

belonged to one late Sankaralingam Pillai (Senior), the

father of late Madhavan Pillai and late Madhavan Pillai

got the property as per Ext.B1 partition deed dated

A.F.A.No. 7 of 1999

                           :-11-:

13.7.1119.       From Ext.B1, it is crystal clear that the

property originally belonged to late Sankaralingam Pillai

(Senior) who purchased the same with his own funds.

The learned Senior counsel submits that the specific

case put forward by the defendants is that the property

in question was the ancestral property in the hands of

late Madhavan Pillai which was inherited from his father

late Sankaralingam Pillai (Senior) and therefore,

according to the defendants, late Madhavan Pillai and

deceased Sankaralingam Pillai have got right by birth in

the property even during the life time of their father.

Thus, it is submitted that the share due to the brother

deceased Sankaralingam Pillai will be vested on his

daughter Smt.Meena who is the additional second

defendant. The learned counsel further argued that the

trial court had held that the suit property is the

ancestral property in the hands of late Madhavan Pillai,

but it was found that the second appellant/second

defendant was not a legitimate issue of the deceased

Sankaralingam Pillai who is the brother of the first

A.F.A.No. 7 of 1999

                            :-12-:

defendant/the first appellant herein. It is also pointed

out by counsel that as per the earlier finding of the trial

court, each of the plaintiffs is entitled to claim 1/3 out of

2/3 share and the first defendant is entitled to get 1/3

share. According to the learned counsel, those findings

of the trial court are final as far as the plaintiffs are

concerned as they did not challenge those findings.

Counsel further pointed out that it is the first appellant

who challenged the judgment of the court below to the

extent to which it was held that each of the plaintiffs is

entitled to claim 1/3 out of 2/3 share of the property and

the first defendant is entitled to the only remaining 1/3

share     and there was no share to the illegitimate

daughter of the deceased Sankaralingam Pillai.           So,

according to counsel, the finding of the trial court that

the property in question was an ancestral property of

the family became final.

      11. It is further argued by the learned Senior

counsel that the above findings of the trial court are not

challenged in appeal by the plaintiffs, and those contra

A.F.A.No. 7 of 1999

                          :-13-:

contentions were not taken even at the time of hearing

of the appeal which was preferred by the first defendant

i.e.,A.S.No.273 of 1984. By judgment dated 17.3.1992 in

A.S.No.273 of 1984, this Court had found that the

property in question is an ancestral property and also

found that the second appellant herein who was not

impleaded as necessary party to the suit is entitled to

get share in the property and for that purpose and for

the proper allotment of share to the second appellant,

the suit was remanded with a direction for impleading

the second appellant as additional defendant in the suit.

On the basis of the above materials, the learned counsel

for the appellants fervently submits that the finding

arrived on by both the trial court as well as this Court in

appeal, that the property in question is an ancestral

property in the hands of late Madhavan Pillai became

final and the said finding is not disturbed in any appeal

or other proceedings in any other higher forum.

Therefore, according to the learned counsel, the finding

arrived by this Court as per the impugned judgment is

A.F.A.No. 7 of 1999

                            :-14-:

not correct and beyond its appellate jurisdiction.

Another point advanced by the learned counsel for the

appellants is that the finding of the trial court as well as

this Court regarding the legitimacy of the second

appellant/second defendant Smt.Meena is also not

challenged by the plaintiffs and therefore, the second

appellant/second defendant is also entitled to get share

in the plaint schedule property and the only point to be

determined is the extent of share to be allotted to the

parties in the suit and how the same shall be allotted.

      12. Per      contra,   Mr.G.S.Raghunath,      learned

counsel appearing for the respondents, supporting the

finding arrived on by this Court in A.S.No.121 of 1994

submits that the property in question is not an ancestral

property, but it is a self acquired property of late

Sankaralingam Pillai (Senior), the grandfather of the

plaintiffs and the first defendant. According to learned

counsel for the respondents, by judgment dated

17.3.1992 in A.S.No.273 of 1984, this Court had

remanded the matter for fresh disposal and it was an

A.F.A.No. 7 of 1999

                           :-15-:

open remand and hence, fresh issues can be raised. It is

also submitted by counsel that the findings of the trial

court initially were wrong and based upon the remand

order, the matter was considered again and therefore,

they can challenge all the wrong findings arrived on by

the court below initially. According to counsel, the real

position is clear from Ext.B1 document that the property

was purchased by late Sankaralingam Pillai (Senior) by

using the dowry amount and hence it cannot be said that

it is an ancestral property, but on the other hand the

wife of late Sankaralingam Pillai (Senior) has also right

over the property.     Thus, supporting the judgment of

the learned single Judge, the learned counsel for the

respondents submits that there is no ground to interfere

by this Court in appeal, against the finding arrived on by

the learned Single Judge.

      13. We have anxiously considered the rival

contentions and also perused the materials and the

evidence available on record. We have carefully perused

the judgments of the trial court and also the judgments

A.F.A.No. 7 of 1999

                          :-16-:

of the learned Single Judge of this Court.

      14. As mentioned earlier, while answering to

issue No.3 in para 8 of the trial court judgment dated

31.3.1984, the trial court had held that so by birth, the

first defendant and his brother late Sankaralingam Pillai

got right in the schedule property, which was in the

hands of late Madhavan Pillai as ancestral property as

per Ext.B1. It was also found that late Madhavan Pillai

had only 1/3 right.     Since    Smt.Meena, the second

appellant/second defendant was found to be the

illegitimate child of late Sankaralingam Pillai     by the

trial court, on his death, his 1/3 right in the schedule

property devolved on late Madhavan Pillai as his legal

heir. So according to the trial court, at the time of death

of Madhavan Pillai, he had 2/3 share in the schedule

property and since Madhavan Pillai died subsequent to

the Hindu Succession Act, both the plaintiffs and the

first defendant would get the said 2/3 share of

Madhavan Pillai in the schedule property in equal

shares. So, according to the trial court, the property in

A.F.A.No. 7 of 1999

                           :-17-:

question is an ancestral property of late Madhavan Pillai

and the first defendant is entitled to 1/3 share of the

plaint schedule property.    Though the trial court found

that the property in question was an ancestral property,

allotment was made in such a manner only on the

finding and footing that Smt.Meena is not a legitimate

child of the deceased Sankaralingam Pillai. Since the

plaintiffs did not challenge the above finding or in the

absence of any cross objection in the appeal suit

preferred by the plaintiffs in A.S.No.273 of 1984, the

above finding of the trial court has become final and the

plaintiffs are estopped from re-agitating the issue.

      15. It is equally important to note that the trial

court during the trial, after the remand, confined to the

points as discussed and directed by this Court at the

time of disposing of the appeal and therefore, there is no

illegality committed by the trial court while disposing of

the suit. But, on the other hand, this Court at the time

of disposing of A.S.No.121 of 1994 under the guise of

appeal went beyond the scope of the remand order and

A.F.A.No. 7 of 1999

                             :-18-:

such    exercise     of   the   powers     virtually  barred

by the principles of res judicata. The operative portion

of the order of remand reads as follows:-

                 "The court below shall dispose of the
          suit having regard to the finding of this
          Court    that  Meena     is the   legitimate
          daughter of Sankaralingam Pillai and the
          court shall re-allot the shares to the
          parties in accordance with law."

From the above order of remand, it is crystal clear that

the task given to the trial court is to re-allot the shares

to the parties in the light of the finding of this court in

appeal that Smt.Meena who is the second appellant

herein/additional second defendant is the legitimate

daughter of late Sankaralingam Pillai. The other issue

whether the property is an ancestral property,          has

already been settled as per the finding of the trial court

as per its preliminary judgment and as per the finding of

this Court in appeal at the first time. As stated earlier,

the above findings of the trial court as well as this Court

became final since the respondents herein who are the

plaintiffs did not challenge the above finding of this

A.F.A.No. 7 of 1999

                             :-19-:

Court, in appeal or in any other forum and also due to

the failure of the plaintiffs in challenging the finding of

the trial court by filing an appeal or by filing a cross

objection in A.S.No.273 of 1984.                In the above

circumstances, the trial court has rightly confined to the

points for which the case was remanded and hence in

appeal, this Court ought not have reopened the issue

regarding the nature of the property and such an

interference will amount to indirect interference with

the   remand       order   and        such    interference   is

impermissible. Even otherwise, the same is barred by

the principles of res judicata.

      16. In this respect, it is relevant to refer to a

decision of this Court in Saraswathy Amma v.

Karthiyani Pillai (2008(1) KLT 784).                In the said

decision, this Court had held in para 4 as follows:-

               "Had the Appellate Court dismissed the
       appeal in toto the aggrieved party could have
       maintained a Second Appeal. Of course that can
       only be in accordance with the provisions
       contained in S.100 of Civil Procedure Code. The
       appellant in that Second Appeal is not entitled to

A.F.A.No. 7 of 1999

                              :-20-:

       agitate questions of fact. It is to be noted that
       if the order of remand is in the nature of an
       interlocutory   order    the   parties  are   not
       aggrieved. But if the Appellate Court decides
       any     point  and   remands    the    case   for
       reconsideration of other point, the aggrieved
       party must challenge those findings by filing a
       Miscellaneous Appeal before this Court. If he
       fails to challenge the point decided by the
       Appellate Court on its merits he will be
       precluded from challenging the correctness of
       that finding at a subsequent stage.       So the
       aggrieved party is entitled to challenge all
       concluded findings of the lower Appellate Court
       in a remand order. But that challenge can only
       be in accordance with the provisions contained in
       S.100 of Civil Procedure Code. The party cannot
       challenge a finding of fact on the ground that
       the appeal is against an order of remand. So an
       aggrieved party can challenge concluded findings
       in an order of remand provided substantial
       questions of law arise. If the contention of the
       respondents is accepted, the aggrieved party
       will be left without any remedy. He will not be in
       a position to challenge the points decided by the
       lower Appellate Court by filing a C.M.A. He will
       not be in a position to challenge the correctness
       of that finding in a regular appeal to be filed
       against the decree passed after remand as the
       same is barred by res judicata."

In another decision in Neelakanta Pillai v. Madhava

Kurup (2007(2) KLT 340), a learned Judge of this Court

A.F.A.No. 7 of 1999

                             :-21-:

had held that the appellate court had confirmed the

findings of the trial court that the plaintiffs are not

entitled to get a permanent prohibitory injunction and

that they are not entitled to get a decree for fixation of

boundary. It was also held that the remand was made

only for the limited purpose of claiming the relief of

recovery      of   possession   based on    title  and   for

incorporating a relief for declaration of title. It was also

held that the plaintiffs are, therefore, not entitled to

circumvent the remand order and get nullified the

findings therein under the guise of instituting a fresh

suit after withdrawing from the suit. Rule 1(3) of Order

XXIII is not intended for such a course being adopted.

On examining the facts and circumstances involved in

the present case in the light of the above decision, it

can be seen that the attempt of the plaintiffs, who were

the respondents herein, is to circumvent the findings in

the remand order indirectly without filing an appeal

against the earlier remand order. As stated earlier, the

question regarding the nature of the property as to

A.F.A.No. 7 of 1999

                            :-22-:

whether it is an ancestral property or not has become

final as per the preliminary judgment of the trial court

as well as the finding of this Court in A.S.No.273 of 1984

and especially in the absence of any contra finding by a

higher forum or a superior court against the finding of

the learned Single Judge and on failure on the part of

the plaintiff to challenge the finding of the trial court or

at least filing a cross objection when the defendants

preferred the appeal which culminated in the judgment

dated 17.3.1992 in A.S.No.273 of 1984. Thus, the final

judgment of the trial court is fully justified as it is

confined to the point for which the case was remanded

by this Court.      In view of the bar contained under

Section 10 of the Code of Civil Procedure, no such

settled issue can be reopened under the guise of appeal

and the divergent finding arrived on by the learned

single Judge as per the judgment in A.S.No.121 of 1994

is incorrect and unwarranted. Therefore, the judgment

of the learned Single Judge in A.S.No.121 of 1994 is

liable to be set aside.

A.F.A.No. 7 of 1999

                           :-23-:

      17. It is also pertinent to note that while

disposing of A.S.No.273 of 1984, His Lordship Mr.Justice

K.G. Balakrishnan (as he then was) found that the

second appellant/second defendant is the legitimate

daughter of late Sankaralingam Pillai (Jr.) and therefore,

the suit was bad for non joinder of parties as one of the

sharers Smt.Meena is not impleaded in the case and the

suit was remanded for the limited purpose of impleading

her as necessary party to the suit and for re-allotting the

share to the parties in accordance with law. From the

discussions and observations contained in the above

judgment and from the order of remand, it is crystal

clear that this Court, while maintaining the finding of

the trial court that the property in question was an

ancestral property, reiterated the same by stating as

seen in para 6 of the judgment that "admittedly, plaint

schedule property was the ancestral property of the family".

It appears that no argument was advanced before this

Court while hearing the above appeal, to canvass that

A.F.A.No. 7 of 1999

                           :-24-:

the property in question was not an ancestral property.

As stated earlier, neither any appeal nor any cross

objection was filed by the plaintiffs against the finding of

the trial court regarding the nature of the property. It is

also not in dispute that no further appeal was filed by

the plaintiffs/respondents herein against the above

finding of this Court regarding the nature of the

property as per judgment in A.S.No.273 of 1984. So, the

finding of both the trial court as well as the learned

single Judge that the property in question is an ancestral

property has become final. It is, in the light of the above

discussion and direction, the trial court passed the

subsequent judgment       allotting shares to both the

appellants and defendants and especially, on the legal

finding that the property in question is an ancestral

property. Therefore, we are of the view that as long as

the finding of the trial court as well as this court in

appeal regarding the nature of the property became

final and undisturbed, this Court committed a grave

mistake in reopening the issue during the second round

A.F.A.No. 7 of 1999

                           :-25-:

and in coming into a divergent conclusion that the

property in question is not an ancestral property.

Hence, we are of opinion that on that count alone, the

judgment of the learned single Judge dated 5.3.1998 in

A.S.No.121 of 1984 is liable to be set aside.

      18. In this juncture, it is pertinent to note that the

questions as to whether the second appellant/second

defendant is entitled to any share and what is the extent

of such share, if any, depend upon two answers to the

questions as to whether the property in question is an

ancestral       property  and     whether    the     second

appellant/additional second defendant is the legitimate

daughter of the deceased Sankaralingam Pillai. If the

answers are positive, certainly Smt.Meena is entitled to

get 5/12 share of the plaint schedule property.

      19. In the light of our discussion and observation

made above, we have already found that the finding of

the learned single Judge as per the impugned judgment

that the property in question is not an ancestral property

is factually and legally incorrect and in that connection,

A.F.A.No. 7 of 1999

                           :-26-:

we have to uphold the finding arrived on by the trial

court as well as this Court by judgment dated 17.3.1992

in A.S.No.273 of 1984. With respect to the question

regarding the paternity and legitimacy of the second

appellant/second defendant, that finding is also not

disturbed by the impugned judgment. Therefore, the

only question remained to be answered, in case we are

reopening the issue, is as to whether the property in

question is an ancestral property. As a matter of fact

and settled position of law, the learned Judge was not

correct in reopening the issue which became final as per

the earlier judgment of this Court and as per the

judgment of the trial court and especially when there is

no challenge against the judgment of the learned single

Judge in A.S.No.273 of 1984.

      20. Still    then, since    the   learned   counsel

appearing for the respondents has strenuously argued

that the property in question is not an ancestral property

and therefore, the plaintiffs are entitled to = share and

defendants 1 and 2 are entitled to get < share each, we

A.F.A.No. 7 of 1999

                           :-27-:

are inclined to consider the above question for the

purpose of completion.

      21. Mr.Raghunath, learned counsel appearing for

the respondents submits that as per the recital

contained in Ext.B1, it can be seen that the property in

question is a stridhana property belonging to Kolamma

Ammal who is the mother of late Madhavan Pillai. Thus,

strongly supporting the impugned judgment, the learned

counsel submits that it is not an ancestral property in

the hands of late Madhavan Pillai and therefore, the

finding of the trial court has to be held as incorrect and

illegal as done by the learned single Judge. In support

of the above submission, the learned counsel placed

reliance on a decision of the Privy Council in Sellamani

Ammal v. Thillai Ammal (AIR (33) 1946 Privy Council

185) wherein it was held that the separate property

inherited from mother's side is separate property and

there was no blending with joint family property and

testamentary disposition was valid. The learned counsel

also placed reliance on the decision reported in

A.F.A.No. 7 of 1999

                         :-28-:

Narinjan Das v. Krishan Lal (AIR 1941 Lahore 31). In

the above decision, it was held that absolute devise to

the widow would not be avoided by the adoption. It was

also held that the property was self-acquired in the

hands of the widow as it came to her by will from her

husband. It was also held that similarly, the property

was self-acquired in the hands of her adopted son as it

came to her by will by her adoptive mother. On the

strength of the decision reported in Vijaya College

Trust v. Kumta Co-op. Arecanut Sales Society Ltd.

(AIR 1995 Karnataka 35), Mr.Raghunath, the learned

counsel appearing for the respondents further submits

that in order to come with the definition of ancestral

property, the property must have been inherited by a

male Hindu from his father's father etc. and property

inherited from female cannot be treated as an ancestral

property. On the death of mother, widow the property

is being devolved upon the sons and therefore, the same

cannot be treated as an ancestral property.

A.F.A.No. 7 of 1999

                           :-29-:

      22. Per contra, Mr.R.D.Shenoi, the learned Senior

Counsel submits that the very recital contained in

Ext.B1 partition deed to which the late Madhavan Pillai

is a party shows that the property was acquired by the

father of late Madhavan Pillai, late Sankaralingam Pillai

(Senior) benami in the name of his wife late Kolamma

Ammal and he himself had settled the mode of

devolution of the property after his death. It is also

submitted that late Madhavan Pillai and other children

of late Sankaralingam Pillai (senior) treated the property

as ancestral only and hence, the daughters of late

Madhavan Pillai cannot now plead to the contrary. The

learned counsel further argued that though the property

was acquired in the name of Kolamma Ammal by her

husband with his own funds, there are no other facts or

transaction to show that the acquisition was intended for

her exclusive benefit only.      Thus, according to the

counsel, in such circumstances it has to be held that it is

the property of late Sankaralingam Pillai (Sr.) alone and

it is an ancestral property in the hands of late Madhavan

A.F.A.No. 7 of 1999

                            :-30-:

Pillai as per the partition deed Ext.B1. In support of the

above plea, the learned counsel very much placed

reliance on the decision of the Privy Council in Sura

Lakshmiah Chetty and others v. Kothandarama

Pillai (1925) I.A.286 (48 Madras 605). It is also argued

by the learned counsel that the learned Single Judge

failed to note that there is no claim from the daughters

of Kolamma Ammal who are otherwise entitled to get

share in the property, and therefore, it has to be treated

as the property of late Sankaralingam Pillai (Sr.) and

hence the property was dealt with by his sons alone as

ancestral property only. The learned counsel further

submits that the learned Single Judge was not correct in

arriving at a conclusion that the property is a stridhana

property and the same is unfounded, with reference to

the pleadings as well as the reference to the evidence

available on record. It is the definite case of the learned

counsel that the plaintiffs never claimed the property as

stridhana property of their grand mother.          On the

strength of Ext.B1 partition deed, the counsel submits

A.F.A.No. 7 of 1999

                              :-31-:

that at the most, what can be seen is that late

Sankaralingam Pillai (Sr.) had created only life estate in

favour of his wife Kolamma Ammal and nothing more.

On a close perusal of Ext.B1 deed, it can be seen that

the property in question is an ancestral property in the

hands of late Madhavan Pillai which he inherited from

his father late Sankaralingam Pillai (Sr.). Nothing is

discernible from Ext.B1 to show as to how Smt.Kolamma

Ammal got the property to consider it as a stridhana

property of Kolamma Ammal.

      23. Page 530 of Raghavacharia's Hindu Law 7th

Edition contained Chapter XIII, Stridhana and Section

468 deals with definition of Stridhana and Section 469

deals with sources of acquisition. Section 472 deals with

gifts subsequent to marriage which runs as follows:-

                "472. Gifts subsequent to marriage.-
       Properties given to a woman subsequent to
       her marriage might have been given to her
       either by her husband or by others. When a
       husband gives properties to his wife, either
       under a gift inter vivos or by will, it is a
       question of construction of the deed of gift
       or will, whether the husband intended her to

A.F.A.No. 7 of 1999

                             :-32-:

       take     the property   absolutely   as    her
       stridhana property or only for a qualified
       interest. The later judicial view seems to be
       that in the absence of words in the deed
       indicating   the  contrary    intention,   the
       presumption is that the donee takes the
       property as an absolute owner and this view
       seems to be more in consonance with the
       present-day sentiment of the Hindus which,
       owing,     to the   influence   of    western
       civilisation  and    culture,   abhors     any
       distinction being created in the legal rights
       of parties, merely because of sex. Properties
       given or bequeathed to a woman by her
       relations or strangers during coverture or
       widowhood are her Stridhana except that
       under the Dayabhaga and the Mithila
       Schools, property given by a stranger during
       coverture is subject to her husband's
       dominion and becomes her absolute property
       only after his death."
                                 (underline supplied)

From the above underlined portion of the above quoted

passage, it can be seen that there must be sufficient

evidence either documentary or oral to show that

whether the husband had intended the wife to take the

property absolutely as her stridhana property or only for

a qualified interest. In the present case, there is no

evidence to show that absolute right was given to

A.F.A.No. 7 of 1999

                             :-33-:

Kolamma Ammal.         But Ext.B1 would show that what

Sankaralingam Pillai(Sr.) intended was to give a life

estate to his wife Kolamma Ammal. It is also clear as to

how the property would devolve upon his son on his

death. It is also vivid that no share was intended to give

the daughters. The facts and circumstances also show

that the daughters of late Sankaralingam Pillai(Sr.) have

never demanded for share in the above property. The

admitted case of the plaintiffs is also to the effect that

the property in question belongs to late Madhavan Pillai

and therefore, the real and deserving claimants are only

plaintiffs and first appellant who is the first defendant in

the suit.

      24.      The 16th Edition of Hindu Law by Mulla is

also an authoritative text on the subject. Chapter X of

the same deals with women's property -- part I about

Stridhana. In the above text, Section 113 deals with

stridhana, according to the Smritis, that is, the sacred

writings of Rishis or sages of antiquity.             Manu

enumerates six kinds of stridhana which reads as

A.F.A.No. 7 of 1999

                              :-34-:

follows:-

        "1.     Gifts made before the nuptial fire,
        explained by Katyayana to mean gifts made at
        the time of marriage before the fire which is
        the witness of the nuptial (adhyagni).
        2. Gifts made at the bridal procession, that is,
        says Katyayana, while the bride is being led
        from the residence of her parents to that of
        her husband (adhyavahanika). Reference may be
        made to the undermentioned case (Vinod Kumar
        v. State of Punjab [(1982) 84 Punj.L.R.337 (F.B.)
        (dowry articles and traditional presents given at
        the wedding)].
        3.      Gifts made in token of love, that is says
        Katyayana, those made though affection by her
        father-in-law and mother-in-law (pritidatta),
        and those made at the time of her making
        obeisance at the feet of elders (padavandanika)
        4. Gifts made by father.
        5. Gifts made by the mother.
        6. Gifts made by the brother (Manu, ix, 194)"

In page 163 of Mulla's Hindu Law under Section 125

deals with sources of woman's property which reads as

follows:-

      "125. Sources of woman's property.-- A Hindu
      female may acquire property from diverse source.
      Several descriptions of property that may be
      lawfully acquired by a Hindu female are:
      (1) Gifts and bequests from relations[ ' 126].
      (2) Gifts and bequests from strangers [' 127].
      (3) Property obtained on partition [ ' 128].

A.F.A.No. 7 of 1999

                               :-35-:

      (4) Property given in lieu of maintenance [ ' 129].
      (5) Property acquired by inheritance [' 130].
      (6) Property acquired by mechanical arts [ ' 131].
      (7) Property obtained by compromise [ ' 132].
      (8) Property acquired by adverse possession [' 133].
      (9) Property purchased with stridhana or with
      savings of income of stridhana [ ' 134].
      (10) Property acquired from sources other than
      those mentioned above [ ' 135].
        Bequests stand on the same footing as gifts
      (Judoo Nath Bussunt Coomar (1873) 19 W.R.264)"

Among the above lists, item No.9 is shown as property

purchased with stridhana or with savings of stridhana.

In the light of the terms contained in the above quoted

passage from the Mulla's Hindu Law, it has to be

established by the respondents-plaintiffs that the

property in question was purchased with the stridhana

in order to come into a different conclusion that the

property in question is not an ancestral property.

      25.      The learned Single Judge casually observed

that the property belonged to Kolamma Ammal and her

mother Kali Ammal and that they acquired the property

with the funds given by late Sankaralingam Pillai (Sr.).

But, the learned Single Judge did not discuss and enter

A.F.A.No. 7 of 1999

                              :-36-:

any finding regarding the source of fund before holding

that the property belongs to Kolamma Ammal and her

mother Kali Ammal.            While       making the above

observation, the learned single Judge failed to note the

recital contained in Ext.B1 that the property belongs to

the father of parties to Ext.B1.           If that be so, the

property is an ancestral property at the hands of late

Madhavan Pillai and to take a different view, the court

has to come into a definite finding as to how Kolamma

Ammal and her mother Kali Ammal got the fund so as to

name them as owners of the properties.            The learned

Judge stated that "it is therefore clear that the properties

belonged to late Madhavan Pillai's mother Kolamma Ammal. It was

acquired in her name, may be with the funds provided by her

husband" (emphasis supplied).         The above underlined

portion of the observation of the learned Judge assumes

much importance.       It is crystal clear from the above

words that the property was acquired by using the self

acquired funds of the late Sankaralingam Pillai (Sr.) and

A.F.A.No. 7 of 1999

                          :-37-:

therefore, late Madhavan Pillai has got right as an

ancestral property. There is no evidence to show that

the property in question was acquired by using the

stridhana fund of late Kolamma Ammal. The specific

recital contained in Ext.B1 regarding the right of

Kolamma Ammal is only life estate which would further

confirm that she has no absolute right over the property

and the modes of devolution of the property among the

sons are also finding a place in Ext.B1 and that is also

another factor unerringly and conclusively establishes

that it is an ancestral property. The daughters of late

Sankaralingam Pillai have not made parties to Ext.B1

and they did not raise any claim with respect to the

property of late Sankaralingam Pillai (Senior) and hence

it can safely be concluded that the property in question

at the hands of late Madhavan Pillai is an ancestral

property.

      26. In Sura Lakshmiah Chetty's case (cited

supra), on appeal from the High Court at Madras, the

Privy Council held that "when it is alleged that a purchase of

A.F.A.No. 7 of 1999

                              :-38-:

property in India by an Indian out of his own money, but in the

name of his wife, was made in pursuance of an ante-nuptial

agreement, and that consequently it is not to be regarded as a

benami transaction, the alleged anti-nuptial agreement, if oral,

must be proved by the clearest and most satisfactory evidence of

credible witnesses; it would be unwise to act upon oral evidence,

unless  there     was  contemporaneous   written   evidence   to

corroborate it". In the present case, the proved facts and

circumstances mentioned above are sufficient to hold

that the property in question is an ancestral property

and there is absolutely no evidence to show that the

property was purchased by using the stridhana property

of late Kolamma Ammal. Ext.B1 contained no indication

or recital to that effect. No other documentary evidence

was adduced by the plaintiffs to establish such claim.

Absolutely there is no oral evidence in this regard.

      27. We have no doubt about the position of law

settled through the decisions namely, Sellamani

Ammal v. Thillai Ammal (AIR (33) 1946 Privy Council

A.F.A.No. 7 of 1999

                           :-39-:

185), Narinjan Das v. Krishan Lal (AIR 1941 Lahore

31) and The Vijaya College Trust v. The Kumta Co-

operative Arecanut Sales Society Ltd. (AIR 1995

Karnataka 35), relied on by Mr.Raghunath, learned

counsel for the respondents.         In the absence of

necessary pleadings and concrete evidence to show that

the property in question belongs to the grandmother of

parties, namely Kolamma Ammal as her stridhana

property, the above contentions fail. Therefore, on

applying the principles laid down by the Privy Council

and in the light of the authorities mentioned above, it

can be seen that there is no specific pleading or

evidence from the side of the plaintiffs to show that the

property in question is purchased by using the stridhana

property of late Kolamma Ammal.        But, on the other

hand,    all    the available   evidence  including   the

documentary evidence and the conduct of the parties

unerringly established that the property in question is

an ancestral property in the hands of late Madhavan

Pillai.

A.F.A.No. 7 of 1999

                            :-40-:

      28. The observation and finding arrived on by the

learned single Judge in para 9 appears to be not correct.

Under the above circumstances, the finding of the

learned single Judge is absolutely unfounded and not at

all warranted and hence the judgment of the learned

single Judge is liable to be set aside.

      29. In the result, we allow this appeal and the

judgment dated 5.3.1998 in A.S.No.121 of 1994 is set

aside, restoring the finding of the trial court and we

further direct the trial court to dispose of O.S.No.316 of

1982 in accordance with law and in the light of the

revised preliminary judgment and decree passed by it as

per the judgment dated 30.1.1993 in O.S.No.316 of

1982. Parties are directed to bear their respective costs.




                                          P.R.RAMAN,
                                               Judge



                                        V.K.MOHANAN,
                                               Judge
MBS/

A.F.A.No. 7 of 1999

                       :-41-:

                              P.R.RAMAN &
                           V.K.MOHANAN, JJ.
                       --------------------------------------------




                              A.F.A.NO. 7 OF 1999
                           ------------------------------------




                                  J U D G M E N T




                              DATED: 25-03-2008

A.F.A.No. 7 of 1999

                       :-42-:


