

 IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

Bail Appl..No. 6295 of 2008()


1. RAJESWARI ASOKAN ALIAS SHEELA ASOKAN,
                      ...  Petitioner
2. G.ASOKAN, "AMBADY", PARUTHIYARA,

                        Vs



1. STATE OF KERALA, REPRESENTED BY THE
                       ...       Respondent

2. SUB INSPECTOR OF POLICE,

                For Petitioner  :SRI.N.SUKUMARAN

                For Respondent  :PUBLIC PROSECUTOR

The Hon'ble MRS. Justice K.HEMA

 Dated :14/10/2008

 O R D E R
                           K.HEMA, J.

               -----------------------------------------
                     B.A.No. 6295 of 2008
               -----------------------------------------

             Dated this the 14th October, 2008

                            O R D E R

      This petition is for anticipatory bail.

      2. The alleged offences are under Sections 498A and 34

of Indian Penal Code. According to prosecution, petitioners

are father-in-law and mother-in-law (accused 2 and 4) of the de

facto complainant. They, along with other accused, including

her husband, illtreated the de facto complainant by demanding

more dowry and money and sent her out of their house. She

was also physically tortured by them. Hence, a complaint was

filed by the de facto complainant before the Magistrate Court,

which was sent for investigation under Section 156(3) Cr.P.C

and a crime was registered.

      3. Learned counsel for petitioners submitted that the

petitioners are the mother-in-law and father-in-law, aged 68

years and 67 years respectively. The de facto complainant was

married by the first accused, who is their son, on 27.1.2008.

After the marriage, they were living together as husband and

wife at Bangalore. The petitioners have not committed any

  BA.6295/08                     2

offence as alleged. In fact, the petitioners are not greedy for

money or gold as evidenced from the facts mentioned in the

complaint itself. The complaint is Annexure-A2. As per the

allegations in the complaint, all the gold ornaments belonging

to the de facto complainant were handed over by accused 1

and 2 to the de facto complainant's father under a receipt. The

de facto complainant had 107 sovereigns and those were

returned to her father, as admitted in the complaint. In such

circumstances, petitioners seek anticipatory bail.

      4. Learned Public Prosecutor submitted that there are

allegations against the first petitioner, who is the mother-in-

law, that on the very same day of the marriage, she had taken

all the gold ornaments, except 'thali' from the de facto

complainant and she had made comments whether those were

genuine gold etc. However, it is submitted that the petitioners

may be directed to surrender before the investigating officer

for the purpose of investigation and subject to that, he has no

objection in granting bail to the petitioners, particularly,

considering their age.

      Hence, the following order is passed:

 BA.6295/08                     3

           Petitioners   shall   surrender    before    the

     Magistrate Court concerned within seven days from

     today and if bail application is filed, they shall be

     released on bail on their executing bond for

     Rs.25,000/- each with two solvent sureties each for

     the like sum to the satisfaction of the learned

     Magistrate, on the following conditions:

                i)     Petitioners shall report before the

                       investigating officer as and when

                       directed and make themselves

                       available for interrogation.

                ii)     Petitioners shall co-operate with

                       the investigation.

                iii)   Petitioners shall not commit any

                       offence while on bail and they

                       shall not influence or intimidate

                       any   witness    or  tamper     with

                       evidence and in case of breach of

                       this condition, bail is liable to be

                       cancelled.

     Petition is allowed.



                                 K.HEMA, JUDGE
vgs.


