

 IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

Bail Appl..No. 7547 of 2008()


1. BIJU @ VIJAYAKUMAR, POKATHU KIZHAKATHIL,
                      ...  Petitioner
2. THANKAMMA, POKATHU KIZHAKATHIL,
3. DAMODARAN, POKATHU KIZHAKATHIL,
4. AYYAPPAN, POKATHU KIZHAKATHIL,
5. ANITHA, POKATHU KIZHAKATHIL,

                        Vs



1. THE STATE OF KERALA,
                       ...       Respondent

2. THE SUB INSPECTOR OF POLICE,

                For Petitioner  :SRI.V.PREMCHAND

                For Respondent  :PUBLIC PROSECUTOR

The Hon'ble MRS. Justice K.HEMA

 Dated :15/12/2008

 O R D E R
                               K. HEMA, J.
        - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                        B.A. No. 7547 of 2008
        - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
          Dated this the 15th day of December,2008

                                 O R D E R

      Petition for anticipatory bail.

      2. The alleged offences are under sections 498A and 34

IPC. According to prosecution, 1st accused married de facto

complainant in the year 2004 and Rs.1 lakh and 25 sovereigns of

gold ornaments were given at the time of marriage. He

misappropriated the same and started demanding more dowry

from de facto complainant. First accused' close relatives who

are accused 2 to 5 also started harassing her. De facto

complainant also has a grievance that 1st accused is having a

deeper relationship with his sister-in-law (A3).

      3. Learned counsel for petitioners submitted that                    1st

accused found some shortage in the gold ornaments, which were

given to de facto complainant at the time of marriage. De facto

complainant revealed that those were taken by her father who

pledged the same. On account of this, there was a quarrel and

she left the matrimonial house. She filed a complaint before the

police station on 25-11-2008 alleging harassment. The parties

were called to the police station and as advised, they started

living  together.      But,     later,    she     gave      a    complaint to

Superintendent of Police, which was forwarded to the

Kayamkulam Police Station and a crime was registered.

BA 7547/08                         -2-

Petitioners apprehend arrest and detention. Petitioners 2 and 3 are

parents of 1st accused, 4th petitioner is the brother and 5th petitioner

is brother's wife. There was a compromise in the police station and

they started living together. But, later she went back to her parental

house and lodged a complaint before Superintendent of Police

instead of Kayamkulam Police station.

       4. This petition is opposed. Learned Public Prosecutor

submitted that after the dispute between the parties were settled at

the police station, husband and wife started living together. On the

second day 1st accused brutally assaulted de facto complainant and

she was forced to lodge a complaint. There are clear allegations

against 1st accused regarding the matrimonial cruelty, but as far as

petitioners 2 to 5 are concerned, he has no objection in granting

anticipatory bail on conditions.

       5. On hearing both sides, I am satisfied that petitioners 2 to 5

can be granted anticipatory bail on conditions. However, in the

nature of allegations made against 1st accused, it may not be proper

to grant anticipatory bail, since he is required for interrogation.

       6. Hence, the following order is passed:-

       (1)   Prayer for anticipatory bail by 1st petitioner is

            rejected. Hence, petitioner is directed to surrender

BA 7547/08                        -3-

           before the Magistrate court concerned or before

           the Investigating Officer without any delay and co-

           operate    with    the  investigation. Whether     he

           surrenders or not, police is at liberty to arrest him

           and proceed in accordance with law.

      2)   Petitioners 2 to 5 shall surrender before the

           Magistrate Court concerned and        they shall be

           released on bail, on their executing a bond for Rs.

           25,000/- each with two solvent sureties each, for

           the like amount, to the satisfaction of the learned

           Magistrate, on the following conditions:-

           i)    They    shall   make himself available for

                 interrogation by the Investigating Officer

                 as and when directed and co-operate with

                 the investigation.

           ii)   They shall not intimidate or influence any

                 witness or commit any offence while on

                 bail.

      This petition is partly allowed.

                                           K.HEMA, JUDGE.

mn.


