

 IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

Bail Appl No. 1842 of 2008()


1. SUKUMARAN, AGED 65 YEARS, PUTHENPURACKAL
                      ...  Petitioner

                        Vs



1. STATE OF KERALA REP. BY PUBLIC
                       ...       Respondent

                For Petitioner  :SRI.T.A.UNNIKRISHNAN

                For Respondent  : No Appearance

The Hon'ble MR. Justice R.BASANT

 Dated :31/03/2008

 O R D E R
                          R. BASANT, J.
            -------------------------------------------------
                     B.A. No.1842 of 2008
            -------------------------------------------------
           Dated this the 31st day of March, 2008

                               ORDER



      Application for anticipatory bail. The petitioner is the

father-in-law of the deceased.         The marriage took place on

29/3/2001. The spouses were blessed with two children aged 5

years and 3 years respectively.         On 10/2/08 the unfortunate

deceased attempted to commit suicide by consuming poison.

She was taken to the hospital. She continued in such a stage

in which her statement could not be recorded and ultimately

expired on 25/2/08.     On 26/2/08 a crime has been registered.

Allegations of matrimonial cruelty are seen raised only against

the petitioner/father-in-law, and not against the husband of the

deceased. The deceased had left behind no suicide note. The

petitioner is a 65 year old person. Investigation is in progress.

He apprehends imminent arrest.

 B.A. No.1842 of 2008           -: 2 :-

      2. The learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the

petitioner is absolutely innocent.     The allegation raised against

him is that he made demands for further amounts by way of

dowry from the deceased. The learned counsel for the petitioner

submits that there was not a whisper of such an allegation at an

earlier point of time. There were some disputes as to where the

body was to be cremated.      Because of such disputes, while the

body was at the mortuary, the complaint was filed raising such

false allegations.  In any view of the matter, the petitioner may

be granted anticipatory bail.      The sequence of events clearly

reveal that the decision to commit suicide was not in any way

prompted by any conduct on the part of the petitioner.         The

petitioner shall abide by all the appropriate conditions that this

Court may impose, submits the learned counsel for the

petitioner.

      3.  The learned Public Prosecutor does not oppose the

application. I have gone through the Case Diary. In particular,

the learned Public Prosecutor has flagged the statement of the

husband and I have gone through the same in detail.            It is

significant that no allegations are raised against the husband.

The    husband     categorically    asserts   that  there   was   a

disagreement/dispute between the husband and the wife and

they were not talking terms with each for a number of days prior

 B.A. No.1842 of 2008            -: 3 :-

to the date on which she committed suicide. There is absolutely

nothing to indicate that there was any such conduct on the part

of the petitioner that had triggered her to commit suicide except

the sweeping allegation for the anterior demands for dowry.

The brother of the deceased also had committed suicide, it is

submitted.

      4.    I am satisfied, in these circumstances, that the

petitioner can be granted anticipatory bail.          Appropriate

conditions can, of course, be imposed to ensure the interests of a

fair, efficient and expeditious investigation.

      5. In the result, this petition is allowed.       Following

directions are issued under Sec.438 of the Cr.P.C:

      (i) The petitioner shall appear before the learned

Magistrate having jurisdiction at 11 a.m. on 7/4/08. He shall be

released on regular bail on his executing a bond for Rs.25,000/-

with two solvent sureties each for the like sum to the satisfaction

of the learned Magistrate.

      (ii) The petitioner shall make himself available for

interrogation before the Investigating Officer between 10 a.m.

and 4 p.m. on 8/4/08 and 9/4/08.           During this period the

Investigator shall be at liberty to interrogate the petitioner in

custody and take all necessary steps for the proper conduct of

the investigation. Thereafter the petitioner shall appear before

  B.A. No.1842 of 2008           -: 4 :-

the Investigating Officer on all Mondays between 10 a.m. and

12 noon for a period of one month. Subsequently, he shall so

make      himself    available  for     interrogation     before the

Investigating     Officer     as   and   when       directed  by the

Investigating Officer in writing to do so.

      (iii) If the petitioner does not appear before the learned

Magistrate as directed in clause (i), directions issued above shall

thereafter stand revoked and the police shall be at liberty to

arrest the petitioner and deal with him in accordance with law as

if these directions were not issued at all.

      (iv) If the petitioner were arrested prior to his surrender

on 7/4/08 as directed in clause (i) above, he shall be released on

his executing a bond for Rs.25,000/- without any sureties

undertaking to appear before the learned Magistrate on 7/4/08.



                                                      Sd/-


                                             (R. BASANT, JUDGE)


Nan/


                 //true copy//

                                         P.S. to Judge

B.A. No.1842 of 2008  -: 5 :-


