

 IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

Bail Appl..No. 5343 of 2008()


1. AJO.K.JOSEPH, AGED 28 YEARS,
                      ...  Petitioner

                        Vs



1. THE STATE OF KERALA REPRESENTED BY THE
                       ...       Respondent

                For Petitioner  :SRI.S.SHANAVAS KHAN

                For Respondent  :PUBLIC PROSECUTOR

The Hon'ble MRS. Justice K.HEMA

 Dated :26/09/2008

 O R D E R
                             K.HEMA, J.
                -------------------------------------------------
                         B.A.No.5343 of 2008
                -------------------------------------------------
           Dated this the 26th day of September, 2008



                                O R D E R


     This petition is for anticipatory bail.

     2.   The alleged offence is under Section 498(A) IPC.

According to prosecution, petitioner and the defacto complainant

got married as per the Penthacostal rights. The petitioner was a

Roman Catholic and the defacto complainant was a member of

the scheduled caste, originally, but, they followed Penthacostal

belief, before their marriage. At the time of marriage,

Rs.60,000/- was given to the petitioner and he spent the same.

Thereafter, he started demanding more money.                      He went to

Sharjah and came back and again started demanding money.

After the marriage, when they were living together, he started

harassing stating that she is not beautiful, she is elder to him,

she belongs to a scheduled caste etc. This harassment continued

even over phone while he was at Sharjah.

     3.   Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the

marriage between the petitioner and the defacto complainant

BA No.5343/08                    2



was on 28.10.2007 and they were lived together only for 28 days.

Being a believer of Penthacostal principles, petitioner does not

believe in demanding dowry and he has not made any demands

for dowry. But, the defacto complainant married the petitioner

believing that he is affluent. But, after the marriage, she came

to understand that he is not so affluent as she expected.

     4.    Therefore, there was a withdrawal by the defacto

complainant as well as the family members from the petitioner.

The allegation that    he demanded money etc. is not correct.

Learned counsel for the petitioner also submitted that the

defacto complainant abandoned him and the efforts taken by him

to get her back were futile.       He was, therefore, forced to

reconvert as a Catholic and even though the case was referred to

Lok Adalath, it could not settled at Lok Adalath.

     5.    This petition is opposed. Learned public prosecutor

submitted that there was a demand for dowry. Though for the

wedding, no such demand was made, according to the defacto

complainant, Rs.60,000/- was given to the petitioner at the time

of marriage as pocket money.        After he left for Sharjah, he

started demanding Rs.5 lakhs as dowry and threatened her that

BA No.5343/08                     3



he will divorce her in case he did not bring the money. She was

also mentally harassed in so many ways as stated by her in

detail.

      6.   After hearing both sides, it is clear that the marriage

lasted only for 28 days and the parties are living separately from

each other. Though an attempt was made by the Lok Adalath to

settle the issues, it could not be settled even at the Lok Adalath.

It also appears that the defacto complainant is not employed and

the petitioner has no case that       he was sending any money

regularly for maintenance of the defacto complainant.

      7.   Taking all the facts to consideration, I find that an

order can be passed which will by protect the interest of both

sides.

      Hence, the following order is passed:

       (i) Petitioner shall surrender before the Investigating

            Officer within seven days from today and make

            himself available for interrogation and in case, he is

            arrested, he shall be released on bail on his executing

            bond for Rs.25,000/- with two solvent sureties each

            for the like sum to the satisfaction of the trial court on

BA No.5343/08                    4



           the following conditions:

           (i)   Petitioner shall report before the Investigating

                 Officer as and when directed and co-operate with

                 the investigation.

           (ii)  Petitioner shall not influence or intimidate any

                 witness or commit any offence while on bail.

           (iii) Petitioner shall deposit Rs.25,000/- before the

                 Magistrate Court within one month from the

                 date of this order towards maintenance of the

                 petitioner which the defacto complainant will be

                 free to withdraw towards maintenance.

           (iv) Petitioner shall also surrender his passport

                 before the Magistrate Court within seven days

                 from today.


    The petition is allowed.




                                               K.HEMA, JUDGE
csl


