

 IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

Bail Appl..No. 3805 of 2008()


1. SHANAVAS.A.M, AGED 26 YEARS,
                      ...  Petitioner
2. RAIHANATH, AGED 46 YEARS, W/O.ABDULLA

                        Vs



1. STATE-REPRESENTED BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR
                       ...       Respondent

2. THE STATION HOUSE OFFICER, (CRIME.NO.

                For Petitioner  :SRI.M.SASINDRAN

                For Respondent  :PUBLIC PROSECUTOR

The Hon'ble MRS. Justice K.HEMA

 Dated :16/06/2008

 O R D E R
                             K.HEMA, J.

                 -----------------------------------------
                        B.A.No. 3805 of 2008
                 -----------------------------------------

              Dated this the 16th day of June, 2008

                              O R D E R

      This petition is for anticipatory bail.

      2. Petitioners are the husband and the mother-in-law of the

defacto complainant. According to the defacto complainant, the first

petitioner married her on 31.8.2008 and a child was born in the

wedlock. Ever since the marriage, the first petitioner was

demanding money from the defacto complainant's father, who is a

P.W.D contractor and every demand was heeded to and huge

amount of money was advanced to the first petitioner, in addition to

the dowry given at the time of marriage including a car.

      3. Defacto complainant's father was even forced to take a loan

for obliging the son-in-law on condition that the first petitioner will

pay the instalments, it is submitted. Since the defacto complainant

could not comply with the subsequent demands made, petitioners

started harassing the defacto complainant physically and mentally.

She was driven out of the house and she is living separately from

the petitioners. Several specific instances are referred to in the

complaint.    It is also alleged in the complaint that the first

petitioner has sent two strangers to the house of the defacto

complainant to take away the child.

     BA.3805/08                      2

      4. Learned counsel for petitioners submitted that this

complaint is a counter blast to the notice issued on behalf of the

first petitioner demanding restitution of conjugal rights. Petitioners

are innocent of the allegations made. This petition is opposed as

far as the first petitioner is concerned. However, it is submitted that

the request by the second petitioner may be allowed on conditions.

      5. On hearing both sides, I am satisfied that the relief may not

be granted to the first petitioner. But, anticipatory bail can be

granted to the second petitioner and the following order is passed:

      i) The prayer for anticipatory bail by the first petitioner is

rejected.

      ii) The respondent is directed to release the second petitioner

in the event of her arrest on her executing a bond for Rs.25,000/-

with two solvent sureties each for the like sum to the satisfaction of

the arresting officer, on condition that she shall co-operate with the

investigation and appear before the investigating officer as and

when directed.

      This petition is partly allowed.




                                     K.HEMA, JUDGE

vgs.


