

 IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

Crl.MC.No. 4300 of 2005()


1. ANNIE JYOTHIS,
                      ...  Petitioner

                        Vs



1. STATE OF KERALA,
                       ...       Respondent

2. ANTO BASTIN (RETD.COMPANY EMPLOYEE

3. MARYKUTTY BASTIN, (RETD. SUB ENGINEER,

4. CHANCHEL ROSE, W/O.GEORGE JOSEPH,

5. GEORGE JOSEPH, (SUB INSPECTOR OF POLICE,

                For Petitioner  :SRI.DINESH MATHEW J.MURICKEN

                For Respondent  :SRI.P.B.ASOKAN

The Hon'ble MR. Justice V.K.MOHANAN

 Dated :23/05/2008

 O R D E R
                         V.K.MOHANAN, J.
             ----------------------------------------------
                     CRL.M.C.N0.4300 OF 2005
             ----------------------------------------------
                      Dated, 23rd May , 2008.

                               ORDER


      This Crl.M.C. is preferred by the widow, the complainant in

Annexure A1 complaint, aggrieved by Annexure A3 order of the

court below by which the         court declined the request of the

petitioner to send the complaint for investigation under section

156(3) of Cr.P.C.

      2. The petitioner herein preferred a private complaint,

C.M.P.No.2782/2005, a copy of which is produced along            with

this Crl.M.C as Annexure A1 before the Judicial Magistrate of the

First Class-II, Aluva under sections 190 and 200 of the Cr.P.C. for

the offences punishable under sections 302 read with Section

201 and 34 of the       Indian Penal Code.       Annexure A1 is the

complaint dated      26-9-2005.       A perusal of       Annexure A1

complaint would show that the complainant got married to

one Mr.Bigil Paul Kaliparambil Veedu.            South Kalamassery,

Development Plot P.O., on 20.6.2004 in accordance with the

Christian religious rites and customs at St.Michel's Church,

CRMC 4300/05
                               :-2-:


Kakkanadu. Accused Nos. 1 and 2 in the complaint are the

parents of her husband. 3rd accused is the sister in law of the

complainant    and  the 4th accused   is  her  husband.    The

allegation in brief as disclosed from Annexure A1 complaint

is that,   after the marriage the accused were harassing the

complainant and they were demanding more wealth from the

complainant's house towards dowry. It is also the case of the

complainant that the accused always found sadistic pleasure

in nagging the complainant's husband saying that         he is

impotent and    is  incapable of consummating the marriage.

According to the complainant, the harassment continued and

the same was reached in an unbearable and intolerable stage

by   December, 2004.       On giving    information about the

situation to her parents, she was taken back to her parental

home.      Subsequently,    all of the   accused assured the

complainant that there will not be any problem in future and

that the complainant's husband will arrange a rented house

and that they will start separate residence. According to the

complainant, on the basis of the said assurance, the

CRMC 4300/05
                               :-3-:


complainant was brought back to the matrimonial home by her

father by the     second week of December. According to the

complainant, even thereafter, the harassment           continued

demanding more money and according to the complainant, she

was threatened on several occasions. It is specifically stated

in the complaint that    her father, taking into account     her

wellbeing, purchased     a property in the joint names of the

complainant and her husband. The said incident made the

accused accelerating the harassment and the situation became

more aggravated. It is also stated that the complainant was

having fond regards for the institution of marriage and

therefore she convinced her father that she would somehow

manage the situation at the matrimonial home. After much

persuasion, the father of the complainant had taken back the

complainant   to her matrimonial    home on      22-7-2005 and

entrusted her to her husband.          It is also stated in the

complaint that she was      assaulted in front of her father and

thereafter also the complainant was continued to harass by the

accused.   It is  specifically stated that    the complainant's

CRMC 4300/05
                                :-4-:


husband had taken her back to her parental home and had

gone to his work.      He had    returned to the complainant's

house after the work on the next day, i.e on 23-7-2005 and

had returned to his residence after some time.       It is also

specifically averred in the complaint that on 23-7-2005 at

9.p.m., the husband of the complainant informed her over

telephone that accused Nos.3 and 4 were also in his house

and all the accused were compelling him to      go out of his

house. It is also stated that the complainant was later told by

her husband that the harassment towards him continued the

whole night. It is also stated that on 24-7-2005 at about 9

a.m., the husband of the complainant     informed her that he

will soon be reached her parental house.    In paragraph 12 of

the complaint it is stated that on 24-7-2005 at 11.30. a.m a

neighbour by name Antony told the complainant's father that

a neighbour of       the complainant's husband's residence

informed     him over telephone that the husband of the

complainant is admitted     in the hospital in a very serious

condition.     On getting such information, the complainant

CRMC 4300/05
                                :-5-:


along with her relatives rushed to     Ernakulam Medical Centre

Hospital, Palarivattom wherein he was admitted in the

intensive care unit in a critical condition. According to the

complainant, none of the relatives of the husband was in the

hospital and no money was spent by any of the accused for

the treatment     of her husband.       In paragraph 13 of the

complaint, it is specifically averred that the 4th accused who

is a Sub Inspector in Kerala         Police had influenced   the

hospital authorities and thereby restrained them from giving

intimation regarding the incident and the factum of admission

of the husband     of the complainant in hospital to the local

police in time and thereby prevented them from collecting the

evidence from the place of occurrence and circumstances of

the   incident.   In the same paragraph it is       averred that

complainant's husband became conscious on 1-8-2005 and

the complainant was allowed to talk to him on 2-8-2008. At

that time the husband of the complainant told her that he had

not consumed poison by himself and that a complaint has to

be preferred to the      police.   It is   further stated in the

CRMC 4300/05
                              :-6-:


complaint that the complainant or her     father was not in a

condition to prefer a complaint on 2-8-2005 as suggested by

her husband. It is further stated in the complaint that the

husband of the complainant became unconscious again on 3-

8-2005 and he continued in the unconscious condition there

after and died on 7-8-2005 at about 8.30 p.m. It is further

stated that the accused have removed the articles and all

the things and belongings of the husband of the complainant

from his residence and the accused have changed the entire

scene of the place of occurrence and tampered the evidence.

The accused have not cared even to receive the dead body of

the complainant's husband after postmortem in the Medical

college Hospital, Alappuzha. In paragraph 15 of the complaint

it is stated that the entire subsequent acts of the accused

were very suspicious and pointing towards their          guilty

consciousness. Accordingly, the Ist accused was admitted by

the other accused in       the   Sacred    Heart Hospital, at

Painkulam, Thodupuzha after the incident while the husband

of the complainant was in hospital. It is also stated that the

CRMC 4300/05
                               :-7-:


accused who are claiming that the husband of the complainant

consumed poison is not disclosing the incident or its details

to the complainant or     to her relatives.   The accused   are

giving different explanations to others regarding the incident.

According to the complainant,      accused    Nos. 2 to 4 have

purposefully admitted the Ist accused in mental hospital to

create an impression that he is a mental patient with a

calculated view to prevent disclosure of the real facts by him.

In paragraph 17 it is further stated that the above said acts of

the accused up to 24-7-2005 are offences punishable under

sections 498A and 306 of IPC.      It is further submitted that

there are valid and strong circumstantial evidence to hold

that Bigil Paul had not consumed poison by himself and that

the accused have forcibly administered poison to him        and

murdered     him.  The accused had tampered some of         the

strong material evidence and thereby to vanish evidence in

support of the       adverse circumstances of the incident.

Therefore according to the complainant, the act of the accused

amounts to offences punishable under sections 302 read with

CRMC 4300/05
                              :-8-:


section 201 and 34 of the IPC.      In paragraph 18 of the

complaint, it has been stated that the incident took place

within the limits of Kalamassery Police Station and the father

of the complainant had preferred petitions on 8-8-2005 and

also on 28-8-2005. But the police had not taken any effective

measures    due to    the undue influence     and pressure of

accused persons.     In paragraph 19, the relief is moulded in

the following words: "In the interest of justice it is just and

necessary to take this complaint into the file          of this

Honourable Court and      proceed against the accused or to

forward the      same to Kalamassery Police Station for

investigation under section 156 of the      Code of Criminal

Procedure and prayed accordingly". In the complaint itself, a

list of certain witnesses and documents are shown. (emphasis

supplied).

      3. Counsel for the petitioner submitted that Annexure

A1 complaint dated 26-9-2005 was filed on the same date

which was numbered as CMP 2782/2005 and the same was

adjourned to 15-10-2005 on which date the sworn statement

CRMC 4300/05
                               :-9-:


of the complainant was taken and it was again adjourned.

According to the counsel for the petitioner, since the complaint

was not sent for investigation under section 156 (3), the

complainant had preferred         Annexure II petition       on

19/10/2005 which was adjourned to 4-11-2005 for hearing.

Petitioner was heard on 4-11-2005 and the same was

adjourned for orders to 8-11-2005. Since the order was not

ready on 8-11-2005, the petition was again adjourned to 11-

11-2005 and again adjourned to 14-11-2005 on which date

the order was passed in Annexure A2 petition. Annexure A3

is the order dated 14-11-2005 in CMP 2999/2005. According

to the Magistrate, the    request for entrusting investigation

under section 156(3) with the police cannot be entertained

since the sworn statement      of the   complainant is already

recorded and the complaint stands posted for further enquiry

as the   offence alleged is exclusively triable    by court   of

Session and therefore according to the Magistrate, statements

of the entire witnesses have to be recorded and the court has

to consider whether offences as alleged in the complaint are

CRMC 4300/05
                               :-10-:


made out. It is also stated by the Magistrate that the court

had already decided to proceed under section 202(2) Cr.P.C.

and the statement of the complainant is also recorded and

now the court cannot revert back and forward the complaint

to police  for investigation and call for report as    specified

under section 202 (1) Cr.P.C. Another reason given by the

court is that   since the court had      started the mandatory

euquiry on the complaint      as    specified by proviso (a) to

Section 202(1) Cr.P.C., by recording the statement of the de

facto complainant, the court cannot give a go bye to the

enquiry initiated or conducted under proviso (a) to Sec.202

(1) Cr.P.C and forward the           complaint to police     for

investigation. It is the above order challenged in this petition

and prays that Annexure II petition may be allowed.

     4. I have heard the counsel for the petitioner as well as

the respondent and also the learned public Prosecutor.

     5. Counsel for the petitioner submits that going by the

complaint, it can be seen that very serious offences which are

exclusively triable by the Sessions court are alleged against

CRMC 4300/05
                                      :-11-:


the accused and the complainant will not be in a position to

adduce evidence to substantiate the allegation especially the

allegation under section 302 of IPC is involved. The counsel

submitted that considering the nature of the allegations and

the    sad    death      of the husband of the complainant, an

effective police        investigation        is absolutely necessary,

otherwise the allegation against the                accused cannot be

proved.     It is pointed out by the counsel for the petitioner that

normally, when a private complaint is filed before a court of law, the

same has to be referred       for investigation under section 156(3) of

Cr.P.C. No reason is inferable from the impugned order for not

invoking     Section 156(3) Cr.P.C.        It is also pointed out that the

complainant was constrained to file Annexure II petition when the

Magistrate has chosen to take the sworn statement of the complainant

instead of invoking Section 156(3) of Cr.P.C. Thus, according to the

counsel, the course adopted by the Magistrate in not referring the

complaint for police investigation as envisaged under section 156(3) of

Cr.P.C., is absolutely incorrect , illegal and irregular.

CRMC 4300/05
                                    :-12-:


      6. Per contra, the learned counsel appearing for the respondents 2

to 5 submitted that Annexure III order is perfectly legal and valid and

Annexure AII petition was       filed only after recording     the sworn

statement of the complainant and therefore, the Magistrate cannot

abandon the proceedings initiated under Chapter XV of the Cr.P.C. and

to go into a stage under section 156(3) of Cr.P.C. Opposing the prayer

of the petitioner, the learned counsel for the respondents submitted that

in every case of private complaint, Magistrate need not send the matter

for investigation under Section 156(3) Cr.P.C..      On the other hand,

Magistrate can invoke Section 202 and if it is satisfied, cognizance can

be taken and can take further steps in the matter. In support of the above

contention, the learned counsel placed reliance in the decision of the

Apex Court in Tula Ram and Others v. Kishore Singh {(1977) 4

SCC459) and also the decision of this Court in Superintendent of

Police, C.B.I. v. State of Kerala (2005(3) KLT 823).           Therefore,

according to the learned counsel for the respondents, the order of the

Magistrate which challenged in this Crl.M.C. is absolutely correct and

not warranted the interference of this Court under section 482 of Cr.P.C.

CRMC 4300/05
                                    :-13-:


             7. The learned Public Prosecutor submitted that Annexure

A2 petition was filed after recording of the sworn statement       of the

complainant and     the prayer in the Crl.M.C. is to allow Annexure A2

petition. Since the Magistrate has already adopted proceedings under

section 202, the same has to be completed in accordance with law and at

this stage, the Magistrate is not empowered to invoke Section 156(3) of

Cr.P.C. and hence the prayer cannot be allowed.

       8. Chapter XIV of Cr.P.C. which deals with conditions requisite

for initiation of proceedings. Section 190 of the Cr.P.C. is with respect

to the cognizance of offences by a Magistrate. As per Sec.190, the

Magistrate can take cognizance of any offence under three situations,

namely:

                   a) upon receiving a complaint of facts which
                      constitute such offence;

                   b) upon a police report of such facts;

                   c) upon information received from any person other
                       than a police officer, or upon his own knowledge,
                       that such offence has been committed.

       9. The Apex Court in the decision reported in Tula Ram and

Others v. Kishore Singh {(1977) 4 SCC 459) has held as follows:

CRMC 4300/05
                                     :-14-:


              "Sections 190 and 156(3) are mutually exclusive
            and work in totally different spheres. A Magistrate
            can order investigation under Section 156(3) only at
            the pre-cognizance stage, that is to say before taking
            cognizance under Sections 190, 200 and 204 and
            where a Magistrate decides to take cognizance
            under the provisions of Chapter 14 he is not entitled
            in law to order any investigation under Section 156
            (3) though in cases not falling within the proviso to
            Section 202 he can order an investigation      by the
            police which would be in the nature of an enquiry as
            contemplated by section 207 of the Code".

In the same decision, it is also held as follows:

                   "Where a Magistrate orders investigation by
            the police under Section 156(3) before taking
            cognizance and receives the report thereupon he can
            act on the report and discharge the accused or
            straightaway issue process against the accused or
            apply his mind to the complaint filed before him
            and take action under Section 190".

      10. This Court in the decision reported in Superintendent of

Police, C.B.I. v. State of Kerala (2005(3) KLT 823) is of the opinion

that the fact that the Magistrate has got a discretion to forward a

complaint under section 156(3) does not mean that the complainant has a

right or privilege to make a demand to refer the case to the police. The

option to refer the complaint to the police for investigation under section

156(3) before cognizance or under section 202(1) after cognizance, is to

CRMC 4300/05
                                    :-15-:


be exercised by the Magistrate. But that discretion has to exercised in a

judicious manner and not mechanically. It is also held that the prayer

in the complaint must be to try the accused and to punish him in case

he is found guilty of any offence. So when the sole prayer in the

complaint is to refer the same to police, the Magistrate shall approach

the matter with care and caution and insist for materials to show a prima

facie case. In this case it is pertinent to note that both the prayers, as

mentioned in the above decision have been            incorporated in the

complaint. On the other hand, the learned counsel for the petitioner

invited my attention to the decision of the Apex Court in Devarapalli

Lakshminarayana Reddy and Others            v. V.Narayana Reddy and

Others (1976 SCC (Cri.) 380) . In paragraph 13 of the above decision,

the Apex Court has held:

                "It is well settled that when a magistrate
          receives   a complaint, he is not bound to take
          cognizance if the facts alleged in the complaint,
          disclose the commission of an offence. This is
          clear from the use of the words "may take
          cognizance" which in the context in which they
          occur cannot be       equated with      "must take
          cognizance". The word "may" gives a discretion to
          the magistrate in the matter. If on a reading of the
          complaint he finds that the allegations therein
          disclose a cognizable offence and the forwarding

CRMC 4300/05
                                   :-16-:


           of the complaint to the police for investigation
           under Section 156(3) will be conducive to justice
           and save the valuable time of the magistrate from
           being wasted in enquiring into a matter which was
           primarily the duty of the police to investigate, he
           will be justified in adopting that course as an
           alternative to taking cognizance of the offence,
           himself".

On the strength of the above principle laid down by the Apex Court, the

counsel submitted that in the present case also what expected from the

magistrate is to refer the complaint for investigation under section 156

(3) Cr.P.C. But instead of the above general course, the magistrate had

adopted    Sec.202 enquiry for which no reason      is   assigned by the

Magistrate.

      11.    I have gone through Annexure III order of the learned

Magistrate. Nothing stated so as to conclude that there is some reason

for not resorting to the usual course of sending      the complaint for

investigation under section 156(3) of Cr.P.C.    The learned counsel for

the respondent submitted that based upon the averments and allegations

contained in the complaint, the learned Magistrate has decided to resort

to section 202 enquiry for taking cognizance and therefore Annexure A2

petition filed by the complainant is not maintainable and the Magistrate

CRMC 4300/05
                                    :-17-:


has no jurisdiction to go back from S.202 enquiry and to invoke S.156(3)

of Cr.P.C.

      12.   Going by Annexure A3 order it can be seen that the

Magistrate is of the opinion that he has no jurisdiction or authority to

go back from the     enquiry or the proceedings prescribed vide Chapter

XV of the Code since the Magistrate had opted not to invoke S.156 (3)

but to proceed under the provisions of Chapter XV of the Code. The

above approach of       the learned Magistrate seems to be incorrect,

irregular and illegal. The discretion, as pointed out by this Court in the

decision cited supra and also the Supreme Court, has to be exercised

when the Magistrate receives a complaint under Sec.190 of Cr.P.C. This

Court in the above decision has      held that  that discretion must be

exercised     in a judicious manner.       Considering the facts and

circumstances involved in the case which was borne out on a perusal of

Annexure A1 complaint, it can be seen that the allegation against the

accused is that they have committed murder of the husband of the

complainant by administering poison and according to the complainant

there is no direct evidence to substantiate the allegations if the

allegations are true. The learned Magistrate failed to take note of the

CRMC 4300/05
                                    :-18-:


above aspect.   At the time of exercising the discretion, the Magistrate

ought to have borne in mind that the proviso to subsection(1) of Section

202 of Cr.P.C. which says that      no such direction for investigation

shall be made     where it appears to the Magistrate that the offence

complained of is triable exclusively by the Court of Session.       In the

light of the facts and circumstances and the allegations contained in

Annexure A1 complaint, it can be seen that the offences are exclusively

triable by Court of Session. So unless there is an effective investigation

at the instance of the police, if it is true, the allegation cannot be

substantiated in the absence of police report. Therefore, considering the

entire facts and circumstances involved in the case, I am of the view

that    the Magistrate ought to have        referred the complaint for

investigation under section 156 (3) of Cr.P.C.

      13. The reason given by the learned Magistrate to reject Annexure

A2 application, is that he had already resorted to the proceedings under

section 202 in Chapter XV of the Code and he cannot go back and

invoke S.156(3), appears to be incorrect. When the Magistrate failed to

exercise his judicial discretion and to invoke 156(3) of the Code and

adopted the procedure under section 202 of Chapter XV, he cannot be

CRMC 4300/05
                                    :-19-:


heard to say that he cannot go back from the proceedings already

initiated under the provisions of Chapter XV. As I have already found

that the learned Magistrate failed     in exercising his discretion and

sending the complaint for investigation under section 156(3), it follows

that the consequent proceedings adopted by the court below is to be set

aside and I do so.

       14. The learned counsel for respondents submitted that in case

the matter is being sent for investigation to the police, then a direction

may be issued to the police not to harass the respondents. I find no

reason to presume that the police will be prejudicial to the

accused/respondents or they will harass them.        Considering the fact

regarding the sad death of the husband of the petitioner/complainant, it

is the duty of the police to find out the truth connected with the

allegation and to book the culprits if any for the cause of the death of

the complainant's husband. I am of the firm belief that the police will

conduct an impartial investigation and to bring out the truth and to book

the culprit, if any, and place them before the court of law.

       15. In the result, all proceedings under Section 202 of Cr.P.C.

upon Annexure-I complaint and A3 order are set aside and the Judicial

CRMC 4300/05
                                    :-20-:


First Class Magistrate is directed to forward Annexure A1 complaint for

investigation under section 156(3) Cr.P.C through the concerned police

station. Accordingly, the Crl.M.C. is allowed. No order as to costs.




                                            V.K.MOHANAN, JUDGE.




kvm/-

CRMC 4300/05
                :-21-:


                         V.K.MOHANAN, J.



                                  No....



                           Judgment/Order



                                  Dated:


