

 IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

Bail Appl..No. 6359 of 2008()


1. SANDEEP BHASKAR,
                      ...  Petitioner

                        Vs



1. THE S.H.O, KANNUR TOWN POLICE STATION,
                       ...       Respondent

                For Petitioner  :SRI.C.P.PEETHAMBARAN

                For Respondent  : No Appearance

The Hon'ble MRS. Justice K.HEMA

 Dated :16/10/2008

 O R D E R
                                K. HEMA, J.
        - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                         B.A. No. 6359 of 2008
         - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
            Dated this the 16th day of October,2008

                                  O R D E R

       Petition for anticipatory bail.

       2. The alleged offence is under section 498A IPC.

According to prosecution, petitioner along with his parents and

sister physically and mentally harassed the de facto complainant

by demanding dowry, etc.

       3. Learned counsel for                   petitioner submitted that

petitioner is the husband of de facto complainant who is the 1st

accused. Accused 2 and 3 who are his aged parents were granted

anticipatory bail by the learned Session Judge, but the prayer for

anticipatory bail by the 1st accused was rejected. It is submitted

that the couple was residing together from 22-8-1993 onwards

ever since the marriage. De facto complainant left the

matrimonial house only about eight months back stating that she

was not able to adjust with the aged parents. She filed a

complaint without any basis and at a belated stage.

       4. The allegation made by de facto complainant is that

aged parents had gone to her house in August, 2008 and

assaulted her, but the complaint was filed only after one month. It

is also stated that de facto complainant's property was compelled

to be conveyed in the name of her mother-in-law and thereafter

BA 6359/08                         -2-

demands were made for money from de facto complainant. But

she did not make any complaint, though the sale deed was

executed in the year 2002. The present complaint is filed making

false allegations.

       5. This petition is opposed. Learned Public Prosecutor

submitted that     de facto complainant is a teacher      and her

property was compelled to be transferred in the name of her

mother-in-law and thereafter also demands for money continued.

Salary used to be given to the father-in-law. The 1st accused used

to physically assault her also.

       6. On hearing both sides, I find that in the nature of the

allegations made, it is not proper to grant anticipatory bail to

petitioner. I do not find any reason to take a different view than

that of the learned Sessions Judge.

       This petition is dismissed.



                                           K.HEMA, JUDGE.

mn.


