

 IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

CRL.A.No. 185 of 2005()


1. SUSEELAN, CONVICT NO.8565,
                      ...  Petitioner

                        Vs



1. STATE OF KERALA,
                       ...       Respondent

                For Petitioner  :SRI.GRASHIOUS KURIAKOSE

                For Respondent  :PUBLIC PROSECUTOR

The Hon'ble MR. Justice K.BALAKRISHNAN NAIR
The Hon'ble MRS. Justice M.C.HARI RANI

 Dated :18/08/2008

 O R D E R
          K.BALAKRISHNAN NAIR & M.C.HARI RANI JJ.
       -----------------------------------------------------
                  CRL.APPEAL No.185 OF 2005
           -----------------------------------------------------
           DATED THIS THE 18th DAY OF AUGUST, 2008

                           J U D G M E N T

Balakrishnan Nair, J.

     The appellant challenges the conviction and sentence imposed on

him   by   the    Additional   Sessions    Judge,    Pathanamthitta in

S.C.No.203/01. He was charge sheeted for the offence under Section

302 IPC.   He was found guilty and sentenced to undergo rigorous

imprisonment for life and also to pay a fine of Rs.10,000/- and in

default to undergo simple imprisonment for a further period of one

year.

     2.    The prosecution case in brief is as follows:

The appellant/accused married Sobha, the daughter of PWs 1 and 2 on

12.9.1988.   For some time, they resided with the father of the

appellant and thereafter they built a thatched house in the same

compound near the family house. At the time of marriage, an amount

of Rs.20,000/- was promised to be paid as dowry. But, the parents of

Sobha could pay only Rs.15,000/-. For non-payment of the balance

amount, the accused was harassing his wife Sobha. Since the dowry

demand was not met, on 19.6.1999, the appellant poured kerosene on

the body of Sobha and set fire to her.        She suffered severe burn

CRL.A.No.185/05                   -2-


injuries.   So, she was hospitalised. She breathed her last on 2.7.1999.

PW1 lodged Exhibit P1 first information statement with the Sub Inspector

of Police, Koyippuram, PW18 on 21.6.1999 at about 2PM. Initially, Crime

No.147/99 was registered under Section 498A and 307 of the IPC.

Later, on the death of Sobha, report was filed by the Investigating Officer

before the Magistrate's Court stating that the offence committed is under

Section 302 IPC.    PW20, the Circle Inspector of Police took over the

investigation. He completed the investigation and laid the charge before

the J.F.C.M., Kozhencherry. The learned Magistrate committed the case

to the Sessions Court for trial which was made over for trial to the

Additional Sessions Court, Pathanamthitta.        From the side of the

prosecution PWs 1 to 21 were examined and Exhibits P1 to P39 were

marked.    Material Objects MO1 to MO14 were produced and marked.

After questioning of the accused under Section 313 Cr.P.C., DW1 was

examined as defence witness. The learned Sessions Judge after hearing

both sides convicted and sentenced the accused. Hence this appeal.

      3.    Mr.Grashious Kuriakose, learned counsel who appeared for the

appellant, raised the following grounds:

            (1)  According to the learned counsel, after the

      admission of deceased Sobha in the hospital, she gave three

CRL.A.No.185/05                  -3-


    versions regarding cause of burns on her body. At the time

    of admission, she told the Doctor PW16 that she sustained

    burn injuries by accident. A burning kerosene lamp fell on

    her, while she was reading. But, she told PWs 1, 2, 8 and 13

    that the accused poured kerosene on her and set fire to her

    and therefore she suffered grievous burn injuries. But, to

    PW6, she told that she attempted to commit suicide and

    hence the burn injuries. In view of the above three versions

    regarding the reason for sustaining burn injuries, the learned

    counsel submitted that the appellant is entitled to get the

    benefit of doubt.   All these versions can be taken as her

    dying declarations which are contrary to each other. When

    there is more than one dying declaration, the benefit of

    doubt goes to the accused, it is stated. It is also submitted

    that having regard to the facts of the case, it is quite unsafe

    to find the appellant guilty without corroboration. The dying

    declaration alone cannot be the basis for conviction.

          (2)  The learned counsel for the appellant pointed out

    that the father of the deceased PW1 lodged the first

    information before the police on the night of 20.6.1999. The

CRL.A.No.185/05                  -4-


    incident took place on 19.6.1999. Next day itself, PWs 1, 2

    and 8 visited the hospital. From the evidence of the above

    three witnesses, it is clear that they went to the police

    station on the said day itself and the police came to the

    hospital on the night of 20th June, 1999 and questioned the

    witnesses. But, Exhibit P1 FI statement is one recorded at 2

    PM on 21.6.1999.         So, the original first information

    statement has been suppressed. The version given by PW1

    in the first information statement might have been different

    from the present case of the prosecution and therefore it was

    substituted by a fresh statement and the FIR was sent to the

    court implicating the accused. So, for not placing the correct

    facts regarding the lodging of the first information

    statement, the appellant is entitled to get the benefit of

    doubt.

          (3)   The   incident   narrated  by  the    prosecution

    regarding the pouring of kerosene and burning the deceased

    is inherently improbable. The deceased is a well built , able

    bodied lady. She was not confined at the time of incident by

    the accused.     There were three matches at the scene of

CRL.A.No.185/05                  -5-


    occurrence. If the accused used those three matches to set

    fire to her, normally she will not stand there meekly and she

    would make her escape. So, the presence of three matches

    in the seen probabilise the case of suicide.      Further, the

    father of the deceased, PW1 has stated that the accused

    used his cigarette lamp for setting fire to the deceased. So,

    the case of the prosecution on the above point lacks

    credence, it is submitted.

    (4)   The learned counsel also pointed out that the motive

    proved by the prosecution for the commission of murder is

    non-payment of Rs.5,000/- towards dowry.         The same in

    normal circumstances cannot be a ground for murder. The

    sequence of events narrated by the witnesses, including the

    murder and the accused going out, etc. would probabilise the

    case of the defence that it was a case of suicide. The motive

    proved in this case may be sufficient for suicide, but not for

    murder, it is pointed out by the learned counsel.         The

    learned counsel also relied on the decisions of the Apex

    Court in Kundula Bala Subrahmanyam v. State of

    Andhra Pradesh (1993(2) SCC 684), P.Mani v. State of

CRL.A.No.185/05                  -6-


     T.N. (2006(3) SCC 161), Amol Singh v. State of

     Madhya Pradesh (2008(5) SCC 468) and also the

     decision in State of Maharashtra v. Sanjay D.Rajhans

     (AIR 2005 SC 97) in support of his submissions regarding

     the legal effect of more than one dying declaration.

     4.     The learned Public Prosecutor Mr.Jai George supported the

judgment of the trial court. The case of the defence regrading more than

one first information statement has been dealt with by the trial court in

paragraph 7 of the judgment rightly, it is pointed out.     The learned

Prosecutor also referred to the statement of PW2 in the re-examination

wherein, the said witness has clarified that, the statement was given to

the police only on 21.6.1999. The learned Public Prosecutor also brought

to our notice the deposition of PW1, which would show that he does not

remember the exact date on which the information was lodged.         The

learned Public Prosecutor also pointed out that the said witness further

stated that they went to the police station along with PW8 on the third

day of the incident. So, there is reliable evidence to show that the first

information was lodged only on 21.6.1999. The learned Public Prosecutor

also brought to our notice the statement of PW3 who is an independent

witness concerning the presence of the accused at the time of

CRL.A.No.185/05                   -7-


occurrence. He has seen the accused going out from the house after the

incident. It is also pointed out that while questioning under section 313

Cr.P.C., the accused has set up a plea of alibi. The same is a plainly false

case set up by the accused.      There is no reason to disbelieve PW3's

version that the accused was present at the time of occurrence. The

learned Prosecutor also pointed out the conduct of the accused in not

taking the victim to the hospital on sustaining burn injury by her. The

same points an accusing finger against the appellant. The learned Public

Prosecutor relied on the deposition of PW7 (father of the accused) who

has spoken that a portion of the dowry was remaining unpaid. Exhibit

P16 is a document executed by the accused to take back deceased Sobha

from her parental home. Sobha, because of the dowry harassment, had

to take shelter in her parental home. The accused came there and in the

presence of PW8, who acted as a mediator, gave a written undertaking

in the form of Exhibit P16. In the said document, he has admitted the

past ill-treatment of the deceased, it is submitted.         The learned

Prosecutor also took us through the evidence of PW6 wherein, she has

stated that the reason for the injury was actually given by her, though

the wound certificate would show that it was as given by the deceased.

PW6 who is a near relative of the accused has stated before the Court

CRL.A.No.185/05                   -8-


that Sobha came out from her house crying, "I am being killed", though

the witness later corrected that she was crying out "save me". If it was a

case of suicide, she would not have ran out of the house crying for help.

The evidence of PW6, according to the learned Prosecutor, therefore

would show that it was not a case of suicide, but homicide. PW7, who is

the father of the accused, has also spoken about Sobha running out of

the house engulfed by fire.      According to the Prosecutor, the above

evidence would point to the guilt of the accused only. Any hypothesis,

consistent with the innocence of the accused, can be safely ruled out

from the evidence on record, it is submitted.         The learned Public

Prosecutor also relied on the decision of the Apex Court in Sher Singh v.

State of Punjab (2008(2) SCC(Cri.) 783) in support of his

submissions. There were three dying declarations in that case. But, the

court acted upon one which was found to be truthful and which was made

before the Judicial Magistrate. The learned Public Prosecutor also brought

to our notice the decision of this Court in Muhammed v. State (1999

(3) KLT 948) dealing exhaustively with the principles governing dying

declarations.  Going by the principles laid down in that decision, the

learned Public Prosecutor submitted that the version given by the

deceased before the learned Magistrate can be safely acted upon.

CRL.A.No.185/05                    -9-


      5.   In answer to the above contentions, the learned counsel for

the appellant pointed out that in the re-examination of PW1, no question

was put to him regarding his version that he went to the police station on

the night of 20.6.1999. So, the submissions of the State on the above

point has to be discarded, it is submitted.

      6.   We gave anxious consideration to the submissions of both

sides. Before dealing with them, we would briefly refer to the evidence

on record. PW1 is the father of deceased Sobha. He deposed that the

marriage between Sobha and the accused took place on 12.9.1988. At

the time of marriage, though the agreed dowry was Rs.20,000/-, he could

pay only Rs.15,000/-.       He also gave gold ornaments weighing 5

sovereigns. The accused and Sobha resided in the family house of the

accused for some time. After about 3-4 months, they put up a thatched

house. After three months, the accused started harassing his daughter

and pressing her to get Rs.5,000/- from her parents. She was being

physically manhandled and sent to her parental home. The accused used

to kick and beat her demanding the balance dowry amount. Sobha came

to PW1's house and told about the above incident. Later, Sobha while

residing with her husband, was set on fire on 19.6.1999 at about 10 PM.

It was a Saturday. On getting information that she is hospitalised with

CRL.A.No.185/05                    -10-


serious burn injuries, he along with his wife and near relatives went to

the hospital. They saw her lying in the hospital with burn injuries on

various parts of her body. He asked her daughter what happened. She

told him that after quarreling for not paying Rs.5,000/- the accused

poured kerosene and burned her. At that time, her daughter has not lost

her consciousness.     She was recognising people and talking to them.

When he asked about the details of the incident, she told him that the

accused demanded the balance dowry amount. He quarreled with her

and thereafter went out. He came back after some time and called her

affectionately to his side. But she did not go. Suddenly, kerosene was

poured on her and she was set on fire using a cigarette lamp. She ran

out crying. Thereupon, the father-in-law's sister and others came and

poured water on her. She was taken to the hospital in an autorickshaw.

The witness stated that the accused has burned his daughter with the

intention of killing her. She was under treatment for 14 days. Finally, she

died on 2.7.1999. Earlier, when quarrel arose between the accused and

Sobha, she was sent home. Later, PW8 who is the local leader of the

Communist Party interfered in the matter and an agreement was

executed under which PW1 has agreed to pay the balance amount after

the next harvest. He has lodged Exhibit P1 information before the police.

CRL.A.No.185/05                  -11-


He was subjected to extensive cross-examination by the defence. At one

place in the cross-examination he has deposed that he went to the police

station on 20.6.1999, though at another place he would say he does not

remember the date and also that he went to the police station on the

third day of the incident. PW2 is the mother of Sobha. She also deposed

in tune with the statement of PW1. She has also deposed about the

statement made by Sobha to her. According to her, Sobha told her that

demanding the balance dowry amount, the accused picked up a quarrel

with Sobha, manhandled her and went out of the house threatening to kill

her. Later on coming back, he affectionately called Sobha to his side.

But she did not go. While so, the accused poured kerosene on her and

set fire to her. She cried and rushed out of the house and thereupon the

relatives of the accused poured water on her and put out the fire. She

was taken to the hospital in an autorickshaw and admitted there. PW2

was also extensively cross-examined by the defence.        In the cross-

examination, she had spoken that the police came to the hospital on

20.6.1999.     But in re-examination, she has stated that the police

questioned her only on 21.6.1999. She would claim that she happened

to make a wrong statement as she was upset on seeing the ornaments of

her daughter.

CRL.A.No.185/05                   -12-


      7. PW3 is residing on the western side of the house of the accused.

He knew the accused and his wife. The wife of the accused died of burn

injuries. While she was reading a book the kerosene lamp fell on her and

she suffered burn injuries. That was what was heard by him. On the

date of incident he went to sleep before 9 O'clock. After 10 O' clock, on

hearing a hue and cry, his wife roused him. He woke up and got out of

his house. He saw Sobha, the wife of the accused lying in the courtyard

of a relative of the accused. He went near to her. He saw burn injuries

on both her hands. She was lying in the courtyard of the sister of the

mother of the accused. Several people assembled there. Sobha was

taken from there to the hospital in an autorickshaw. While Sobha was

lying there, she was able to talk. At that time he saw the accused going

out from his house. The accused was seen going to the nearby road.

Since he disowned his statement before the police that the accused

poured kerosene on her and set fire, he was declared hostile to the

prosecution by the Public Prosecutor with the permission of the court and

was cross-examined.

      8. PW4 is residing in the neighbourhood of the accused. On the

date of occurrence, while she was sleeping, she heard a hue and cry at

about 10.45 p.m.      That was on 19.6.1999.     When she went out on

CRL.A.No.185/05                  -13-


hearing the sound, she saw the wife of the accused lying in the courtyard

of PW6. She asked Sobha, what happened to her. She was told that the

burn injury was caused by the falling of a burning lamp. She saw burns

on the chest and stomach of Sobha. Some persons poured water on her

and later, she was taken to the hospital in an autorickshaw. Since she

deviated from her statement before the police regarding a quarrel

between Sobha and the accused for non-payment of dowry, she was

declared hostile to the prosecution by the Public Prosecutor with the

permission of the court and was cross-examined.

      9. PW5 is a relative of the accused. He is also residing in the

neighbouring house. He stated that Sobha, the wife of the accused died

a few years back. She died of burn injuries. Sobha came running to the

house of the witness with fire on her clothes. PW5 and his mother came

out of their house and went to the courtyard. They poured water on

Sobha's body. Other people also came running. Sobha was taken inside

their house and she was laid in a cot there. The witness went to call an

autorickshaw. Sobha was taken to the hospital by his brother-in-law and

others. He did not accompany Sobha to the hospital.       He did not ask

Sobha about the reason for the burns. His mother asked her. Thereupon

Sobha told his mother not to ask anything.      When Sobha was asked

CRL.A.No.185/05                   -14-


about the accused, she told them that he has gone for work. The witness

disowned his statement before the police that there was a quarrel

between the accused and the deceased on the date of occurrence.

Therefore, he was declared hostile to the prosecution and was cross-

examined.     In cross-examination he has stated that the deceased came

out crying "Ah! Please come (and help)".

      10. PW6 is the maternal grand mother of PW5. She is also the

sister of the father of the accused. She has deposed that on 19.6.1999,

Sobha came out of her house, crying 'save me'. She saw Sobha lying

down. People poured water on her and put out the fire. She along with

another took the injured to the hospital in an autorickshaw. There were

burns on the face, chest and hands of Sobha. Initially, Sobha was taken

to the nearby hospital and from there she was taken to Pushpagiri

Hospital, Thiruvalla. While in the hospital, the doctor asked her about the

name and address of the injured. She gave the details, which were noted

down by the doctor. The witness has also told the doctor how the burn

injury was caused. She stated that she told the doctor that a lamp fell

down and as a result the fire occurred. She also stated that when Sobha

came running the accused was not there. He has gone for collecting

sand.   Sobha told her that she set fire by herself.       Thereupon, the

CRL.A.No.185/05                    -15-


Prosecutor, with the permission of the court, declared her hostile and

cross-examined her. In the cross-examination, she initially admitted that

Sobha came running saying that she is being killed. Immediately, the

witness corrected and said that Sobha came running, saying 'save me'.

Ext.P16, which is an agreement executed by the accused was marked

through the said witness. In Ext.P16 the accused admits his previous ill-

treatment of the deceased. Going by Ext.P16, it would show that the

father of the deceased agreed to pay the balance dowry after the next

harvest.

      11. PW7 is the father of the accused. He also admits the execution

of Ext.P16. When the accused and the deceased quarrelled and were

living separately, Ext.P16 was executed, to which the witness is also a

party. He identified his signature in that document. He also admits that

he put his signature, knowing about the contents of that document. He

also identified the signature of his sister PW6 and that of the accused in

that document.      He further admits that PW8 Krishnan Kutty did the

mediation for arriving at that settlement.     He heard that Sobha died

because a burning kerosene lamp fell on her body and her clothes caught

fire. He also deposed that he saw Sobha running with fire on her body.

He denied the presence of the accused at the relevant time. Therefore,

CRL.A.No.185/05                    -16-


he was declared hostile to the prosecution by the Public Prosecutor with

the permission of the court and was cross-examined.

      12. PW8 is a coolie worker. At the relevant time he was the

Kadambur Branch Secretary of CPI(M). He knew PW1 and his deceased

daughter Sobha. Sobha was married to Suseelan, the accused.            He

participated in that marriage. To resolve the problems in their marital

life, he had interfered. Sobha's father made a complaint to him. Based

on that, he talked to Sobha.          She told him that for not paying

Rs.5000/-, which is the balance amount of dowry, she is being harassed

and manhandled by the accused. He came to know that owing to the

quarrel between them, Sobha has come to her parental house.          Such

quarrels took place on three occasions within a period of six months.

Based on the complaint of Sobha's father, the witness went to the house

of the accused. He talked to the accused and his relatives. Based on

that Ext.P16 agreement was executed. He saw Sobha while she was in

the hospital. She told him that Suseelan (accused) poured kerosene and

set fire to her. She also told him that the said incident happened day

before yesterday. He was also told by Sobha that the accused burned

her using kerosene for non-payment of the balance dowry amount. The

accused has done this to kill her intentionally, told Sobha to him. He was

CRL.A.No.185/05                   -17-


cross-examined extensively by the accused. In the cross-examination, he

stated that he did not go to the Koyipram Police Station on that day (the

date on which he went to the hospital). He further stated that he has not

gone to the Police Station along with PW1. The police questioned him

while he was in the hospital.      It appears, the same was done on

21.6.1999, submitted PW8. He denied the suggestion of the defence that

because of political rivalry towards the accused, who was a member of a

trade union affiliated to B.M.S., he was being falsely implicated in this

case by PW8, who belongs to CPI(M).            On Ext.P16, he was cross-

examined extensively. But, he stood by his statement made in the chief

examination.

     13. PW9 is the witness to Ext.P26 scene mahazar. PW10 is the

witness to Ext.P27 mahazar, as per which Exts.P16 and P22 were seized.

PW11 is the witness to Ext.P28 mahazar seizing the gold ornaments of

the deceased. PW12 is the witness to the inquest report Ext.P29. PW13

was, at the relevant time, the Judicial First Class Magistrate of Thiruvalla.

She recorded the dying declaration of Sobha under Section 164 of the

Cr.P.C., a copy of which was marked as Ext.P30. It was recorded on

21.6.1999 at 3.40 p.m. She would depose that the statement was

recorded in accordance with law. Before and after the recording of the

CRL.A.No.185/05                   -18-


statement, Sobha was examined by a doctor of the hospital, who certified

that she was mentally fit to give the statement. The doctor who examined

Sobha is PW21.

      14. PW14 was, at the relevant time, the Tahsildar, who prepared

Ext.P29   inquest    report.     PW15     was   the  Village  Officer of

Thottappuzhassery Village Office, who prepared the scene plan Ext.P31.

PW16 is Dr.K.P.Nair.     It was he who admitted Sobha in Pushpagiri

Hospital, Thiruvalla.   He has issued Ext.P31 Accident Register-cum-

Wound Certificate. In the said certificate the cause of injury was shown

as accidental burn. It was shown as the own statement of the injured.

      15. PW17 is the doctor who conducted the autopsy and prepared

Ext.P33 post-mortem certificate. He has deposed that the cause of death

was infection arising from the burn injuries. PW18 was the Sub Inspector

of Police at the relevant time, who recorded Ext.P1 FI Statement given

by PW1 and registered Ext.P34 FIR. It was he who gave requisition to

the Judicial First Class Magistrate, Thiruvalla to record the dying

declaration of the injured Sobha. He stated that the FIR was registered

at 2.30 p.m on 21.6.1999. He denied the suggestion of the defence that

he has suppressed the FI Statement given on 20.6.1999 and under the

influence of PW8, he has falsely implicated the accused. PW19 was the

CRL.A.No.185/05                   -19-


Deputy Superintendent of Police at the relevant time. At the early stages

of investigation of the case, he has verified the investigation and has

given instructions to the investigating officer.

     16. PW20 is the investigating officer. At the relevant time, he was

the C.I of Police, Kozhencherry. He took over the investigation of the

case on 21.6.1999. On that day itself he prepared the scene mahazar

Ext.P26. He seized a kerosene bottle, one box of matches and three

burned matches under a mahazar. The kerosene bottle was marked as

MO12. The box of matches was marked as MO13. The three burned

matches were marked as MO14 series. The burned portions of Sobha's

clothes found at the scene were recovered. The said material objects

were marked as MO8 and MO9. He questioned the witnesses, completed

the investigation and laid the charge before the Judicial First Class

Magistrate's Court-II, Pathanamthitta. The statements of the witnesses,

who were declared hostile, made before the police under Section 161

Cr.P.C., were also proved through PW20.         He was extensively cross-

examined by the defence. He has stated that while preparing the scene

mahazar Ext.P26, he did not see any kerosene lamp. He denied the

suggestion that it was in fact a case of accident and he has falsely

implicated the accused.     The witness explained that the relatives of

CRL.A.No.185/05                   -20-


Sobha who brought her for treatment, to avoid registration of a crime,

have stated that it was a case of accident.

      17.   PW21 is Dr.S. Aparna.      At the relevant time she was the

Casualty Medical Officer in Pushpagiri Hospital.      On 21.6.1999 she

examined Sobha and certified about the physical condition of that patient.

The Judicial First Class Magistrate,      Thiruvalla recorded the dying

declaration of Sobha on the said date. On examination, she found that

Sobha was conscious and her mental condition was fit for making a

statement before the Magistrate.      In the cross-examination, she has

stated that she did not do any clinical assessment of the state of mind of

the patient.

      18. The learned Additional Sessions Judge questioned the accused,

based on the depositions of the witnesses. The accused gave his version

and finally, he stated that when the incident happened, he was away and

was collecting sand from Pamba river. He came to know of the incident

only by 3 a.m.     On coming to know of the incident, he went to the

hospital and asked Sobha what happened. Sobha told him that she was

lying down and reading a weekly. When she was turning the pages of the

weekly, her hand hit against the lamp and the same fell on her body. He

gave water to his wife as requested by her. He told his mother what

CRL.A.No.185/05                  -21-


Sobha told him. On the next day of the incident, the relatives of Sobha

came. They started accusing him for the incident and they manhandled

him. They also threatened to kill him. For fear of his life, thereafter, he

did not go to the hospital.    He was innocent.    He was arrested and

brutally manhandled by the police. He was a member of the B.M.S union.

For that, PW8, who was a leader of the CPI(M), was harbouring ill-will

towards him.

     19. From the defence side one Mr.Sukumaran was examined as

DW1. He was examined to prove the plea of alibi raised by the accused.

DW1 was a co-worker of the accused and he deposed that on the fateful

day they were together at the work site.

     20. The following facts are undisputed in this case. Sobha, the wife

of the accused suffered burn injuries while she was in her house at about

10.45 p.m. On 19.6.1999. She came out crying. P.Ws.5, 6 and others

poured water on her body. She was taken to a nearby hospital and form

there she was taken to Pushpagiri Hospital, Thiruvalla. Her statement

was recorded under Section 164 Cr.P.C., by the Judicial First        Class

Magistrate, Thiruvalla on 21.6.1999 at 3.40 p.m. She died in the hospital

on 2.7.1999 at 11.15 p.m.      PW17, who conducted the post-mortem

examination has given his opinion for the cause of death as 'died of

CRL.A.No.185/05                    -22-


infection following burns'. The above opinion is given in Ext.P33. The

point that arises for decision is whether it was a human agency, which

caused the burn injuries or it was an accident. Even if accident is not the

reason for causing the injuries, it has to be further examined whether it

was homicidal or suicidal.

      21. First we will deal with the theory of the defence that it was a

case of accident. The materials on record in support of this proposition

are the following: The Accident-cum-Wound Certificate Ext.P32 shows

the cause of burn injury as falling of a burning lamp while reading. The

said certificate would further show that the said statement was given by

the injured Sobha. PW4 has stated that Sobha told her that the burn

injury was caused by the falling of a burning lamp.           The trial court

disbelieved the above version of the defence regarding the incident.

Going by the materials on record, we fully agree with the trial Judge on

this point. The post-mortem report shows the following injuries on the

body of the deceased:

      "B. INJURIES (Ante-Mortem)

      1. Infected dermo epidermal burns involving (a) all areas of
      face, (b) all areas of neck, (c ) all areas of chest and upper
      half of abdomen, (d) back of trunk up to a point 17 cm above
      the natal cleft, (e) both upper limbs, (f) front, inner and outer
      aspect of right thigh, (g) over an area 5x4 cm on the front of
      middle of thigh, (h) over an area 6x4 cm on the back of right

CRL.A.No.185/05                     -23-


     thigh.

     2. Surgical sutured cut down wound 3.5 cm long on the inner
     aspect of right leg 2 cm above the ankle.

     3. Infected wound 3x1 cm on the inner aspect of left ankle."

If she was lying down and reading and thereupon the lamp fell down,

immediately the light will be put out and she will become aware of the

accident.   By the time the fire starts, she will be able to put it out.

Having regard to the nature of the injuries on the body noted in the post-

mortem report, it is inherently improbable that they were caused as a

result of accidental fall of a small kerosene lamp, which would have been

noticed by the deceased immediately. So, we reject the claim of the

defence that it was a case of accident. The statement in the Accident-

cum-Wound Certificate regarding the cause of injury stated to have been

given by the deceased, cannot be believed to be the actual version of the

deceased. At the relevant time, the deceased was a patient, who was

suffering from 80% burn injury and must be reeling under excruciating

pain.    She was surrounded by the relatives of her husband only. She

had to depend on them, even for a coup of water. PW6 in her deposition

stated that it was she who told the doctor PW16 about the cause of the

incident. She has stated as follows: "At the hospital the doctor asked me

about the name, address etc.        The doctor took down the information

CRL.A.No.185/05                    -24-


furnished by me. I told the doctor how the burn injury was caused. The

doctor did not ask me how the burn was caused. I told the doctor that

fire was caught from a lamp."

      22.   The above statement would show that in fact it was PW6, who

took the injured to the hospital, told   the cause of injury to the doctor.

The deceased, who was conscious, can only concur with PW6. So, the

statement might have been recorded as the statement given by the

deceased. PW20, the investigating officer has also spoken to regarding

the above aspect. He stated that to avoid registration of a crime, the

relatives of the accused made the statement regarding accident. PW17,

the doctor who conducted the post-mortem examination has stated that

the possibility of catching fire by accidental fall of a lamp, as suggested

by the defence, was remote. He stated that such a possibility is rare. In

view of the above materials also, we reiterate that this was not a case of

accident.

      23.   The next point to be considered is whether the death was

homicidal or suicidal. The injuries on the body of the deceased can be

caused, if she pours kerosene on her body, lit matches and set fire to

herself. But, the said possibility has to be examined in the light of the

overwhelming evidence to the contrary. The main piece of evidence to

CRL.A.No.185/05                    -25-


show that the injuries were not suicidal but homicidal, is the dying

declaration made by the deceased before the Judicial First Class

Magistrate, Thiruvalla, PW13. The statement of Sobha is Ext.P30. PW21

has certified that the injured was in a fit condition of mind to give the

statement. She has certified before and after the recording of the

statement by the Judicial First Class Magistrate, about the above mental

condition of the injured.    The point to be considered is whether the

injured has given a false statement to falsely implicate her husband.

Normally, a person at the threshold of the next world will only speak the

truth.      But, the defence would point out that there are several

declarations which could be treated as dying declarations. So, it will be

quite unsafe to rely on Ext.P30, to sustain the conviction against the

accused.

      24. The learned counsel for the appellant vehemently contended

that in the face of several versions coming from the mouth of the injured

regarding the reason for the injury, her statement before the Magistrate

should also be disbelieved. The learned counsel pointed out that before

PW16, the doctor, Sobha deposed that she sustained the burn injuries on

account of the accidental fall of a kerosene lamp.  But, to PW6, she told

that it was an attempted case of suicide. We have already dealt with the

CRL.A.No.185/05                     -26-


statement of the deceased before PW16, which finds a place in the

Accident-cum-Wound Certificate Ext.P32. In fact, it is a statement made

by PW6, who took the injured to the doctor. PW6 is the aunt of the

accused. She is hostile to the prosecution. Her statement before the

police under Section 161 Cr.P.C was proved through PW20, the

investigating officer.    Before the police, PW6 has stated that Sobha

sustained the burn injuries because the accused poured kerosene on her

and set fire to her. A different version given by PW6 while in the box was

not believed by the trial court, which had the occasion to see and watch

the demeanour of the witness. So, we are of the view that the statement

given by PW6 concerning the cause of burn injury cannot be believed or

acted upon.

      25. Yet another circumstance which may go against the theory of

suicide, is the fact that the injured came out of her house, crying for help.

If it was a case of suicide, normally, the person will not frantically come

out, crying for help. Such persons will remain locked inside the room till

death silences them. Even the hostile witnesses have spoken to that

Sobha frantically come out from her house, crying for help and she

readily accompanied the persons, who carried her to the hospital.

Further, PW3 has spoken to about the presence of the accused in the

CRL.A.No.185/05                   -27-


house, immediately after Sobha came out crying for help. We find no

reason to disbelieve the said statement of PW3. He is an independent

witness, though he was treated as hostile to the prosecution for having

retracted from some of his earlier statements before the police.        The

accused did not attempt to take the injured to the hospital. If it was a

case of suicide, the accused would have been in the forefront to render

assistance to her and to take her to the hospital. The evidence of PW3

would show that the plea of alibi raised by the accused is a false plea. It

is a circumstance against the accused. From the above circumstances,

we are of the definite view that the suggestion of the defence that it was

a case of suicide has to be ruled out.

      26. We also notice the decisions cited by both sides concerning the

reliability of dying declarations.   We are convinced that each case is

decided based on the facts of that case. There is no rule of law which

says that if there is more than one dying declaration, the benefit of doubt

should go to the accused and he should be acquitted. In this case, we

notice that the first statement before the doctor which finds a place in the

Accident-cum-Wound Certificate, is, in fact, the statement of PW6. We

are of the view, as mentioned earlier, that the learned Additional Sessions

Judge rightly disbelieved the version of PW6 regarding the cause of

CRL.A.No.185/05                   -28-


injury.  If that be so, the only surviving dying declaration is the one

recorded by PW13 as per Ext.P30. We find no reason to disbelieve the

contents of that statement, which was properly recorded by the learned

Magistrate.     Going by the general principle laid down in the

aforementioned decisions cited by both sides, we feel that the trial court

has rightly relied on Ext.P30, to find the accused guilty. We agree with

the reasons and conclusions of the trial Judge. We also hold that the

prosecution has proved beyond doubt that it was         the accused who

caused the burn injuries on the body of his wife Sobha. So, he has been

rightly convicted and sentenced by the court below.

      In the result the Criminal Appeal fails and it is accordingly

dismissed.




                            K.BALAKRISHNAN NAIR, JUDGE.




                            M.C.HARI RANI, JUDGE.

dsn

CRL.A.No.185/05                 -29-


Mohammed v. State 1999 (3) KLT 948

Shersingh v. State of Punjab 2008(2) SCC Crl.783

(1993(2) SCC 684),
2006(3) SCC 161,
2008(5) SCC 468

State of Maharashtra v. Sanjay (AIR 2005 SC 97)


