

 IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

RPFC.No. 26 of 2003()


1. GEORGE, AGED 78,
                      ...  Petitioner

                        Vs



1. EALIYAMMA GEORGE @ HAJAMMA GEORGE,
                       ...       Respondent

                For Petitioner  :SRI.SUBAL J.PAUL

                For Respondent  :SRI.GEO PAUL

The Hon'ble MR. Justice A.K.BASHEER

 Dated :14/02/2008

 O R D E R
                             A.K. Basheer, J.

                - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

                      R.P (F.C) No. 26 of 2003

                - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

            Dated this the 14th day of February, 2008.

                                   ORDER

      This revision petition is at the instance of a husband. He

impugns the preliminary order passed by the Family Court,

Ernakulam on the question of maintainability of the petition filed by

his wife under Section 127 of the Code of criminal Procedure before

the court for enhancement of maintenance awarded to her in an

earlier proceeding.

      2. It is on record that maintenance was awarded to the wife at

the rate of Rs.100/- per mensem u/s 125 of the Code by the Chief

Judicial Magistrate's Court, Alappuzha, way back in the year 1977.

The wife filed the present application in 2001 for enhancement,

under Section 127 of the Code before the Family Court, Ernakulam

contending that she was not able to maintain herself with the

paltry sum awarded to her. She is a heart patient in her late 60's.

Her two grown up children are residing separately. Therefore

she   sought    enhancement         of     the maintenance         allowance of

Rs.100/= to Rs.500/= per month. She specifically averred in the

RPFC.26/2003.                     2



application that     she had been residing permanently at Eloor in

Ernakuam District within the jurisdiction of Family Court, Ernakuam.

      3. The revision petitioner/husband raised a preliminary objection

contending, inter alia,     that the said application    could not be

entertained by the Family Court.       According    to him   such    an

application ought to have been filed before the same court which

passed the original order under Section 125 of the Code.

      4. The Family Court repelled the above contention and held that

the application was maintainable. The said order is under challenge in

this revision petition.

      5. It is contended by the learned counsel that an application for

enhancement of maintenance u/s 127 of the Code has to be preferred

by the party seeking such enhancement or alteration          before the

same court which passed the original order.        He submits that a

proceeding under Section 127 of the Code is a continuation of the

original proceeding under Section 125 and therefore only the same

court which passed the earlier order can deal with an application

for alteration or enhancement. Yet another defect pointed out by the

petitioner is that the applicant/wife had not produced the copy of the

RPFC.26/2003.                      3



earlier order along with her application and therefore it ought to have

been rejected by the Family Court at the threshold itself. Are the

above contentions legally tenable?

        6. It may be noticed that u/s 125 of the Code, the court of a

judicial Magistrate of First Class within whose jurisdiction the husband

or the former husband is, or where he or his wife resides or where he

last resided with his wife, may order the husband to pay maintenance

to his wife who is unable to maintain herself or his legitimate or

illegitimate minor child whether married or not and unable to maintain

itself. Section 127 of the Code deals with the power of the court

to    alter    or modify     the order of maintenance in         changed

circumstances.

  Section 127 reads thus:

             "127. Alteration in allowance:--(1) On
             proof of a change in the circumstances of
             any person receiving under section 125 a
             monthly allowance for the maintenance or
             interim maintenance, or ordered under the
             same section to pay a monthly allowance
             for       the  maintenance,    or   interim
             maintenance, to his wife, child, father or
             mother, as the case may be, the Magistrate
             may make such alteration, as he thinks fit,
             in the allowance for the maintenance or the
             interim maintenance, as the case may be.

RPFC.26/2003.                        4



                 (2) Where it appears to the Magistrate
           that, in consequence of any decision of a
           competent Civil Court, any order made
           under section 125 should be cancelled or
           varied, he shall cancel the order or, as the
           case may be, vary the same accordingly.
                 (3) Where any order has been made
           under section 125 in favour of a woman
           who has been divorced by, or has obtained a
           divorce from, her husband, the Magistrate
           shall, if he is satisfied that--
                 (a) the woman has, after the date of
           such divorce, remarried, cancel such order
           as from the date of her remarriage;
                 (b) the woman has been divorced by
           her husband and that she has received,
           whether before or after the date of the said
           order, the whole of the sum, which, under
           any customary or personal law applicable to
           the parties, was payable on such divorce,
           cancel such order--
                         (i) in the case where such sum
           was paid before such order, from the date
           on which such order was made,
                         (ii) in any other case, from the
           date of expiry of the period, if any, for
           which maintenance has been actually paid
           by the husband to the woman;
                 (c) the woman has obtained a divorce
           from her husband and that she had
           voluntarily     surrendered     her  right  to
           maintenance or interim maintenance, as the
           case may be after her divorce, cancel the
           order from the date thereof.
                 (4) At the time of making any decree
           for the recovery of any maintenance or
           dowry by any person, to whom monthly
           allowance for the maintenance and interim

RPFC.26/2003.                       5



            maintenance or any of them has been
            ordered to be paid under section 125, the
            Civil Court shall take into account the sum
            which has been paid to, or recovered by,
            such person as monthly allowance for the
            maintenance and interim maintenance or
            any of them, as the case may be, in
            pursuance of the said order.


      7. A perusal of the provisions contained in sub-section (1)

extracted above, will      show that the Magistrate    may make such

alteration as he thinks fit in the allowance for maintenance or interim

maintenance awarded under Section 125, on proof of a change in the

circumstances of any person receiving such monthly allowance. Sub-

section (2) of Section 127 postulates that the Magistrate shall cancel or

vary an order of maintenance passed under Section 125 if it appears

that consequent to the decision of a competent civil court, the said

order of maintenance is liable to be varied. Sub-sections (3) and (4)

contemplate or envisage certain other contingencies and situations

which may warrant alteration or variation of the order of maintenance.

      8. It is contended by learned counsel for the petitioner that

"the Magistrate" referred to in subsections 1 to 3 has to be read

and understood as the same court which had passed the original

RPFC.26/2003.                      6



order of maintenance.     Any alteration or variation of the original

order   can be made only by the        same   Magistrate or   court, as

otherwise there    will be no meaning in      incorporating    such   a

provision in the Code, it is contended.

      9. I am afraid the above contention is totally misconceived

and untenable. By no stretch of imagination can it be said that only

the same court which had awarded maintenance         under Section 125

shall have the competence and jurisdiction to alter or vary the original

order passed earlier. Such a preposterous interpretation will not only

do violence to the statutory mandates contained in Chapter IX of the

Code, but it will also tend to defeat the laudable object sought to be

achieved    by   the legislature.     It may be remembered that the

provisions contained in Chapter IX are intended to ameliorate the

sufferings of destitute wives, children and parents. If a pedantic view

is to be adopted while interpreting such a welfare piece of legislation,

its very purpose will be negated.

       10. I am also unable to accept the contention raised by the

petitioner that any proceeding under Section 127 is a continuation of

an earlier proceeding under Section 125 of the Code and therefore an

RPFC.26/2003.                     7



order awarding maintenance can be altered only by the same court

which granted it. It may become inevitable to the beneficiary of an

order under Section 125 to seek its alteration or modification at a

later stage, in certain    changed circumstances.      When    such a

contingency arises, the party seeking alteration (especially if it is a

destitute woman as in this case) cannot be denied easy access to

justice by insisting that she should approach the same court which

passed the earlier order.      If by force of circumstances either the

husband or the wife happens to shift his/her    residence to some other

place, an application under Section 127 can be filed before any court

of competent jurisdiction as provided under Section 126 of the Code

which reads thus:

             S. 126. Procedure- (1) Proceedings under Section
       125 may be taken against any person in any district-
             (a)   where he is, or
             (b)   where he or his wife resides, or
              (c )  where he last resided with his wife, or as
       the case may be, with the mother of the illegitimate
       child.

             (2)    All evidence to such proceedings shall be
       taken in the presence of the person against whom an
       order for payment of maintenance is proposed to be
       made, or, when his personal attendance is dispensed
       with in the presence of his pleader, and shall be
       recorded in the manner prescribed for summons-cases:

RPFC.26/2003.                     8




             Provided that if the Magistrate is satisfied that
       the person against whom an order for payment of
       maintenance     is proposed to be made is      wilfully
       avoiding service, or wilfully neglecting to attend the
       Court,    the Magistrate may proceed to hear       and
       determine the case ex parte and any order so made
       may be set aside for good cause shown on an
       application made within three months from the date
       thereof subject to such terms including terms as to
       payment of     costs to   the opposite party    as the
       Magistrate may think just and proper.

             (3) The Court in dealing with applications under
       Section 125 shall have power to make such order as to
       costs as may be just."

      11. In my view Section 127 cannot be read in isolation from

Section 126. Though, for a limited and technical purpose, it can be

said that a proceeding under Section 127 is the continuation of an

earlier proceeding under Section 125, the scope and ambit of Section

127 are wide enough to confer jurisdiction to any competent court, to

alter or modify the original order passed by any other    court under

Section 125 subject, of course, to the procedural and jurisdictional

parameters or restrictions   contemplated both under Sections 126 and

127 of the Code.

       12. It is true that Section 126 of the Code refers only to a

proceeding under Section 127. But still, the procedure prescribed in

RPFC.26/2003.                     9



that section will have to be read and understood to be applicable

to the proceedings under Section 127 of the Code as well. Such a

purposive and meaningful interpretation will only subserve the

legislative intent and purport. More importantly, there is nothing   in

Section 127 which will indicate that the Magistrate exercising

jurisdiction thereunder   is   in any way denuded of the power to

decide the issue as a court of original jurisdiction.

      13. Learned counsel for the petitioner has invited my attention to

a decision of the Rajasthan High Court in Rajkumar v. Shantha Bai

reported in 2002 Crl.L.J. 2894. In the above case the husband had

challenged an order passed by the Sessions Court enhancing/modifying

the amount of maintenance awarded by the trial court to his wife and

minor child. The additional Chief Judicial Magistrate had awarded

monthly maintenance at the rate of Rs.250/- to the wife and Rs.150/-

each for the two children with effect from the date of order.

      14. The adequacy of the award of maintenance was challenged

by the wife before the Sessions Court in a revision petition. Learned

Sessions Judge modified and enhanced the award and directed the

husband to pay a monthly allowance of Rs.400/- to his wife and

RPFC.26/2003.                    10



Rs.250/- each to the two children.

     15. The learned Judge of the Rajasthan High Court, before

whom the revision petition preferred by the husband came up for

consideration,   took the view that the Sessions Court        was not

competent to alter or modify the award of maintenance granted by the

Magistrate. The learned Judge took the view that the order passed by

the Sessions Court was an alteration or modification coming within the

ambit of Section 127. According to the learned Judge, if an alteration

or modification of an order passed under section 125 had to be made, it

could have been done only by the same court which had passed the

order under Section 125. The reasoning of the learned Judge, with due

respect, cannot be accepted as a correct interpretation of the relevant

provisions of the Code. The reasoning given by the learned Judge is

extracted hereunder:

             "     13. A reading of S.126 Cr.P.C
             would show that it provides for
             procedure and the jurisdiction of the
             Court where an application under
             S.125 Cr.P.C could be filed. Section
             127 Cr.P.C which is for alteration in
             the amount is completely different and
             for this     S.126 Cr.P.C has no
             application. Section 127(1) Cr.P.C
             provides a proof of change in the

RPFC.26/2003.                      11



             circumstances of any person receiving
             under S.125 a monthly allowance, or
             ordered under the same section to pay
             a monthly allowance to his wife, child,
             father or mother, as the case may be,
             the   Magistrate     may    make     such
             alteration in the allowance as he thinks
             fit. The words "the Magistrate" would
             mean the Magistrate who has passed
             the first order of maintenance because
             court    is    strengthened     in    this
             interpretation by the fact that S.128
             Cr.P.C which is the section for
             enforcement order of maintenance
             specifically provides that such petition
             under S.125 Cr.P.C may be presented
             before "any Magistrate". Therefore, in
             these circumstances, the petition under
             S.127 Cr.P.C will have to be filed
             before the Magistrate who has passed
             the first order of maintenance. Similar
             view has been taken by Andhra
             Pradesh High Court in the case of
             G.Balraj v. Smt.Mallamma reported in
             1984 Cr.L.J. 1170.
                   14.       Thus,    the   impugned
             judgment    passed    by    the   learned
             Additional Sessions Judge No.2 by
             which he enhanced the maintenance
             amount awarded to the respondent
             becomes per se illegal and cannot be
             sustained and is liable to be set aside."


     16. Though learned counsel for the petitioner contended that the

reasoning of the learned Judge of the Rajasthan High Court    in the

RPFC.26/2003.                     12



decision cited supra is squarely applicable in this case, I have no

hesitation to repel the said contention. Apparently, what had been

challenged before the learned single Judge was the revisional order

passed by the Sessions Court seeking enhancement of          the award

passed by the Magistrate under Section 125.         Evidently the order

impugned before the High Court was not one passed under Section

127 of the Code. Even assuming so, I am not persuaded to subscribe

to the view taken by the learned Judge in the above decision.

      17. The next contention raised by the petitioner is that since the

respondent/applicant had not produced a copy of the earlier order

passed by the Magistrate       under Section 125 along with         her

application for   alteration, the   court   below ought not    to have

entertained the application at all. It is contended      that a proper

adjudication would be possible only if the said order had been

produced.    But the above defect       can be cured if either of the

parties produces the copy of the earlier order in the course of the

proceedings. Therefore, the above contention is also repelled.

      18. To conclude, it is held that an application under Section 127

of the Code need not necessarily be filed before the same court which

RPFC.26/2003.                     13



passed the original order under section 125. An application under

Section 127 of the Code can be filed before any court of competent

jurisdiction as provided under section 126 of the Code depending on

the territorial jurisdiction which governs the parties. Even assuming

that an application under section 127 of the Code is a continuation of

the original lis initiated u/s 125 there can be no doubt that for all

procedural and legal purposes the subsequent proceeding has to be,

and can always be, dealt with by a competent court of jurisdiction in

consonance with the provisions contained in Section 126 of the Code.

        19. It is revealed from the records that the applicant is a heart

patient who is in her late 60's. Her two grown up children are living

separately . She was awarded only Rs.100/- per month way back in the

year 1977. The present application was filed by her in the year 2001

seeking enhancement of       the  amount to Rs.500/- per month. She

specifically averred in the application that she has her     permanent

residence now at Eloor in Ernakulam District within the jurisdiction of

Family Court, Ernakulam. This contention is not seen to have been

controverted. Therefore the said court has jurisdiction to entertain the

application filed by the respondent/applicant for enhancement under

RPFC.26/2003.                      14



Section 127. In that view of the matter, there is no illegality in the

order passed by the     court below.      The contentions raised by the

petitioner are wholly misconceived and untenable.

      Revision Petition fails and it is accordingly dismissed.



                                                       A.K. Basheer
                                                           Judge.
an.

RPFC.26/2003.    15




                            A.K. BASHEER, J.




                     R.P.(F.C)NO.26 OF 2003




                     O R D E R




                    14th February, 2008.


