

 IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

Bail Appl..No. 6720 of 2008()


1. DAMODARAN, AGED 58 YEARS,
                      ...  Petitioner
2. SASIKALA.D, AGED 35 YEARS,
3. PRAMEELA.D, W/O.G.V. KRISHNAN,
4. G.V. KRISHNAN, AGED 40 YEARS,

                        Vs



1. STATE OF KERALA,
                       ...       Respondent

2. PREMA SHALINI, AGED 28 YEARS,

                For Petitioner  :SRI.KODOTH SREEDHARAN

                For Respondent  :PUBLIC PROSECUTOR

The Hon'ble MRS. Justice K.HEMA

 Dated :05/11/2008

 O R D E R
                             K.HEMA, J.
                  ---------------------------------------------
                         B.A.No.6720 of 2008
                  ---------------------------------------------
                 Dated this the 5th November, 2008



                                O R D E R


      This petition is for anticipatory bail.

      2.    The alleged offences are under Sections 498(A), 506

(ii) and 34 IPC. According to prosecution, defacto complainant

was harassed by relatives of her husband, demanding more

dowry and on 18.10.2008, there was a quarrel in the house and

A1 poured kerosene on her body and when she made a hue and

cry, people of the locality intervened and she escaped. The other

accused supported her. A1 is the brother-in-law. A2 and A3 are

sister-in-laws of the defacto complainant. A4 is the husband of

her sister-in-law. It is also alleged that second accused was

having an illicit affair with a person and she was caught red-

handed and the family members believe that the defacto

complainant was instrumental for the same. This is also a reason

for harassing the defacto complainant.

      3.    Learned counsel for petitioners submitted that

kerosene was only poured and she was not set fire to, as per the

BA No. 6720/2008                  2



allegations. It is also submitted that this is a counter blast to

another case. A2 filed a case against her own husband and

defacto complainant's husband and that is why this complaint is

filed. It is also submitted that there is a chance for settlement

and therefore, anticipatory bail may be granted to the

petitioners.

      4.    This petition is opposed. Learned public prosecutor

submitted that allegations made against petitioners are serious.

Petitioners harassed defacto complainant and there was also a

specific reason for harassing her. Defacto complainant did not

make any complaint against her husband. It is not a fit case to

grant anticipatory bail, it is submitted.

      5.    On hearing both sides, on consideration of the nature

of allegations made, I am satisfied that it is not a fit case to grant

anticipatory bail. Though learned counsel would submit that a

case was filed against defacto complainant's husband and the

husband of the second accused and that this case is a counter

blast, it is not clarified as to what are the allegations made,

whether it is a civil case or a criminal case etc. There is only a

bald assertion that a case was filed and this is a counter blast.

BA No. 6720/2008                  3



In such circumstances, I find absolutely no reason to grant

anticipatory bail.    Crime is registered on 21.10.2008 and

petitioners are not available for interrogation and investigation.

            Hence, petitioners are directed to surrender before

            the Investigating Officer without any delay         and

            co-operate with the investigation. Whether they

            surrendered or not, police is at liberty to arrest them

            at any time.


      With this direction, this petition is dismissed.




                                                  K.HEMA, JUDGE
csl


