

 IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

Bail Appl..No. 6456 of 2008()


1. KAMALAKSHI, AGED 85 YEARS,
                      ...  Petitioner
2. JAMEELA, AGED 45 YEARS,

                        Vs



1. STATE OF KERALA, REPRESENTED BY
                       ...       Respondent

                For Petitioner  :SRI.M.T.BALAN

                For Respondent  :PUBLIC PROSECUTOR

The Hon'ble MRS. Justice K.HEMA

 Dated :28/10/2008

 O R D E R
                             K.HEMA, J.

                 -----------------------------------------
                        B.A.No.6456 of 2008
                 -----------------------------------------

               Dated this the 28th October, 2008

                              O R D E R

      This petition is for anticipatory bail.

      2. The alleged offences are under Sections 304B and 306 of

the Indian Penal Code. According to prosecution,            wife of first

accused committed suicide from his house on 7.8.2008 by

consuming poison. First accused and his mother and sister (accused

2 and 3) were harassing her, by demanding more money and dowry

and thereby committed offences under the above said Sections. A

crime was registered under the caption 'unnatural death' on the

same day on the complaint made by the de facto complainant's

brother.

      3. Learned counsel for petitioners submitted that petitioners

are mother-in-law and sister-in-law of the deceased. First petitioner

is aged 85 years and second petitioner, sister-in-law is not residing

in the same house. They are absolutely innocent of the allegations

made. The deceased used to get certain unknown phone calls and

just before the incident, a phone call came and she was not willing

to attend the phone call. She was totally disturbed, thereafter.

Later, she collapsed while she was washing clothes. She was

immediately taken to the hospital and she was reported dead.

  BA.6456/08                        2

There was no incident prior to the present case in which any

allegation of harassment was made. The deceased's brother is an

active worker of CPI(M) and at his instance, the police has

registered the crime and false allegations are now being made

against petitioners. If petitioners are arrested and detained, they

will be subjected to harassment and torture, it is submitted.

Learned counsel for petitioners submitted that anticipatory bail

may be granted atleast to the first petitioner.

      4. This petition is opposed. Learned counsel for de facto

complainant was also heard. It was submitted by learned counsel

for de facto complainant that the information conveyed to the de

facto complainant by petitioners (accused 2 and 3) on the crucial

day was that the deceased had a heart attack. But, he found some

violet coloured liquid coming out of the nose which was wiped out

from the body and on seeing this, he had suspicion. Hence, he made

a complaint to the police, suspecting reasons other than cardiac

attack. He also insisted for conduct of postmortem examination

which was refused by petitioners and first accused as well as one

"Swamy".     It was also submitted that though the doctor, who

examined the deceased at the hospital stated that it was a case of

cardiac arrest, on postmortem examination, it was revealed that it

is a case of poisoning.

  BA.6456/08                         3

      5. It was also submitted that the remnants of poison which

was consumed by the deceased was not available in the house and

it was not traced out from the house. Therefore, it is now suspected

that poison must have been deliberately removed by the inmates of

the house. Second petitioner is not residing in the house, but it was

she who took the deceased to the hospital along with the brother. In

such circumstances, unless petitioners are interrogated by police, it

may not be possible to find out the real cause of death, it is

submitted. It is even suspected that it may not be a case of murder

by poisoning, but, something more would have happened, learned

counsel submitted. Learned counsel for de facto complainant also

submitted that steps are being taken for investigation by the CBI.

      6. On hearing both sides, I find that petitioners' custodial

interrogation will be required, in the peculiar facts and

circumstances of the case, particularly since the remnants of the

poison could not be detected in the house-search. In the peculiar

circumstances of the case, I find that the request by first petitioner

also cannot be allowed, since she was also present at the house,

when the deceased collapsed at the house and she will have many

materials within her exclusive knowledge to be conveyed to the

police. If anticipatory bail is granted and the petitioners are not

subjected to interrogation, it is likely that it will adversely affect the

  BA.6456/08                         4

investigation. The facts which are in the exclusive knowledge of the

petitioners can be brought out only by interrogating them in

custody. Therefore, it may not be proper to grant anticipatory bail

in a case of this nature. The incident occurred as early as on

7.8.2008 and the petitioners could not be arrested so far.

                 Petitioners are hence directed to surrender

           before the police within seven days from today and

           co-operate with the investigation.

      With this direction, petition is dismissed.




                                    K.HEMA, JUDGE
vgs.


