

 IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

Bail Appl..No. 7168 of 2008()


1. SANTHOSH KUMAR, AGED 39 YEARS,
                      ...  Petitioner

                        Vs



1. STATE OF KERALA REP.BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR
                       ...       Respondent

                For Petitioner  :SRI.T.A.UNNIKRISHNAN

                For Respondent  :PUBLIC PROSECUTOR

The Hon'ble MRS. Justice K.HEMA

 Dated :01/12/2008

 O R D E R
                             K.HEMA, J.

                 -----------------------------------------

                        B.A.No. 7168 of 2008

                 -----------------------------------------

              Dated this the 2nd December, 2008

                              O R D E R

      This petition is for anticipatory bail.

      2. The alleged offences are under Sections 498A, 326 and 34

of the Indian Penal Code. According to prosecution, petitioner is

husband of de facto complainant. They were married 8 years back

and for about 3 years, they were living happily. Thereafter,

petitioner, his mother and sister started harassing de facto

complainant demanding more money and dowry. De facto

complainant was residing in the house of petitioner, which was

purchased using money given to her at the time of her marriage

also. But, mother-in-law insisted that the property shall be given to

the third accused, who is sister-in-law. De facto complainant was

not willing for the same. Therefore, petitioner was physically and

mentally harassed by petitioner and his family members. On

10.10.2008, petitioner was assaulted by all the accused and she

sustained a fracture to the mandible.

      3. Learned counsel for petitioner submitted that the

allegations are not correct. The parties were living happily, but de

facto complainant insisted that petitioner should take a house close

to her parental house and on account of this, there was some

   BA.7168/08                     2

difference of opinion. Petitioner was not assaulted, but she had

fallen down and sustained some injury. She had gone to her house

for some time. After three years of the marriage, she was residing

away from the house of petitioner. There is chance for settlement, it

is submitted.

      4. This petition is opposed. Learned Public Prosecutor

submitted that this is a case where even physical assault was made

on de facto complainant and she sustained grievous hurt. Parties

were living separately after three years of marriage. She again

started living with him a few months back, but there was an

altercation about four months back while she was residing with

petitioner and    she was again assaulted. All these happened

because she was not ready to transfer the property belonging to

petitioner in the name of petitioner's sister because, it was bought

with the fund of de facto complainant also.

      On hearing both sides, considering the nature of allegations

made, I am satisfied that it is not a fit case to grant anticipatory

bail. Crime was registered as early as on 25.10.2008 and petitioner

is bound to surrender before the police and co-operate with the

investigation.

      Petition is dismissed.




                                  K.HEMA, JUDGE
vgs.


