

 IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

Bail Appl..No. 6502 of 2008()


1. GIRISH KUMAR, AGED 38 YEARS,
                      ...  Petitioner

                        Vs



1. STATE OF KERALA REPRESENTED BY SI OF
                       ...       Respondent

                For Petitioner  :SRI.M.ASOKAN

                For Respondent  :PUBLIC PROSECUTOR

The Hon'ble MRS. Justice K.HEMA

 Dated :06/11/2008

 O R D E R
                             K.HEMA, J.

                 -----------------------------------------
                        B.A.No.6502 of 2008
                 -----------------------------------------

               Dated this the 6th November, 2008

                              O R D E R

     This petition is for anticipatory bail.

     2. The alleged offences are under Sections 498-A and 34 of

the Indian Penal Code. According to prosecution, petitioner and the

deceased Bindu were married in the year 2006. A child was also

born in the wed-lock. Deceased was working as an LIC agent. She

was physically and mentally harassed by petitioner and his mother,

demanding more dowry. Petitioner was also a drunkard, who used

to assault her. On the date of suicide, she called her mother and

informed that she is coming to her parental house. When she was

about to leave the house with the child, her mother-in-law did not

allow her to take the child along with her. Therefore, she committed

suicide on the railway track.

     3. Learned counsel for petitioner submitted that petitioner is

absolutely innocent of the allegations made. Mother-in-law, who is

the second accused, was granted anticipatory bail by the Sessions

Court. This is only a case of accidental death and an attempt is

made to convert it into a case of suicide and petitioner is being

harassed by filing a complaint at a highly belated stage alleging

offence under Section 498A IPC. It is submitted that after the

    BA.6502/08                      2

death, deceased Bindu's family members wanted the child's

custody, for which petitioner was not amenable and this alone was

the reason why a complaint was lodged alleging offences.

      4. It is also pointed out that the place where the dead body

was found is only 500 meters away from the house of the LIC

Development Officer and the deceased's bag contained details of

several policy holders and it is clear that she was attending her

work as usual. It is also pointed out that the said place is 20 km

away from the house of petitioner as well as deceased's family

house. It is also submitted that no suicide note was seized.

      5. This petition is opposed. Learned Public Prosecutor

submitted that case diary reveals that deceased was harassed by

petitioner after getting drunkard. He used to assault her and also

mentally torture her demanding more money etc. The nature of

incident happened and the investigation so far conducted reveal

that it is a case of suicide and not a mere accident. Petitioner is

required for custodial interrogation and it is not a fit case to grant

anticipatory bail, it is submitted. Learned Public Prosecutor also

pointed out that immediately after two days of the death, statement

of relevant witnesses were recorded and those revealed harassment

from the side of petitioner and his mother.

    BA.6502/08                      3

      6. On hearing both sides and considering the facts and

circumstances and the nature of investigation required, I find that it

is not a fit case to grant anticipatory bail. Petitioner's interrogation

would be required for an effective investigation. Hence, I am not

inclined to grant anticipatory bail to petitioner.

      Petition is dismissed.




                                    K.HEMA, JUDGE
vgs.


