

 IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

CRP.No. 463 of 2001(B)



1. C.A.MARY
                      ...  Petitioner

                        Vs

1. TALUK LAND BOARD
                       ...       Respondent

                For Petitioner  :SRI.T.A.RAMADASAN

                For Respondent  :GP-SPL.S.C.

The Hon'ble MR. Justice HARUN-UL-RASHID

 Dated :08/08/2008

 O R D E R
                        HARUN-UL-RASHID, J.
                   --------------------------
                       C.R.P. No. 463 OF 2001
                   --------------------------
                  Dated this the 8th August, 2008.

                              O R D E R


      This revision petition is filed by the legal heirs of one of the

sons of the declarant Shri. Chandy Joseph challenging the order in

TLB 877/73 dated 11.7.2000 of the Taluk Land Board, Telicherry.

By the impugned order the Taluk Land Board held that the declarant

as head of tthe statutory family owned a total extent of 97.85

acres, that an extent of 0.60 acres is liable to be exempted as

house site, that out of the remaining extent the family is entitled to

retain 20 acres and is liable to surrender 78.87 acres. Out of the

extent so found as excess land, 27.37 acres was taken over as

surplus land as per the order dated 22.9.1976. The Taluk Land

Board held that the balance extent to be surrendered is 47.90 acres

and that the legal heirs of the late declarant has the right to retain a

total extent of 20.60 acres only.

      2. The statutory family consists of the declarant Shri. Chandy

Joseph (now died), his wife Mary and four minor children as on

1.1.1970. Besides the four minor children there are other major

C.R.P.NO: 463/01                   2

children. This revision petition is filed by the legal heirs of one

major son Shri. Jose Paul, died pending proceedings. Respondents

2 to 10 are the other children of the declarant.

      3. Legal heirs of the declarant contended before the Taluk

Land Board that 60 acres of land which stands in the name of the

declarant-wife Mary was purchased as per document No: 333/63

dated 13.2.1963.    According to the declarant the purchase was

made in the name of Mary with the sums contributed by major

earning children and amount received from the sale of ancestral

properties. It is also stated by them that in order to avoid any

dispute between the family members it was decided to purchase

the property in the mother's name and they have agreed to divide it

in between them later.        It is also submitted by the revision

petitioners that the declarant and his family belonged to Elanji in

Central Travancore.         They have properties in Elanji and

Vazhakkulam villages in the name of the declarant and those

properties are ancestral in nature. The said items of properties are

sold and they have shifted their residence and avocation to Aralam

in Telicherry taluk. With the consideration they received by sale of

those properties and the dowry amount obtained by the daughter-

C.R.P.NO: 463/01                  3

in-law who married the eldest son of the declarant were utilised for

the purchase of 60 acres of land by document No: 333/63 in the

name of the declarant's wife. The declarant also purchased another

item of property having an extent of 6.23 acres purchased in the

name of the declarant.    According to the declarant 17 = acres of

land from the southern side of the property was measured, located

boundaries and demarcated by putting up boundaries and that the

property was set apart for the share of the daughter-in-law.      The

balance property was divided into 13 shares allotting equal shares

to the members of the family which includes declarant, his wife and

11 children. It is also submitted that the partition was effected and

an agreement was executed, signed by all the sharers               and

witnesses evidencing partition of the property. According to the

declarant, the Taluk Land Board went wrong in taking into account

the entire properties covered by the said sales as properties

belonging to the statutory family. It is submitted that the statutory

family consists of the declarant, his wife and five minor children and

only 7/13 share of the total extent excluding 17 = acres allotted to

the daughter-in-law shall be accounted in the ceiling case.

      4. It is also contended that the Taluk Land Board by order

C.R.P.NO: 463/01                  4

dated 22.9.1976 decided the ceiling case and passed an order

directing the declarant to surrender 27.37 acres which was set aside

in the judgment passed by this Court in C.R.P.1583/78 filed by the

Government and remanded for fresh consideration. After remand

the Land Board examined the witnesses. The witnesses include the

declarant, his wife, two witnesses of the partition agreement dated

20.3.1963. The witnesses testified before the Taluk Land Board that

they have got direct knowledge about the partition effected in the

family of the declarant, that they were present at the time of

execution of the properties happened to be purchased in the name

of the declarant's wife. All of them acknowledged the fact that the

properties belonged to all members of the family jointly and that is

the reason why they have decided to partition the property.     The

Taluk Land Board passed orders holding that the property belonged

to the members of the family. Again the State filed C.R.P.479/85

and by judgment dated 27.6.1989 this Court remanded the matter

for de novo consideration. Subsequently, while the matter was

pending before the Taluk Land Board declarant died in the year

1991.

      5. An extent of 60 acres of land was purchased in the name of

C.R.P.NO: 463/01                   5

the declarant's wife Mary in the year 1963. The parties are natives

of Elanji Village in Moovattupuzha Taluk, Ernakulam district.    The

declarant and his wife along with their 11 children shifted their

residence and activities to a place in Alaram Village in Telicherry

Taluk and they have settled there.     The properties which stood in

the name of the declarant in Elanji Village and Vazhakulam Village

are sold and sale proceeds along with the dowry amount received by

the elder son Jose Paul are utilised for purchase of the properties in

the year 1963.     The properties include 60 acres in the name of

declarant's wife and 6.23 acres in the name of the declarant.    The

declarant, his wife and two witnesses were also examined in this

case.  They have testified before the Taluk Land Board that the

properties are sold and purchased on an understanding that the

entire property shall be divided between all the members of the

family equally.    So, the version of the declarant, his wife and the

witnesses that the properties were partitioned among the members

of the family equally on 20.3.1963 and an agreement was executed

on the said date is worthy to rely upon. It is also explained by the

parties that the original of the agreement has been lost and,

therefore, they have produced copy of the agreement and cited two

C.R.P.NO: 463/01                   6

witnesses, who are parties to the agreement. On the basis of the

explanation offered by the parties, copy of the agreement has to be

acted upon, the facts and circumstances explained and narrated by

the parties probablises the case that the properties purchased in

the name of the declarant and wife is intended to benefit all the

members of the family.        The shifting of the entire family to

Malabar, possibility of the document executed in the name of the

mother and execution of agreement are more probable. Therefore,

I accept     the contention of the revision petitioners that the

properties purchased in the year 1963 in the name of the declarant

and his wife belongs to the entire members of the family and that

the statutory family is only entitled to 7/13 share.

      6.    Another contention was also raised by the revision

petitioners stating that the first petitioner's husband is in

possession and owner in respect of 17 = acres of land out of 60

acres in the name of the mother.      The contention raised is that so

much of extent is set apart to the share of the first petitioner and

her husband since a portion of the property was purchased utilising

the streedhana amount obtained by the first petitioner's husband

Shri. Jose Paul. To prove the said transaction he has examined the

C.R.P.NO: 463/01                  7

mother as a witness. She stated that portion of the amount for the

purchase of 60 acres of land was contributed by Shri. Jose Paul, that

till his death he was in possession of 17 = acres and he and his

family are residing in the house constructed by him in the property.

According to the revision petitioners, this contention was not

considered by the Taluk Land Board and that no finding was

entered.

       7. For the reasons stated above, the order under challenge is

set aside. The Taluk Land Board is directed to pass fresh orders in

the light of the findings and observations made above. The Taluk

Land Board also is directed to reconsider the arguments advanced

before this Court regarding 17 = acres of land allegedly belonged to

the first petitioner and her husband. Revision petition is allowed.

The case is remanded for fresh consideration.       The Taluk Land

Board shall dispose of the matter within a period of six months on

receipt of a copy of the order.




                                         HARUN-UL-RASHID, JUDGE
jj


