

 IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

Crl.Rev.Pet.No. 1070 of 2001()



1. RAVEENDRAN
                      ...  Petitioner

                        Vs

1. STATE
                       ...       Respondent

                For Petitioner  :SRI.R.BINDU (SASTHAMANGALAM)

                For Respondent  :PUBLIC PROSECUTOR

The Hon'ble MR. Justice A.K.BASHEER

 Dated :16/12/2008

 O R D E R
                           A.K.BASHEER, J.
                -------------------------------
                    Crl. R.P No.1070 of 2001-B
               --------------------------------
             Dated this the 16th day of December, 2008.


                             O R D E R


      Petitioner was tried for the offences punishable under Section

498-A and 406 IPC, before the trial Court, primarily on the

allegation that he had subjected PW1, his wife, to cruelty and

harassment. The trial court found the petitioner guilty only under

Section 498-A and convicted and sentenced him to undergo

rigorous imprisonment for one year and to pay a fine of Rs.5,000/-

and in default of payment of fine, to undergo simple imprisonment

for 6 months.    It was further directed that the fine amount, if

realised, shall be paid to PW1 by way of compensation. The trial

court acquitted the petitioner under Section 406 IPC. In appeal the

Sessions Court confirmed the order of conviction and sentence.

Hence this revision petition.

      2.    The prosecution case in brief was that the petitioner had

married PW1, the defacto complainant on 15.9.1988, in accordance

with the customary rites. PW1 was living with the petitioner in the

matrimonial home after the marriage. Petitioner had gone abroad

Crl. R.P No.1070 of 2001-B       2

in connection with his employment.        Initially the relationship

between the petitioner and PW1 was cordial but it soon became

sour. According to PW1, petitioner used to send threatening letters

to her while he was abroad. In June 1994, when the petitioner came

home from abroad, he asked PW1 to bring Rs.30,000/- towards

dowry from her parents. PW1 alleged that even for the purpose of

raising money to go abroad, the petitioner had taken away and sold

her gold ornaments weighing about 22 sovereigns. Since PW1 could

not bring the money as demanded by the petitioner, she was beaten

up by the petitioner on 27.6.1994. In fact on that day she was sent

out of the house with her small child. Due to the intervention of

some mediators, PW1 returned to the matrimonial home with her

child. Again the same process was repeated and she was sent home

to bring the money. She again came back to the matrimonial home

without money. On her return, she was cruelly assaulted by the

petitioner, who caught hold of her hair and beat her.          Local

residents gathered on hearing the commotion.        Her brother on

getting information, took her away. Though a complaint was lodged

before the police, no case was registered. She was in the hospital

for four days. After her discharge she filed a private complaint,

Crl. R.P No.1070 of 2001-B        3

which was marked as Exhibit P2 in the case. The police registered a

crime and investigated after the complaint was forwarded to it u/s

156(3) of the Code. It was thereafter that the petitioner was charge

sheeted for the offences mentioned above.

      3.   Altogether 11 witnesses were examined on the side of

the prosecution and Exts.P1 to P7 were marked. Exts.D1 and D2

were marked on the side of the defence.

      4.   PW2, who was the maternal uncle deposed that he had

participated in the marriage between the petitioner and PW1 held on

15.9.1988. He further asserted that the marriage ceremony was

held in accordance with the customary rites prevalent in Ezhava

community. Many of the relatives of the bride and bridegroom had

also participated. The marriage ceremony was performed by the

Santhikaran attached to S.N.D.P Yogam. He further stated that at

the time of marriage ornaments weighing 22 sovereigns were given

to PW1, by her parents. He also spoke about the demand made by

the petitioner for Rs.30,000/- as additional dowry.

      5.   PW3 was the neighbour of the petitioner.       He spoke

about the frequent quarrel between the petitioner and PW1. He also

stated that one lady named Moly had been residing with the

Crl. R.P No.1070 of 2001-B       4

petitioner. He further went on to say that petitioner had married

Moly. PW4 is the wife of PW3. She also spoke in corroboration of

whatever had been stated by PW3.

      6.     PW5 is a nephew of PW1. He also spoke about the

marriage ceremony in which he participated.        He further spoke

about the quarrel between PW1 and the petitioner.          He further

stated that PW1 was admitted in hospital because of the assault

made by the petitioner. PW6, the brother of PW1 also gave evidence

with regard to the marriage ceremony and the other incidents of

quarrel between the petitioner and PW1. PW7 was the doctor who

examined PW1.      On 17.9.1994 she had issued Ext.P5 wound

certificate. PW7 spoke about the tenderness on the left side of

abdomen.     She also stated that PW1 had told her that she was

kicked on the navel portion and beaten up by the petitioner. PW8

who was another neighbour of PW1 spoke about the mediation in

the dispute between the petitioner and PW1.        PW9 had attested

Ext.P6 seizure mahazar and PW10 had conducted investigation.

PW11 registered the crime.

      7.    Learned counsel for the petitioner has taken me through

the deposition of all the witnesses. It is significant to note that all

Crl. R.P No.1070 of 2001-B        5

witnesses who were examined on the side of the prosecution had

quite satisfactorily corroborated the prosecution case. The defence

could not succeed in causing any dent in the prosecution case.

      8.    The trial court had evaluated the oral and documentary

evidence on record elaborately. The finding entered by the trial

court was confirmed by the Sessions Court after a further

evaluation. Having perused the entire materials available in record.

I do not find any reason to interfere with the concurrent finding of

guilty entered by the Court below.

       9.   Ext.P1 and P4 letters written by the petitioner to PW1,

will show that the relationship between the two was not at all

cordial. Ext.P5 wound certificate also clearly established that PW1

was physically assaulted and she had been admitted in the hospital.

Though the learned counsel for the petitioner has pointed out that

there was some delay in lodging the complaint I am not persuaded

to accept the above contention. It had come out in evidence that

PW1 had reported the matter to the Police when she was admitted in

the hospital.   But no action was taken by the Police.       It was

thereafter that PW1 had filed the private complaint before the court,

which in turn was forwarded to the Police under Section 156(3) of

Crl. R.P No.1070 of 2001-B          6

the Code of Criminal Procedure, for investigation.

      10. Having regard to the entire evidence on record I am totally

satisfied that the Courts below were justified in holding the

petitioner guilty of the offence punishable under Section 498-A.

Therefore the order of conviction is confirmed.

      11. As regards the sentence, I am satisfied that the plea of

the learned counsel for the petitioner can be accepted to some

extent.   Petitioner now stands sentenced to undergo rigorous

imprisonment for one year and to pay a fine of Rs.5,000/-. In the

facts and circumstances, I am satisfied that interests of justice will

be met if the substantive sentence is reduced to six months

rigorous imprisonment and further directed to pay a sum of

Rs.25,000/- as compensation under Section 357 (3) of the Code of

Criminal Procedure. Ordered accordingly.

      12. The Criminal Revision Petition is disposed confirming the

order of conviction under Section 498-A IPC. In modification of the

sentence imposed on him by the courts below the petitioner is

directed to suffer rigorous imprisonment for six months and to pay

a sum of Rs.25,000/- under Section 357 (3) of the Code of Criminal

Procedure. If the petitioner fails to remit the sum of Rs.25,000/- he

Crl. R.P No.1070 of 2001-B         7

shall undergo rigorous imprisonment for three more months. The

Court below shall release the amount of Rs.25,000/- to PW1 as and

when it is realised from the petitioner.

      The petitioner shall appear before the trial court on 30.4.2009

to receive the sentence, failing which the learned Magistrate shall

initiate appropriate coercive steps.

                                            Sd/-

                                        A.K.BASHEER
                                          JUDGE


                       //True Copy//


                                        PA to Judge


