

 IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

Crl.MC.No. 2225 of 2009()


1. DR. V.K.VIJAYALEKSHMI AMMA, AGED 70 YRS,
                      ...  Petitioner

                        Vs



1. BINDU V., AGED 34 YEARS,
                       ...       Respondent

2. ARJUN RAJAGOPAL, AGED 8 YEARS,

3. STATE OF KERALA, REPRESENTED BY

                For Petitioner  :SRI.C.HARIKUMAR

                For Respondent  :PUBLIC PROSECUTOR

The Hon'ble MR. Justice M.SASIDHARAN NAMBIAR

 Dated :02/12/2009

 O R D E R
              M.SASIDHARAN NAMBIAR,J.
            ===========================
            CRL.M.C.No. 2225      OF 2009
            ===========================

     Dated this the 2nd day of December,2009

                        ORDER

    Second respondent in M.C.36/2009 on the file of

Judicial    First     Class    Magistrate    Court-II,

Thiruvananthapuram,  a petition filed under section 12

of   Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act,

2005, (hereinafter referred to as the Act,) is the

petitioner. Respondents 1 and 2 are the petitioners

before the Magistrate.   This petition is filed under

section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure to quash

the proceedings as against her contending that the

allegations in Annexure A complaint do not disclose or

prove any domestic violence as defined under section 3

of the Act, and first respondent has no right over the

property of the petitioner and it is not a shared

household.   It is contended that petitioner being a

female person is not    a respondent as defined under

section 2(q) of the     Act and therefore proceedings

under  the  Act  as  against   the petitioner  is  not

maintainable and is to be quashed.

    2.   Learned counsel appearing for the petitioner

Crl.M.C.2225/2009               2

was heard.

      3.      The argument of the learned counsel is that

respondent as defined under section 2(q) of the Act can

only be a male person and not a female and therefore the

proceedings initiated by the learned Magistrate on Annexure

A1 complaint as against the petitioner is not sustainable

and is    an abuse of process of the court and hence it is to

be quashed.      It is also argued that the house involved in

the petition is the exclusive property of the petitioner

and is not a shared household of respondents 1 and 2 and on

that    ground     also  the  petition is  not  maintainable.

Relying on the decision of      Madhya Pradesh High Court in

Ajay Kant v. Smt.Alka Sharma (2008(Crl.L.J.) 264), learned

counsel argued that a female person could be proceeded

against under the Act only on a complaint for    violation of

an order under section 18 or 23 and        proceedings under

section 12 of the Act        cannot be continued before the

learned Magistrate against the petitioner.     Relying on the

decisions of this court in Surendran v. State of Kerala

(2009(3) KLT 967) and     the High Court of Andhra Pradesh in

Mohammad      Maqeenuddin  Ahmed   v.  State   of   A.P,(2007

Crl.L.J.3361)     it   was  argued  that  High  Court     has

jurisdiction to quash a petition filed under section 12 of

Crl.M.C.2225/2009               3

the    Act       pending  before  the   Magistrate and  when

continuation of the proceedings as against the petitioner

is an abuse of process of the court, it is to be quashed.

      4. The questions to be decided in the petition are:-

          1.   Whether a female person could be

          a respondent, in a petition filed

          under section 12 of the Act.

          2.   Whether the powers under section

          482 of Code of Criminal Procedure is

          to be invoked, to quash a petition

          filed under section 12 of the Act,

          on the ground of abuse of process of

          the court or on the ground that

          petitioner before the Magistrate is

          not    an    aggrieved   person    or

          respondent is not a respondent as

          defined   under   the  Act   or   the

          disputed   house  is  not  a   shared

          household,   as  provided  under  the

          Act.

      5.     Clause (a) of Section 2 defines "an aggrieved

person as "means any woman who is, or has been, in a

domestic relationship with the respondent and who alleges

Crl.M.C.2225/2009               4

to have been subjected to any act of domestic violence by

the respondent."       As is clear from the definition, an

aggrieved person provided       under the Act can only be a

woman.    Respondent is defined under clause (q) of Section 2

as follows:-



                 "respondent" means  any  adult  male

                 person who is,or has been, in a

                 domestic   relationship   with   the

                 aggrieved person and against whom

                 the aggrieved person has sought any

                 relief under this Act.

                 Provided that an aggrieved wife or

                 female living in a relationship in

                 the nature of a marriage may also

                 file a complaint against a relative

                 of the husband or the male partner.

If there is no proviso to clause (q), it could be contended

that a respondent could only be a male person and a female

person cannot be the     respondent.  But under the proviso an

aggrieved wife or a female living in a relationship in the

nature of marriage can file a complaint against a relative

of the husband. But it is not provided that such a

Crl.M.C.2225/2009               5

complaint could be filed only against a male relative of

the husband. Instead it is against a relative of the

husband or the male partner.        The legislatures in their

wisdom used "a male person" in the main definition of the

respondent and     purposely did not use "a male relative" and

instead used only a relative.      The proviso makes it clear

that    an    aggrieved    wife  or  a  female  living  in   a

relationship in the nature of marriage may also file a

complaint against a relative of the husband or the male

partner. The proviso       consciously avoided using "a male

relative" and instead used only a "relative"of the husband

or male partner.          A relative could be both male and

female. Hence      a female relative is not excluded by the

proviso.     If that be so,  contention that a female relative

of the husband cannot be a respondent, as defined under

section 2(q) of       the Act cannot be accepted.   There are

sufficient indications in the Act      to strengthen the said

conclusion.

      6. Section 19 provides for residence orders.         Sub

section (1) of Section 19 reads:-

             "19.Residence Orders:-(1) While

             disposing  of  an   application

             under   sub  section   (1)   of

Crl.M.C.2225/2009               6

             Section  12,   the   Magistrate

             may, on being satisfied that

             domestic  violence  has   taken

             place, pass a residence order-

             (a) restraining the respondent

             from dispossessing or in any

             other  manner  disturbing   the

             possession  of  the   aggrieved

             person    from    the    shared

             household, whether or not the

             respondent  has   a  legal   or

             equitable   interest   in   the

             shared household'

             (b) directing the respondent to

             remove himself from the shared

             household;

             (c) restraining the respondent

             or any of his relatives from

             entering any portion of the

             shared household in which the

             aggrieved person resides;

             (d) restraining the respondent

             from alienating or disposing

             off the shared household or

Crl.M.C.2225/2009               7

             encumbering the same.

             (e) restraining the respondent

             from renouncing his rights in

             the  shared  household   except

             with   the    leave   of    the

             Magistrate; or

             (f) directing the respondent to

             secure same level of alternate

             accommodation      for      the

             aggrieved person as enjoyed by

             her in the shared household or

             to pay rent for the same, if

             the circumstances so require;

             Provided that no order under

             clause  (b)  shall  be   passed

             against any person who is a

             woman.(underline supplied)

The proviso makes it absolutely clear that the prohibition

is only against passing an     order under clause (b) against

a person who is a woman.     That means except in the case of

clause (b), orders could be passed as against the woman

also. Otherwise there is no necessity to specifically

provide by a proviso that no order under clause (b)

passed    against   a  woman.     If  a  woman  cannot be   a

Crl.M.C.2225/2009               8

respondent,when no order      could be passed against such a

person, there is no need to provide such a proviso as even

otherwise in any     event an order cannot be passed against a

woman who is not the      respondent.   Moreover in that case

there is no rational for providing that no order could be

passed under clause (b) alone, thereby enabling to pass

orders under the other clauses of Section 19. Clause (b)

provides for passing a residence order, directing the

respondent to remove himself from the shared household.     In

view of proviso,       Magistrate cannot direct a woman, to

remove herself from the shared household.       Under section

19, residence orders could be passed as against a woman

also in respect of clause (a) and (c) to (f).           It is

therefore clear that under clause (a) Magistrate can pass

an order restraining the respondent from dispossessing or

in any other manner disturbing     possession of the aggrieved

person from the shared household, whether or not the

respondent has a legal or equitable interest in the shared

household.     Similarly under clause (c) an order restraining

the respondent or any of his relative from entering any

portion of the shared household in which the aggrieved

person resides could be passed. There also it is not

restricted as against the male relative alone. Under clause

(d) an order restraining the respondent from alienating or

Crl.M.C.2225/2009               9

disposing off the shared household or encumbering the same

could be passed.      Under clause (e)    respondent could be

restrained     from  renouncing  his  rights  in  the   shared

household, except with the leave of the Magistrate.      Under

Clause (f) the respondent could be directed to secure same

level of alternate accommodation for the aggrieved person,

as enjoyed by her in the shared household, or to pay rent

for the same if the circumstances so required.         In all

these cases such a restraining        order could be passed

against the woman also as is clear by the proviso to

Section 19(1) as those clauses are not included in the

proviso.     If such an order can be  passed against a woman,

as it is permissible under the Act, that woman against whom

such an order is to be passed should necessarily be a

respondent in the petition before the Magistrate.     If that

be so, it can never be said that a female person cannot be

a respondent under the Act.

      7.     A learned single Judge of the Madhya Pradesh High

Court has taken a different view in Ajay Kant v. Smt.Alka

Sharma (2008 Crl.L.J.264)     for the reason that proviso to

clause (q)       of Section 2 enables an aggrieved wife or

female living in a relationship in the nature of a marriage

to file a complaint against a relative of the husband      and

Crl.M.C.2225/2009            10

as    'complaint' is not defined in the Act and Section 12

provides     for  filing only an  application  and  not   a

complaint, the definition of "complaint" in clause (d) of

Section 2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure is to be

followed and if so the complaint contemplated under the

proviso to Section 2(q) could only be in        respect of

offences provided under section 31(1) and 33 of the Act. It

was therefore held that   scope of the respondent cannot be

widened to include a female.

      8.It is to be born in mind that sub section (1) of

Section 31 only provides that  a breach of protection order

or of an interim protection order, by the respondent shall

be an offence under the Act and shall be punishable with

the sentence provided therein. Section 32 provides for

cognizance and proof of the offence.  Under sub section (1)

notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal

Procedure, the offence under sub section (1)of Section 31

shall be cognizable and non-bailable.    Under sub section

(2) of Section 32, upon the sole testimony of the aggrieved

person, the court may conclude that an offence under

section 31(1) has been committed by the accused.      Under

sub section (1) of Section 31 it is only the breach of a

protection order under section 18 or an interim protection

Crl.M.C.2225/2009               11

order under section 23 which      is made  punishable.    As is

clear from       sub section   (1) of Section 31, such breach

shall    be   by   the  "respondent".   Therefore   unless  the

"respondent" could be     a female person, an offence cannot be

committed by breach of such an order by a female person.

If that be so, the complaint provided under proviso to

Clause    (q)    of  Section  2,  cannot  be  a   complaint  as

interpreted by the learned Judge, as it is an impossibility

because if a female person cannot be a respondent as

defined under section 2(q), no protection order under

section 18 or interim protection order under section 23

could be passed against the      female person and in that case

the proviso enabling       filing of a complaint against the

female relative of the husband would be         reduntant.   If

that be so, it could only be taken that the complaint

provided in the proviso to clause (q)of Section 2       is the

application filed under section 12, though inadvertently an

application is referred in the Section        as complaint.   A

learned single Judge of this Court in Remadevi v. State of

Kerala (2008(4) KLT 106) has taken an identical view that

respondent as defined under section 2(q) could also be a

female person.       It cannot be said that   proceedings under

section 12 cannot be initiated against a female person.

Crl.M.C.2225/2009              12

      9.     The next question is whether the extra ordinary

jurisdiction of this court under section 482 of Code of

Criminal Procedure is to be invoked to quash a petition

filed by a person claiming to be an aggrieved person

against a respondent, for the reliefs provided under the

Act.

      10. Undoubtedly the High Court possess inherent powers

under section 482 of the Code.     These inherent powers are

meant    to    act ex-debito  justitiae  to do     real and

substantial justice for the administration of justice or to

prevent abuse of process of court.     Inherent powers under

section 482 can be exercised either (1) to give effect to

an order under the Code or (2) to prevent abuse of process

of court and (3) to otherwise secure the ends of justice.

Apex Court in State of Haryana v. Bhajan Lal (1992 supp.(1)

SCC 335) enunciated the principles relating to the exercise

of the extra ordinary power under Article 226 of the

Constitution of India or the inherent powers under section

482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure as follows:-

          "(1) Where the allegations made

          in the first information report

          or the complaint, even if they

          are taken at their face value and

Crl.M.C.2225/2009               13

          accepted in their entirety do not

          prima    facie    constitute   any

          offence   or   make  out   a  case

          against the accused.

          (2) Where the allegations in the

          first    information  report   and

          other     materials,    if    any,

          accompanying   the   FIR   do not

          disclose   a  cognizable  offence,

          justifying   an  investigation  by

          police officers under section 156

          (1) of the Code except under an

          order of a Magistrate within the

          purview of Section 155(2) of the

          Code.

          (3)    Where  the   uncontroverted

          allegations made in the FIR or

          complaint    and    the   evidence

          collected in support of the same

          do not disclose the commission of

          any offence and make out a case

          against the accused.

          (4) Where the allegations in the

          FIR    do    not    constitute  a

Crl.M.C.2225/2009               14

          cognizable offence but constitute

          only a non-cognizable offence, no

          investigation is permitted by a

          police officer without an order

          of a Magistrate as contemplated

          under Section 155(2) of the Code.

          (5) Where the allegations made in

          the    FIR or   complaint are   so

          absurd and inherently improbably

          on the basis of which no prudent

          person   can  ever  reach  a  just

          conclusion     that    there    is

          sufficient ground for proceeding

          against the accused.

          (6) Where there is an express

          legal bar engrafted in any of the

          provisions of the Code or the Act

          concerned (under which a criminal

          proceeding is instituted) to the

          institution   and  continuance  of

          the    proceedings  and/or   where

          there is a specific provision in

          the Code or the Act concerned,

          providing efficacious redress for

Crl.M.C.2225/2009              15

          the grievance of the aggrieved

          party. (underline supplied)

          (7) Where a criminal proceeding

          is manifestly attended with mala

          fide and/or where the proceeding

          is maliciously instituted with an

          ulterior    motive for   wreaking

          vengeance on the accused and with

          a   view  to  spite  him  due  to

          private and personal grudge."

The content of the inherent power under section 482 of the

Code of Criminal Procedure were examined and laid down in

Madhu Limaye v. State of Maharashtra (1977) 4 SCC 551 as

follows:-

          "(1) that the power is not to be

          resorted    to  if  there  is  a

          specific provision in the code

          for the redress of the grievance

          of the aggrieved party;

          (2) that it should be exercised

          very sparingly to prevent abuse

          of    process  of any  court  or

          otherwise to secure the ends of

Crl.M.C.2225/2009              16

          justice;

          (3)    that it   should  not   be

          exercised as against the express

          bar    of law engrafted   in  any

          other provision of the Code."

In R.P.Kapur v. State of Punjab (AIR 1960 SC 866) Apex

Court summarised some categories of cases where inherent

powers are to be exercised to quash the proceedings as

follows:-

           "(i) where it manifestly appears

           that   there is   a  legal   bar

           against   the   institution   or

           continuance of the proceedings;

           (ii) where the allegations in

           the first information report or

           complaint taken at their face

           value   and accepted  in   their

           entirety do not constitute the

           offence alleged;

           (iii)   where  the   allegations

           constitute   an   offence,   but

           there   is  no  legal   evidence

           adduced or the evidence adduced

Crl.M.C.2225/2009              17

           clearly or manifestly fails to

           prove the charge.

The question whether the extra ordinary inherent powers

under section 482 of Code of Criminal Procedure is to be

exercised by the court to quash a proceeding initiated

under the Protection of Women from Domestic violence Act,

2005 is to be considered in the background of the settled

legal position. For a better appreciation of the relevant

aspects, it is necessary to bear in mind the object and

purpose of the Act. The Act      was enacted to provide for

more effective protection of rights of woman guaranteed

under the Constitution, who are victims of violence of any

kind occurring within the family and      incidental thereto.

Relevant portion of the Statement of Objects and reasons of

the Act reads:-

         "It    is therefore proposed   to

          enact a law keeping in view the

          rights guaranteed under Articles

          14,15 and 21 of the Constitution

          to provide for a remedy under

          the civil law which is intended

          to protect the woman from being

          victims of domestic violence and

Crl.M.C.2225/2009              18

          to   prevent the  occurrence  of

          domestic    violence   in    the

          society."(underline supplied).

      11. It is     clear that the Act was enacted to provide

"a remedy under civil law" to protect the woman from being

victims of domestic violence and to prevent occurrence of

domestic violence in the society.

      12. The definition in clause (a) of Section 2 shows

that an "aggrieved person" could only be a woman who is , or

has been, in a domestic relationship with the respondent

and who alleges to have been subjected to any act of

domestic violence by the respondent. Chapter IV provides

the procedure for obtaining orders of reliefs under the

Act.     Under sub section (1) of Section 12, an aggrieved

person or a Protection Officer or any other person on

behalf of the aggrieved person may present an application

before the Magistrate seeking one or more reliefs under the

Act.    Under sub section (2), the reliefs sought for under

sub section (1) may include a relief for issuance of an

order for payment of compensation or damages, without

prejudice to the right of such person to institute a suit

for compensation or damages for the injuries caused by the

acts of domestic violence committed by the respondent.

Crl.M.C.2225/2009             19

Under sub section (3) every such application shall be in

such form and contain such particulars as may be prescribed

or as nearly as possible thereto. Prescribed     is defined

under clause (m) of Section 2, means prescribed by rules

made under the said     Act.  Sub section (5) of Section 12

provides that Magistrate shall endeavour to dispose of

every application made under sub section (1) within a

period of sixty days from the date of its first hearing.

Section 16 provides that if the Magistrate considers that

the circumstances of the case so warrant, and if either

party to the proceedings so desires, he may conduct the

proceedings under the Act in camera.    Section 17 provides

for the right of an aggrieved person   to reside in a shared

household.        Under sub  section  (1)  of  Section  17,

notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the

time being in force, every woman in a domestic relationship

shall have the right to reside in the shared household,

whether or not she has any right, title or beneficial

interest in the same.     Shared household is defined under

clause (s) of Section 2.    Under sub section (2) of Section

17, the aggrieved person shall not be evicted or excluded

from the shared household or any part of it by the

respondent,      except in  accordance with  the   procedure

established by law.      Section 18 provides for protection

Crl.M.C.2225/2009              20

orders.     Under section 18, the Magistrate may after giving

the aggrieved person and the respondent an opportunity of

being    heard   and on  being  prima  facie  satisfied that

domestic violence has taken place or is likely to take

place, pass a protection order in favour of the aggrieved

person and prohibit the respondent from committing any acts

as provided under clause (a) to clause (g).       Section 19

provides for Residence orders.    Under sub section (1) while

disposing of an application under sub section (1) of

Section 12 and on being satisfied that domestic violence

has taken place, Magistrate may pass a residence order

restraining the respondent from dispossessing or in any

other manner disturbing the possession of the aggrieved

person from the shared household, whether or not the

respondent has a legal or equitable interest in the shared

household or directing the respondent to remove himself

from the shared household or restraining the respondent or

any of his relatives from entering any portion of the

shared household in which the aggrieved person resides or

restraining the respondent from alienating or disposing off

the shared household or encumbering the same or restraining

the respondent from renouncing his rights in the shared

household except with the leave of the Magistrate or

directing the respondent to secure same level of alternate

Crl.M.C.2225/2009               21

accommodation for the aggrieved person as enjoyed by her in

the shared household or to pay rent for the same if the

circumstances so require.      Proviso makes it clear that no

order shall be passed against any person who is a woman

under clause (b) directing the respondent to remove herself

from the shared household.       Sub section (2) enables the

Magistrate to impose any additional condition or pass any

other     direction which may deem reasonably   necessary to

protect or to provide for the safety of the aggrieved

person or any child of such aggrieved person.     Sub section

(3) enables the Magistrate to require from the respondent

to execute, a bond with or without sureties, for preventing

commission of domestic violence.     Sub section (4) makes it

clear that an order under sub section (3) shall be deemed

to be an order under Chapter VIII of the Code of Criminal

Procedure and shall be dealt with accordingly making       it

clear that       other orders are not to be treated as orders

passed under the Code of Criminal Procedure as essentially

they are      orders in respect of the civil liability.   Sub

section (5) provides that while passing an order under sub

section (1) or sub section (2) or sub section (3),      court

may also pass an order directing the officer-in-charge of

the nearest police station, to give protection to the

aggrieved person or to assist her or the person making an

Crl.M.C.2225/2009               22

application on her behalf in the implementation of the

order.    Sub section (6) enables the Magistrate while making

an order under sub section (1) to impose on the respondent

obligations, relating to the discharge of rent or other

payments having regard to the financial needs and resources

of the parties.      Sub section (7) provides that Magistrate

may direct the officer-in-charge of the police station in

whose jurisdiction the Magistrate has been approached to

assist in the implementation of the protection order.

Under sub section (8) Magistrate may direct the respondent

to return to the possession of the aggrieved person, her

stridhan or any other property or valuable security, to

which she is entitled to.          Section   20 provides for

monetary reliefs.      Under sub section (1) while disposing

the application under sub section (1) of Section 12,

Magistrate may direct the respondent to pay monetary relief

to meet the expenses incurred and losses suffered by the

aggrieved person or her        child as a result of domestic

violence.      Sub section (2)makes it clear that the monetary

relief granted under sub section (1) shall be adequate,

fair and reasonable and consistent with the standard of

living to which the aggrieved person is accustomed.        Sub

section (6) provides that on the failure of the respondent

to make payment in terms of the order under sub section

Crl.M.C.2225/2009              23

(1), Magistrate may direct the employer or a debtor of the

respondent to directly pay to the aggrieved person or to

deposit in       court a portion of the wages or salaries or

debt due to or accrued to the credit of the respondent and

that amount may be adjusted towards the monetary relief

payable by the respondent.         Section 21 provides that

notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the

time being in force, Magistrate may, at any stage of

hearing of the application for protection order or for any

other relief under the Act, grant temporary custody of any

child or children to the aggrieved person or the person

making an application on her behalf and specify,          the

arrangements for visit of such child or children by the

respondent.      Section 22 provides for compensation orders.

Under the said section in addition to other reliefs as may

be granted, Magistrate may on an application being made by

the    aggrieved    person,  pass  an  order  directing   the

respondent to pay compensation and damages for the injuries

including mental torture and emotional distress caused by

the respondent, by acts of domestic violence.      Section 23

provides the power to grant interim and ex parte orders.

Section 25 provides for duration and alteration of the

orders.      Under sub section (1) a protection order made

under section 18 shall be in force till the aggrieved

Crl.M.C.2225/2009               24

person applies for discharge.       Under sub section (2), on

receipt of an application from the aggrieved person or the

respondent       if satisfied that there is a change in the

circumstances      requiring   alteration,   modification   or

revocation or any order made under the Act, for reasons to

be recorded in writing       he may pass such order as he may

deem appropriate.      Section 26 provides for relief in other

suits and legal proceedings.       Under sub section (1) any

relief available under section 18 to 22 may also be sought

in any legal proceeding, before a civil court, family court

or a criminal court, affecting aggrieved person and the

respondent, whether such proceeding was initiated before or

after the commencement of the Act.           Sub section (2)

provides that any relief referred to in sub section (1) may

be sought for, in addition to and along with any other

relief that the aggrieved person may seek in such suit or

legal proceeding before a civil or criminal court.         Sub

section (3) mandates that in case any relief has been

granted     in   favour   of  the  aggrieved  person  in  any

proceedings other than a proceeding under the Act, she

shall be bound to inform the Magistrate of the grant of

such relief.

      13. Section 28 provides the procedure. It reads:-

         "28.    Procedure:-(1) Save   as

Crl.M.C.2225/2009             25

         otherwise   provided  in   this

         Act,    all proceedings  under

         sections 12,18,19,20,21,22 and

         23 and offences under section

         31 shall be governed by the

         provisions  of   the  Code  of

         Criminal Procedure,1973 (2 of

         1974).

         (2) Nothing in sub section (1)

         shall prevent the court from

         laying down its own procedure

         for disposal of an application

         under section 12 or under sub

         section (2) of Section 23."

Therefore under sub section (1) all        proceedings under

section 12, 18 to 23 and offences under section 31 shall be

governed by the provisions of    Code of Criminal Procedure,

1973.    Sub section (2) provides that nothing in sub section

(1) shall prevent the court from laying down its own

procedure for disposal of an application under section 12

or under sub section (2) of Section 23 of the Act.    Section

29 provides for an appeal against the order,    by either the

aggrieved person or by the respondent within thirty days

Crl.M.C.2225/2009             26

from the date of passing of the order.

      14. Section 31 and 33 are    the only penal provisions

in the Act. Section 31 reads:-

           "31.Penalty   for   breach    of

           protection order by respondent-

           (1)   A  breach  of   protection

           order,   or   of   an    interim

           protection   order,    by    the

           respondent shall be an offence

           under  this  Act  and  shall  be

           punishable with imprisonment of

           either description for a term

           which may extend to one year, or

           with fine which may extend to

           twenty thousand rupees, or with

           both.

           (2)   The  offence   under   sub

           section(1)  shall  as   far   as

           practicable  be  tried  by   the

           Magistrate who had passed the

           order, the breach of which has

           been alleged to have been caused

           by the accused.

           (3) While framing charges under

Crl.M.C.2225/2009              27

           sub section (1), the Magistrates

           may   also frame  charges  under

           section 498A of the Indian Penal

           Code (45 of 1860) or any other

           provision of that Code or the

           Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961 (28

           of 1961), as the case may be, if

           the     facts    disclose    the

           commission of an offence under

           those provisions."

      15.    Section  32  provides    cognizance  and   proof.

Under sub section (1) notwithstanding anything contained in

the Code of Criminal Procedure, the offence under sub

section (1) of Section 31, shall be cognizable and non-

bailable.        Under sub section (2) the court may on the

sole testimony of the aggrieved person conclude that an

offence under sub section (1) of Section 31, has been

committed by the accused.     Only if the respondent, against

whom a protection order or interim protection order        is

passed, commits     breach of that order, an offence under the

Act is attracted.     Under sub section (2), the said offence,

as far as practicable, shall be tried by the Magistrate who

had passed the order the breach of which has been alleged

Crl.M.C.2225/2009              28

to have been caused by the accused.    Under sub section (3)

while framing charge for the offence under sub section (1),

Magistrate may also frame charge under section 498A of

Indian Penal Code or any other provisions of the Indian

Penal Code or Dowry Prohibition Act, if the facts disclose

the commission of such an offence.       Section 33 provides

that    if   any  Protection  Officer fails  or  refuses   to

discharges his duties as directed by the Magistrate in the

protection order, without any sufficient cause, he shall be

punished with imprisonment as provided therein.         Under

section 34 Magistrate is not competent to take cognizance

of such an offence unless a complaint is filed with the

previous sanction of the State Government or an officer

authorised by it in this behalf.     Section 35 provides for

protection,       taken in  good  faith,  to  the  Protection

Officer.      Section 36 provides that  the Act shall be in

addition to, and not      in derogation of the provisions of

any other law for the time being in force.

      16.     It is thus clear that though under sub section

(1)    of    Section  28,  all  proceedings  under   sections

12,18,19,20,21,22 and 23 of the Act and offence under

section 31, shall be governed by the provisions of Code of

Criminal Procedure, the    penal provisions under the Act are

under sub section (1) of Section 31 and Section 33 of the

Crl.M.C.2225/2009               29

Act.     When under section 34, cognizance of offence under

section 33 could only be taken by the Magistrate on a

complaint filed with the previous sanction of the State

Government or an officer authorised by it on that behalf.

Under sub section (1) of Section 32, an offence under sub

section (1) of Section 31 is      cognizable  and no complaint

is necessary for the Magistrate to take cognizance of that

offence.

      17. In     an application filed under section 12 claiming

reliefs either under section 18,19, 20, 21 or 22,          the

Magistrate can pass an interim order under section 18 to

23. All these reliefs are in respect of the civil liability

and not the criminal liability.      If that be so,  it is not

for this court under section 482 of the Code of Criminal

Procedure,      to quash the proceedings invoking    the extra

ordinary inherent powers provided under the Code, as such

order is      necessary neither   to give effect to any order

under the Code nor to       prevent  abuse of the   process of

any   court nor to     secure the ends of justice.  An offence

under sub section (1) of Section 31, or an offence under

section 33 taken cognizance by the Magistrate or an order

passed    by    the  Magistrate  directing the   respondent to

execute a bond as provided under sub section 3 of Section

19, which by the mandate under sub section 5 that such

Crl.M.C.2225/2009               30

order is to be treated as an order under Chapter VIII of

Code of Criminal Procedure, stand        on different footing.

They are truly criminal proceedings.      Except in respect of

such proceedings      it is not for the High Court to exercise

the   extraordinary     inherent  jurisdiction  to  quash   the

proceedings pending before the Magistrate.

      18.    A   person  to  whom  notice  was  issued  by  the

Magistrate in a petition filed under section 12 of the Act

can appear before the Magistrate and contend that the

proceedings is not maintainable either on the ground that

the person who filed the application is not an aggrieved

person as defined under section 2(a) or the application is

not filed for an aggrieved person.      He is also entitled to

contend that he is not a respondent, as defined under

section 2(q) of the Act.       He is also entitled to contend

that there is no domestic violence as defined under section

2(g) or the reliefs sought for are not the reliefs provided

under the Act. In all such cases,      it is not for this court

to consider the       question, when it  could legitimately be

raised and decided before the Magistrate. So long as the

respondent is not an accused in a         proceeding initiated

under the Act and      pending before the Magistrate and he is

not   obliged     to  apply   for  bail  in  respect  of   such

proceedings       and    even his personal presence is not

Crl.M.C.2225/2009              31

mandatory     for  hearing  and  disposing  a  petition  under

section 12, it is not for this court to consider the

question whether the petitioner before the Magistrate is an

aggrieved person as defined under section 2(a) or the

respondent is a respondent as defined under clause (q) of

Section 2 or the household is a shared household as defined

under    clause   (s)  or   whether  there  is  any   domestic

relationship between the parties or whether       the reliefs

sought for in the petition could be granted.        These are

matters which are to be considered by the Magistrate,

before granting       relief in the     petition filed under

section 12, either under section 18 or 19 or 20 or 21 or 22

or 23.

      19.    Learned  counsel  appearing  for  the  petitioner

pointed out that in various decisions of this court and the

other High Courts and       Apex Court, proceedings initiated

under section 12 of the Act were quashed invoking the

powers under section 482 of Code of Criminal Procedure and

in such circumstance, it cannot be held that inherent

powers under section     482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure

is not to be exercised.     In   none of those decisions, the

question was addressed as stated above and in fact in none

of   those    decisions,      question  whether  the  inherent

jurisdiction     under  section  482   of  Code  of   Criminal

Crl.M.C.2225/2009              32

Procedure is to be invoked to quash a proceeding     initiated

under the Act which is enacted to     provide  a remedy under

the civil law was not considered.      In such circumstances,

for the reason that proceeding under the Act was quashed

invoking the powers under section 482 of the Code of

Criminal Procedure it cannot be said that the powers under

section 482 is to be invoked in all cases. I am of the firm

view that      a party against whom proceedings were initiated

by the Magistrate under section 12, on a petition filed

under section 12(1) of the Act seeking relief under section

18 to 23, has adequate remedy before the Magistrate,    it is

not for the High Court to exercise the extraordinary

inherent powers and quash the proceedings.        Section 482

is to      be invoked in appropriate cases either to give

effect to any order passed under the Act or to prevent

abuse of process of any court or to secure the ends of

justice, when cognizance was taken by the Magistrate for an

offence under sub section (1) of Section 31 or Section 33

of the Act.      In all other cases, the affected party could

raise the question and seek an order from the Magistrate

including the       maintainability of the proceedings and if

an   order is passed against him, he is at liberty to    file

an appeal as provided under section 29 of the Act.    If that

be so, it is not for this court to invoke the extraordinary

Crl.M.C.2225/2009            33

jurisdiction under section 482 of the Code of Criminal

Procedure, to quash a proceeding initiated under section 12

(1) of the Act.

      The petition is dismissed.




                                    M.SASIDHARAN NAMBIAR
                                              JUDGE
tpl/-

M.SASIDHARAN NAMBIAR, J.




     ---------------------
    Crl.M.C.NO.2225 /09
     ---------------------


          ORDER




    2ND DECEMBER,2009


