

 IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

Crl.MC.No. 1422 of 2008()


1. NARAYANAN UNNI MOOSAD,
                      ...  Petitioner
2. PARVATHY, W/O.NARAYANAN UNNI MOOSAD,

                        Vs



1. THE SUB INSPECTOR OF POLICE,
                       ...       Respondent

2. THE STATE OF KERALA,

3. SMT.VIDHYA, D/O.V.K.NEELAKANDAN,

                For Petitioner  :SRI.K.M.SATHYANATHA MENON

                For Respondent  :SRI.K.S.RAJESH

The Hon'ble MR. Justice M.N.KRISHNAN

 Dated :26/03/2009

 O R D E R
                         M.N. KRISHNAN, J
                        -----------------------
                  CRL.M.C.No. 1422 OF 2008
                  ---------------------------------
              Dated this the 26th day of March, 2009

                              O R D E R

      This is a petition filed by accused Nos. 2 and 3 to quash the

proceedings in C.C. 158/2008 so far as it relates to them. This

unfortunate litigation is between the wife on one side and

husband and in-laws of the wife on the other side. The young

couple got married on 10.02.2007 and thereafter within few

months the matrimonial dispute started and we find the 1st

complaint filed in the early process of time as O.P. 863/2007. It

is filed on 14th June 2007 with a prayer to the respondent

husband to return 60 sovereigns of gold ornaments worth

Rs. 4,00,000/-.

      2. I have perused the avernments in the petition and para

5 details about the cruelty that she has to face from her husband

and she had described him as a drunkard.              There is no

avernments against the present petitioners who are father-in law

and mother-in-law.      Thereafter we find the next case as O.P.

864/2007 which is a petition for divorce filed by the wife against

the husband on the ground of cruelty.              There also the

involvement or encouragement given by the parents of the

Crl.M.C. 1422/2008
                                -2-


husband does not find and there is no allegations against them.

Then comes the F.I. Statement. F.I. Statement was given by the

defacto complainant on 21.10.2007 and there it is only averred

that the husband used to come drunk everyday and used to treat

her with cruelty both physically and mentally and that she had

been deprived of her ornaments and thereby he has committed

the offences under Section 498 A of the IPC. Then an application

was filed by the Sub Inspector of Police who conducted the

investigation to open the locker which is in the name of the

father-in-law. I am informed that nothing turned out from that.

Then anticipating some difficulty the petitioners herein moves for

anticipatory bail in the Sessions Court, Trichur and that court

found that petitioners 2 and 3 are not made as accused so far as

there are no allegations against the petitioners 2 and 3 and

therefore the petition filed by the petitioner therein for

anticipatory bail was held to be not maintainable. Now comes a

statement given by the wife on 16.11.2007 on further

interrogation regarding the case. In that statement allegation is

made to the effect that the mother-in-law has stated that the

wife has cheated the husband and if she goes away her son will

Crl.M.C. 1422/2008
                                -3-


get a better bride and more dowry. Now the learned counsel for

the respondent would contend in the light of the statement, the

court cannot quash the proceedings under 482 of the Crl.P.C

because there is something to connect the accused with the

crime. At the outset, I would like to state the very scope of

investigation is mainly based on the complaint by the wife under

Section 498 A. In that complaint it is filed that after filing an

application for return of ornaments and for divorce there is not

even a solitary avernment whereby she wanted to implicate her

father-in-law and mother-in-law in the alleged commission of

offence and for any misappropriation.       When a lady files an

application for divorce on the ground of cruelty and if there had

been physical and mental cruelty, it will be the first thing that will

be averred in petition for divorce. Except making allegations of

drunkness, cruelty etc. on the husband, absolutely there is

nothing pleaded against these two persons.

      3. Now while regarding a statement of this nature whether a

prosecution has to continue against these people has to be

looked into in the backdrop of the materials available till that

date.     If these type of questioning and interrogation are

Crl.M.C. 1422/2008
                                   -4-


permitted to continue, so many proceedings can come at any

stage. Then there will not be any finality and the persons will

unnecessarily be forced to face a trial on that basis.         Under

Section 482 of the Crl.P.C there is a specific object especially to

secure the ends of justice. Here from the materials available

there cannot be any doubt in the mind that the subsequent

statement given on 16.11.2007 is only with an intention to drag

the in-laws also in a case wherein wife did not have any sort of

complaints or grievance against them inspite of initiating three

proceedings.

      I feel interest of justice requires that these persons shall not

be proceeded for criminal prosecution.         Therefore I quash all

criminal proceedings against these two persons making it clear

that the criminal prosecution can continue against the husband

against whom prima facie materials are available.

      The Crl.M.C is allowed.


                                           M.N. KRISHNAN, JUDGE

vkm


