

 IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

GTA.No. 11 of 2008()


1. M.E.MEERAN, MANALUMPARAYIL
                      ...  Petitioner

                        Vs



1. DEPUTY COMMISSINER OF INCOME-TAX
                       ...       Respondent

2. COMMISSIONER OF INCOME-TAX,

                For Petitioner  :.

                For Respondent  :SRI.GEORGE K. GEORGE, SC FOR IT

The Hon'ble MR. Justice C.N.RAMACHANDRAN NAIR
The Hon'ble MR. Justice V.K.MOHANAN

 Dated :02/11/2009

 O R D E R
                                                                                   C.R.
                    C.N.RAMACHANDRAN NAIR &
                               V.K.MOHANAN, JJ.
               ....................................................................
                          G.T. Appeal No.11 of 2008
               ....................................................................
              Dated this the 2nd day of November, 2009.

                                      JUDGMENT

Ramachandran Nair, J.

      The question raised in the Gift Tax Appeal filed by the assessee

is whether the Tribunal was justified in holding that the value of one

Maruti car and 151 sovereigns of gold given by him to his daughter at

the time of marriage reduced by the exemption of Rs.30,000/- available

under Section 5(1)(7) constitute a gift assessable under the Gift Tax

Act, 1958 (hereinafter called "the Act").                                    We have heard

Sri.P.Balakrishnan, counsel appearing for the appellant.

      2. Counsel relied on decision of this court in COMMISSIONER

OF GIFT-TAX VS. V.SUNDARAM ACHARI reported in (2004) 266

ITR 681 and contended that like a Hindu father, a Muslim father also

has a moral obligation to get his daughter well married and so much so,

following the judgment abovereferred the above gifts given at the time

                                   2

of marriage do not constitute chargeable gift under Section 2(xii) of the

Act. He has further pointed out that the distinction drawn by the

Madras High court in COMMISSIONER OF GIFT-TAX VS.

K.B.AVURUMANKUTTY reported in (2003) 264 ITR 177 between

Hindu father and Muslim father is non-existent atleast in Kerala and so

much so, the Tribunal was not justified in following the decision of the

Madras High Court to disallow the claim.

     3. On going through the above two decisions, after hearing the

counsel and on going through the statutory provisions, we are unable to

agree with the opinion expressed by this court and the Madras High

Court in the above two decisions even though we agree with the

conclusion arrived at by the Madras High court. In our view, it is the

desire of every father, whether he is member of the Hindu community

or Muslim community, to have his daughter married in the best manner

possible and naturally people look persons for marrying their daughters

who hold the same status, position etc. in the society as they have.

                                      3

Even though under Muslim law marriage is a contract, no one can

expect a grown up girl to go and negotiate and enter into contract for

marriage by herself. It is common knowledge that like member of any

other community it is the father and the family members who arrange

the marriage for the girl, no matter the Muslim marriage is treated as a

contract.   We are, therefore, unable to agree with the view expressed

by the Madras High Court that since Muslim marriage is a contract,

father is not obliged to give any gift at the time of marriage and so

much so, gift given by Muslim father at the time of marriage of his

daughter is not comparable with the gift given by a Hindu father

because under Hindu law, it is the obligation of the father to maintain

his daughter which includes giving her in marriage.

      4. In our view, liability to tax and exemption has to be considered

only with reference to statutory provisions and it is not for the court to

make any law with reference to personal laws of the communities when

the Act is a self-contained code.      Parliament was well aware of the

                                    4

existence of various religious communities in the society, their social

and legal obligations and they would have considered all these at the

time of making the law. In fact, it is not as if the Parliament was

unaware of gift being given to those getting married at the time of

marriage. The exemption provided under Section 5(1)(vii) of the Act at

the relevant time is as follows:

           "S.5. Exemption in respect of certain gifts

           (1) Gift-tax shall not be charged under this Act in
     respect of gifts made by any person--

           .........

           (vii) to any relative dependent upon him for support
     and maintenance, on the occasion of the marriage of the
     relative, subject to a maximum of rupees thirty thousand in
     value in respect of the marriage of each such relative."

From the above it is clear that exemption contemplated is in respect of

gift given by a person to any relative depending upon him for support

and maintenance on the occasion of the marriage of such dependent.

Obviously gift by father to daughter who is dependent upon him at the

                                      5

time of marriage is squarely covered by the above exemption. The

ceiling limit has been periodically enhanced from Rs.10,000/- to

Rs.30,000/- and later to Rs.1,00,000/-.        During the previous year

relevant to the assessment year in which assessee gave the gift, the

exemption limit was only Rs.30,000/-.           Therefore, the Assessing

Officer treated the gift as a gift given by the appellant to the daughter at

the time of her marriage and he, therefore, allowed exemption upto the

statutory limit of Rs.30,000/-. When the law is very clear on the

subject, we do not know what is the scope for courts interpreting and

substituting their views for the statutory provisions. In our view, when

gift at the time of marriage from a person to dependent relative is

squarely covered by the above provision of statute, there is no authority

for the court to consider personal law applicable to the parties and to

grant a higher exemption or to declare the gift as not chargeable under

the Gift Tax Act. In our view, irrespective of personal laws applicable

to various religious communities, the purpose of having a uniform

                                    6

exemption limit at the time of marriage is to discourage payment of

dowry under the guise of gift and to have equal status for females in the

family even after marriage.

       5. The next question to be considered is whether the gift of the

Maruti car valuing Rs.3.5 lakhs and 151 sovereigns of gold given to

his daughter at the time of marriage is a chargeable gift or not. Even

though contention of the counsel is that since the appellant had a moral

and legal obligation to get his daughter well married and a reasonable

gift is an incentive for the boy to marry her, we are unable to accept the

contention that the gift does not constitute chargeable gift under

Section 2(xii) of the Act, which reads as follows:

            "Gift means the transfer by one person to another of any
     existing movable or immovable property made voluntarily and
     without consideration in money or money's worth, and includes
     the transfer or conversion of any property referred to in Section
     4, deemed to be a gift under that Section."

It is very clear from the definition clause that any voluntary payment

without consideration of money or moneys worth is a gift answering

                                    7

the definition. Gift given in discharge of moral obligation or obligation

under personal law is also gift, whether it is money or moneys worth.

So much so, in our view, irrespective of the community to which the

donor belongs, a gift given to the dependent at the time of marriage

over and above the ceiling limit of exemption provided under Section 5

(1)(vii) is chargeable to tax. We, therefore, dismiss the appeal but

make it clear that our decision is not based on the reasoning of the

Madras High Court in the decision cited above, but based on the

statutory provisions explained above.




                                    C.N.RAMACHANDRAN NAIR
                                    Judge




                                    V.K.MOHANAN
                                    Judge
pms


