
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

PRESENT:

THE HONOURABLE MRS.JUSTICE K.HEMA

WEDNESDAY, THE 14TH DAY OF OCTOBER 2009/22ND ASWINA, 1931

Crl.MC.No. 2998 of 2007 ( )
---------------------------
CC.159/2007 of C.J.M.,KOLLAM

PETITIONER(S)/ACCUSED:
---------------------

         CHITHRANGATHAN,
         SREEPADMAM, NEAR SARADA MUTT, S.N.COLLEGE JUNCTION
         KOLLAM.

         BY ADVS.SRI.M.BALAGOVINDAN
                 SRI.M.R.SASITH

COMPLAINANT(S)/COMPLAINANT & STATE:
-----------------------------------

     1.  SEEMA C.,
         N.B.BHAVAN, PULIMOOTTIL, MUNDAKKAL
         MUNDAKKAL VILLAGE, KOLLAM.

     2.  STATE OF KERALA, REPRESENTED BY
         ITS PUBLIC PROSECUTOR, HIGH COURT OF KERALA
         ERNAKULAM.

         BY  PUBLIC PROSECUTORS (SRI.B.VINOD & SRI.P.A.SALIM)

       THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE  HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD  ON
14-10-2009, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE FOLLOWING:


                           K. HEMA, J.
                  ------------------------------------------
                        Crl.M.C.No. 2998 of 2007
                  -------------------------------------------
               Dated this the 14th day of October, 2009.

                                  ORDER


        A petition was filed by first respondent herein (daughter)

against petitioner (father) under Section 31 of the Protection of

Woman from Domestic Violence Act, 2005 ('the Act' for short),

alleging that petitioner violated a protection order issued by the

court etc. The petitioner filed a written objection to the petition

and, after hearing both sides, the Magistrate court found that,

prima facie, there is a breach of "protection order" passed by the

court by the petitioner herein and hence, a case was taken on

file as C.C.No.159/2007 under Section 31 of the Act, by virtue of

Annexure-D order.

        2. This petition is filed to quash Annexure-D order and

also further proceedings initiated against petitioner, pursuant to

such order. The relevant facts, which are necessary to dispose of

this petition can be briefly narrated as follows:- A lady Advocate

filed a petition against her father before Magistrate Court

seeking reliefs under the Act. In the main petition, she also

filed a petition (C.M.P.No.1523/07) under Section 12(1) of the

[Crl.M.C.No.2998/07]             2

Act and sought for an order under Section 19 of the Act to restrain

her father from dispossessing or throwing her out from the shared

household and from entering that          portion of the shared

household in which she resides. An affidavit was also filed under

Section 23(2) of the Act stating that she had been living with

the respondent       at "Sreepadma" since 1.1.2007 and that she

apprehended repetition of the acts of domestic violence from

her father and that he had threatened her that at any costs he

would evict her from the shared household.

         3. The Magistrate passed Annexure-B order ex parte

under Section 23 of the Act by which petitioner is restrained from

evicting his daughter from the premises (which is described in

paragraph 8 of the affidavit). Notice was issued to petitioner.

Petitioner entered appearance. In the meantime, on 14.3.2007,

the daughter had also filed another petition under Section 23(2)

of the Act which is taken on file as C.M.P.1706/07 seeking an

order under Section 19(d) of the Act. Petitioner-father, on

appearance, filed a counter affidavit denying the allegations

made in the petition stating that the application filed under the

Act is not maintainable, since as per the averments made by first

respondent-daughter, she was residing in the house under the

strength of a rent deed. Hence, only the civil courts will have

[Crl.M.C.No.2998/07]               3

jurisdiction to grant the relief.

         4. It is also stated in the counter affidavit that the house

in respect of which an order is sought by the applicant is in

possession, occupation and enjoyment of the petitioner's wife.

The said property was purchased by the wife of the petitioner.

Petitioner     and   his   wife    are  permanently      residing  in

Thiruvananthapuram whereas the house referred to in this case is

in Kollam. Petitioner's wife is a retired Professor. The respondent

herein had approached petitioner and his wife demanding Rs. 5

lakhs to settle      some of    her liabilities. When the petitioner

informed his inability to raise the amount, the respondent and

her husband, who is also an advocate, started harassing

petitioner and his wife in several ways. She started residing in

the house constructed in the property of petitioner's wife, after

looting the articles in the household and keeping her own articles

in the house.

         5. Thereafter, a petition was filed by the respondent

herein as Crl.M.P.No.1769/07 alleging that petitioner manhandled

her for forcibly evicting her from the shared household on

13.2.2007 and she was rescued by her husband, who is also a

lawyer. A complaint was also filed in respect of the incidents

before the police and on the same day, she was allegedly staying

[Crl.M.C.No.2998/07]              4

in the relatives house and when she came to the shared

household on the next day afternoon, the respondent allegedly

found her household articles being kept outside by petitioner's

men and the house was also found looted and that immediately,

the matter was reported to the police etc.

         6. It is also alleged that she was directed to remove all

the household articles from the compound and hence, she was

forced to take away household articles on 14.3.2007 afternoon.

Thus, she was forcibly evicted from the shared household, in

violation of the order granted by the Court in C.M.P.No.1523/07.

The cause of action arose on 13.3.2007 on the date on which

complainant was evicted from the shared household. Therefore,

the respondent asserts that no action be taken for the breach of

the "protection order" under Section 31 of the Act.

         7. Petitioner herein filed a detailed counter-affidavit

denying all the allegations made therein stating that from

13.3.2007 onwards, petitioner was admitted in District Hospital,

Kollam as inpatient and he was discharged only on 19.3.2007.

The respondent was not dispossessed from the house but the

complaint was filed only to escape from the legal proceedings

initiated against first respondent's husband for manhandling

petitioner, by violating the order of the court. Petitioner also

[Crl.M.C.No.2998/07]             5

initiated proceedings against first respondent's husband and

obtained an order. According to petitioner, his daughter,        in

collusion with her husband,     had fabricated some documents

purporting to be the rent deed etc. but no action can be taken

against petitioner on the strength of the petition filed under

Section 31 of the Act.

         8. This case was heard on more than one day. First

respondent was represented by her counsel Sri.B.S.Sivaji and he

was heard in the matter in detail but yesterday, he reported that

he got instruction from first respondent that she did not want to

engage him to argue the matter any more and hence, he reported

no instruction. I heard learned counsel for petitioner and learned

Public Prosecutors Sri.B.Vinod and Sri. P.A. Salim, who also helped

this court in taking a decision in this case. There is no

representation for respondent when the case was called today.

         9. Learned counsel for petitioner argued that there is no

protection order in this case. Annexure-B order is only an order

passed under Section 19 of the Act and it is a "residence order"

and hence no action can be taken under Section 31 of the Act. As

per Section 31 of the Act, only a breach of protection or interim

protection order by the respondent would be punishable under

Section 31. Considering the same matter, in Crl.R.P.No.1216 of

[Crl.M.C.No.2998/07]               6

2007, a learned single Judge of this Court, as per order dated

4.9.2007 in paragraph 5 of the order held that the relevant order

(Annexure-C herein) is a "residence order" passed under Section

19 read with Section 23(2) of the Act. The said order has become

final.

         10. It is also pointed out that even as per the allegations

made by first respondent herself, the house in respect of which

she has sought the reliefs under the Act, is occupied by first

respondent as a "tenant" under the petitioner's wife. The fact that

she took the house on rent is specifically alleged in the affidavit

filed by respondent. She had also filed a written statement in a

civil suit filed by petitioner's wife as O.S.220/07 seeking

prohibitory injunction against first respondent herein and she

raised specific contentions that with effect from 1.1.2007, she

along with her husband        shifted their residence to the house

involved in this case on the strength of rent deed executed in

favour of petitioner's wife.

         11. The civil court has considered the dispute between

first respondent and petitioner's wife and after considering rival

contentions, passed an order on 23.8.2008 restraining first

respondent and her husband from causing any sort of nuisance or

interference to the peaceful living of petitioner's wife in the house

[Crl.M.C.No.2998/07]                7

etc. The said decree has become final and it is not challenged by

the respondent herein or her husband. In such circumstances, the

first respondent     is not entitled to get any order against the

petitioner under the provisions of the Act, it is argued.

           12. On hearing petitioner's counsel and learned Public

Prosecutors in detail, the first question to be considered is

whether petitioner can be proceeded against under Section 31 of

the Act. Section 31 reads as follows.

             "Penalty for breach of protection order
             by respondent:- (1) A breach of protection
             order, or of any interim protection order, by
             the respondent shall be an offence under
             this Act and shall be punishable with
             imprisonment of either description for a
             term which may extend to one year, or with
             fine which may extend to twenty thousand
             rupees, or with both.

             (2) The offence under sub-section (1) shall
             as far as practicable be tried by the
             Magistrate who had passed the order, the
             breach of which has been alleged to have
             been caused by the accused.

             (3) While framing charges under sub-
             section (1), the Magistrate may also frame
             charges under Section 498A of the Indian
             Penal Code (45 of 1860) or any other
             provision of that Code or the Dowry
             Prohibition Act, 1906 (28 of 1961), as the
             case may be, if the facts disclose the
             commission of an offence under those
             provisions."

[Crl.M.C.No.2998/07]              8

         13. A reading of Section 31 shows that if there is a breach

of the protection order, or interim protection order by the

respondent, it will amount to an offence under the Act and is

punishable with imprisonment of either description for a term

which may extend one year or with fine which may extend

Rs.20,000/- or both. The said offence shall, as far as possible, be

tried by the Magistrate who passed the order, the breach of which

is alleged to have been caused by the accused.

         14. It is clear from Section 32(2) that upon the sole

testimony the court "may" conclude the commission of the

offence by the accused. But on a close reading of the various

provisions in the Act, I find that merely because an aggrieved

person mounts the box and states that the person shown as

respondent in the cause title committed breach of protection

order and thereby he committed the offence, the court cannot

proceed against him.

         15. The person, who is shown in the cause title as

respondent, cannot be proceeded against under Section 31 of the

Act.    Only if the court finds that such person falls within the

definition of "respondent" in Section 2(q) of the Act, he can be

proceeded against under Section 31. To constitute offence under

Section 31 of the Act there has to be breach of protection order

[Crl.M.C.No.2998/07]               9

or interim protection order by "respondent". "Respondent" is

defined in Section 2(q) of the Act. Section 2(q) reads as follows:

             "Respondent" means any adult male person
             who is, or has been, in a domestic
             relationship with the aggrieved person and
             against whom the aggrieved person has
             sought any relief under this Act: provided
             that an aggrieved wife or female living in a
             relationship in the nature of a marriage may
             also file a complaint against a relative of
             the husband or the male partner".

         16. A plain reading of the definition of "respondent" in

Section 2(q) will show that a respondent is not a person who is

shown as a respondent in the cause title or against whom an

order     is passed under the provisions of the Act. There is a

definite meaning given to the expression "respondent". A person

can be proceeded against under Section 31 of the Act only if

there is breach of the particular order passed by the court by the

respondent.

         17. The "respondent" means any adult male who is, or has

been, in a 'domestic relationship' with the aggrieved person and

against whom the aggrieved person has sought for relief under

the Act. The expression 'domestic relationship' is also defined

under the Act. A reading of Section 2(f) shows that there is

definite      meaning    given    to    said   expression,"domestic

relationship". It is a relationship between two person who "live"

[Crl.M.C.No.2998/07]              10

or at any point of time have "lived together" in a shared

household when they are related by consanguinity, marriage etc.

         18. It is clear from a reading of Section 2(f) that it is not

sufficient if parties are wife or husband or father or daughter etc.

to proceed against a male person under the provisions of the Act.

But what is most relevant under Section 2(f) is that such persons

who are related by consanguinity, marriage etc. must live or must

have lived together at any point of time.       Merely because the

applicant and the respondent stated in the petition have a

relationship by consanguinity or      marriage, the court cannot

conclude that there is any domestic relationship as defined

under the said Section.

       19. The court must confirm that they lived or have lived

together at any point of time in a shared household. So, for the

mere reason that the parties to the petition filed under the

provisions of the Act are father or the daughter or husband and

wife, court cannot conclude that there is domestic relationship as

defined under the Act. The court must find out from the materials

available whether the accused satisfies the requirements under

Section 2(q) of the Act and he "is" or "has been" in domestic

relationship with the aggrieved person. The expressions "is" and

"has been" are also relevant and those denote present tense.

[Crl.M.C.No.2998/07]            11

         20. The definition domestic relationship also refers to

"shared household". The shared household has also specific

meaning under Section 2(s) of the Act. A plain reading of Section

2(s) shows that 'shared household' is a 'household', but

'household' does not mean a 'house'. The 'household' is not

defined under the Act. As per Oxford Concise Dictionary (7th Edn.)

the word "household" means "occupants of house; domestic

establishment, all the people living together in a house". As per

Co Build English Language Dictionary, the word "household"

means, all the people in a family or group who live together in a

house. The word "household" means "a family living together; (2)

a group of people who dwell under the same roof"( vide Black's

Law Dictionary).

         21. Learned counsel for petitioner pointed out that it is

laid down by the Supreme Court in Oswal Asro Mills Ltd. v.

C.C.E. ((1993) Suppl. 3 SCC 716) that the word "household"

signifies a family living together. Therefore, shared household

cannot be confined to a house where they live together. It

implicates a living together of people in a family in a domestic

establishment. Going by the dictionary meaning, the word

"household" means occupants of the house or the people who live

together in a house of the people in a family. Therefore, a house

[Crl.M.C.No.2998/07]             12

where the aggrieved persons reside alone, strictly speaking,

cannot be treated as a household.

         22. Having gone through the meaning given to "domestic

relationship" and "respondent" under the Act, it is evident that

"shared household" as stated in Section 2(s) cannot be a mere

house which is taken on rent by the wife or the husband or the

parties to the petition. To constitute a shared household, there

must be a living together by the aggrieved person and the

respondent against whom a relief is sought for. Interestingly,

there are no averments in the petition under Section 12(1) or in

the affidavit from which the court can infer that the petitioner

herein is "respondent" as defined under the Act.

         23. There are absolutely no allegations or averments

made either in the petition under Section 12(1) or in the affidavit

in Form-III from which the court can conclude that there was

'domestic relationship' or 'shared household' or that the petitioner

is a 'respondent' as stated in the Section. The trial court has

passed the impugned order against petitioner even without

confirming whether averments in the petition disclose that

petitioner is a person who falls under the definition of

"respondent". He is proceeded against under Section 31 of the

Act and restrained from doing certain acts against the first

[Crl.M.C.No.2998/07]             13

respondent even without confirming whether he is a "respondent"

as defined under the Act.

         24. At any rate, the petitioner cannot be proceeded for

offence under Section 31 of the Act, since no protection order is

passed against him. The order allegedly breached is a "residence

order" and hence no offence under Section 31 will be attracted.

When the matter came up for revision before this Court, another

Bench of this Court held that Annexure-B order is only a

residence order. Therefore, for this sole reason itself petitioner

ought not to have been proceeded against under Section 31        of

the Act. The proceedings initiated under Section 31 of the Act

against petitioner is illegal.

         25. The trial court passed a hasty order under Section

31 of the Act without        even confirming whether the person

against whom the order is passed falls under the definition of

"respondent" who is in "domestic relationship" and "lives" or

"has lived" in shared household. The provisions of the Act

introduced for protecting women from acts of domestic violence

committed         against her by a person who is in domestic

relationship with her. But, while protecting the rights of a woman,

the court has to be careful and cautious in not violating the rights

of the male also.

[Crl.M.C.No.2998/07]               14

         26. It is to be borne in mind that any wrong order passed

in haste without looking into the provisions of the Act will harm

the woman herself, since by such wrong order passed, it is likely

that the relationship between the parties may become more

strained and it will lead to disastrous consequences in the family

relationship. If the court is not cautious in passing orders under

the Act, the woman herself may be victim of the wrong order and

that is not what the legislature has intended by the Act.

         27. In the result, Annexure-D order passed against

petitioner and the proceedings initiated against him, consequent

to the said order under Section 31 of the Act are illegal and

those are hereby quashed.

         This Crl.M.C. is allowed.



                                                       Sd/-
                                              K. HEMA, JUDGE.
krs.



