

 IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

Crl.MC.No. 41 of 2009()


1. ALPHONSA, AGED 57 YEARS,
                      ...  Petitioner

                        Vs



1. JOSELIN @ DINU, AGED 27 YEARS,
                       ...       Respondent

2. STATE OF KERALA, REPRESENTED BY THE

                For Petitioner  :SRI.MATHEW JAMES

                For Respondent  : No Appearance

The Hon'ble MR. Justice R.BASANT

 Dated :05/01/2009

 O R D E R
                            R. BASANT, J.
                  - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                    Crl.M.C.No. 41 of 2009
                  - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
             Dated this the 5th day of January, 2009

                               O R D E R

      The petitioner is the third accused and she, along with the

co-accused, faces indictment in a prosecution for offences

punishable, inter alia, under Section 498A I.P.C.              Altogether

there are three accused persons. The first accused is the son of

the petitioner and the second accused is her husband. The crux

of the allegations against the petitioners is that they are guilty of

matrimonial cruelty of culpable variety against the defacto

complainant, a girl, who was married by the first accused. The

petitioner was employed abroad. It is alleged that on her return

to India on 1.7.2008 she, who did not approve of the marriage,

demanded dowry of Rs. 5 lakhs and the share in the property of

the defacto complainant. Cognizance was taken on the basis of

the final report submitted by the police after due investigation.

The crime in turn was registered on the basis of a private

complaint filed before the Magistrate and referred to the police

Crl.M.C.No. 41 of 2009
                                    2

under Section 156(3) Cr.P.C.       Cognizance has been taken.        The

petitioner has not entered appearance so far.             The petitioner

apprehends imminent arrest.

      2. According to the petitioner she is absolutely innocent. She is

not in any way responsible for any crime. Totally false and vexatious

allegations are raised against the petitioner. She was employed abroad

and had come to India. The petitioner's son, during the absence of the

petitioner in India, had contracted a marriage with the defacto

complainant. Only to vex and harass her this false complaint has been

filed and the proceedings initiated by the defacto complainant may be

quashed, it is prayed.

      3. The short ground on which the prayer for quashing is founded

is that the allegations raised against her are false. At the moment and

with the available inputs, it is impossible for this court to hazard a

finding that the allegations are so totally false and baseless that the

proceedings deserve to be quashed invoking the jurisdiction under

Section 482 Cr.P.C.        According to the learned counsel for the

petitioner, the allegations are groundless. If that be so, the petitioner

Crl.M.C.No. 41 of 2009
                                      3

can claim premature termination of proceedings by discharge under

Section 239 Cr.P.C.

       4. An indictee facing unjustified and undeserved criminal

prosecution can certainly claim premature termination of              such

proceedings. Ordinarily and normally such premature termination must

be claimed according to the ordinary provisions of the Code.           Of

course in an exceptional case, where the interests of justice

compellingly demand such a course, this Court has the reservoir of

powers under Section 482 Cr.P.C. to invoke the extra ordinary inherent

jurisdiction and bring to premature end such prosecution.         I do not

find any such      reasons in this case.    I am in these circumstances

satisfied that this is a fit case where the petitioner must be relegated to

claim premature termination of prosecution by discharge at the stage of

Section 239 Cr.P.C.

      5.   The learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the

petitioner, a woman, had met with an accident and is laid up. Great

hardship and inconvenience would result if the personal presence of

the petitioner were insisted on all dates of posting to facilitate

Crl.M.C.No. 41 of 2009
                                     4

consideration of the plea of discharge under Section 239 Cr.P.C. I am

satisfied that appropriate directions can be issued.

      6. This Crl.M.C. is dismissed, but with the specific observation

that the dismissal of this petition will not in any way fetter the rights of

the petitioner to claim premature termination by discharge under

Section 239 Cr.P.C. It is further directed that the personal presence of

the petitioner need not be insisted by the court below to consider the

plea of discharge. Only if a decision is taken that charges are liable to

be framed against the petitioner, need the learned Magistrate insist on

the personal presence of the petitioner. On all other dates the petitioner

can be permitted to appear through counsel, if she is represented

appropriately by a counsel.




                                                (R. BASANT)
                                                    Judge
tm


