

 IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

RPFC.No. 119 of 2004()


1. K.G.MANOJ KUMAR, AGED 32 YEARS,
                      ...  Petitioner

                        Vs



1. SATHI K., AGED 26 YEARS,
                       ...       Respondent

2. K.VISHNU, AGED 5 YEARS,

3. STATE, REPRESENTED BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR,

                For Petitioner  :SRI.M.SASINDRAN

                For Respondent  :SRI.K.S.MADHUSOODANAN

The Hon'ble MR. Justice M.N.KRISHNAN

 Dated :13/03/2009

 O R D E R
                   M.N.KRISHNAN, J.
                 -------------------------------
              R.P.(FC).NO.119 OF 2004 ()
               -----------------------------------
        Dated this the 13th day of March, 2009

                          O R D E R



     This revision petition is preferred against the order of

the Family Court, Kannur in M.C.No.444/2003.           The court

below found that the wife is living separately on account of

only reasonable cause and directed the revision petitioner

herein to pay a sum of Rs.750/- to the wife and Rs.500/- to the

child on 5.4.2003. It is against that decision, the husband has

come up in revision.



     2. The learned counsel for the revision petitioner had

taken me elaborately through the pleadings and evidence in

this case. Matrimonial harmony is something which has to be

preserved for a welfare society. But now a days, we find

restlessness and breakage of marriage in plenty. It is a social

problem that has to be dealt with.           Similarly, in every

matrimonial life, there will be ordinary wear and tear and

RP(FC).119/04                    2


when it goes beyond a limit, the relationship breaks with

commencement of litigation.       In this case, the unfortunate

couple got married in 1995 and in the matrimonial

relationship, a child was born.          Immediately, after the

marriage, the wife was taken to Delhi, the place of

employment, and she became pregnant during the course of

her stay therein and thereafter she came to the matrimonial

home and then left for the parental home and she gave birth

to a child. It is the case of the petitioner that consistently and

persistently, she had been subjected to physical as well as

mental cruelty and it had developed into a higher dimension

when the brother of the husband got married, who got more

dowry and gold ornaments. The wife complaints about the

harassment by the husband, the mother-in-law and even the

father-in-law.   On the contrary, the husband would submit

before the court that there was no reasonable cause for her to

live separately and her version that nobody bothered about

her after the marriage and after she came back from Delhi, is

absolutely false. I have gone through the cross examination

wherein there are some materials which would indicate and

RP(FC).119/04                   3


which is contradictory to what is stated in the chief

examination.     The wife would state that the husband and

family members never bothered to look after her. But in the

cross examination, it is seen that the parents came after the

delivery, some amount was given as token and present and

there was some attendance on the 28th day of the child. These

are all materials which will be in the society and when the

matrimonial relationship has not reached an irretrievably

broken stage, attempts will be made to rejoin. What is the

necessity of a wife to live separately from the husband is

always a question of concern.      Under the Indian Society,

generally, we find the ladies tolerating and continue to live in

the matrimonial home forgetting the unhappiness which they

have therein. So, until and unless there are real reasons, no

one will try to live separately. According to the husband, the

reasons for the wife's separation is that when the

mother-in-law was about to retire, they had decided to leave

Kannur and settle down in Palakkad and that the wife does not

want to go to Palakkad and that is why she had not joined him

later. When a wife can join the husband at Delhi and live

RP(FC).119/04                   4


together for almost an year under the same roof, it may not be

possible to believe that such a wife with the child, who

requires the nurturing and care of the father, would hesitate

to go to Palakkad, which is within the same State. So, unless

there are reasons which makes the wife staying away under

the ordinary circumstances, she would not be interested to

live separately from the husband. However, the wife's house

is also not so financially well equipped so as to have a

luxurious life. Therefore, I find that the Family Court analyzed

the evidence in perspective and also attempted to find out

what shall be the cause.      As I discussed earlier, the points

put forward by the husband appears to be flimsy whereas the

wife persistently and consistently speaks about the cruelty

meeted out to her in the matrimonial home. Therefore, one

cannot hold that she is living separately without any

reasonable cause.    This Court in the revisional jurisdiction,

can interfere only when there is patent illegality, irregularity

or perversity in appreciation of the law and evidence which I

do not find in this case.   In order to satisfy my conscience, I

have read the entire evidence of both the parties and I am

RP(FC).119/04                  5


inclined to give more reliance on the evidence of PW1 to hold

in her favour.   The amount awarded is also only just and

adequate and it cannot be stated as excessive by any stretch of

imagination. Therefore, the revision lacks merits and it is

dismissed. Time is not yet come for a separation and if the

members of the family will try, the husband and wife's life can

be reunited and an attempt can be made even at this belated

stage by the people who are concerned about the welfare of

both parties.




                                     M.N.KRISHNAN
                                          JUDGE

prp

     J.B.KOSHY & THOMAS P. JOSEPH, JJ.




 --------------------------------------------------------




                           M.F.A.NO. OF 2006 ()



---------------------------------------------------------




                                   J U D G M E N T


---------------------------------------------------------



                             6th November, 2008


