

 IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

RPFC.No. 378 of 2009()


1. RAJEEV V.R.,
                      ...  Petitioner

                        Vs



1. SUNITHAKUMARI,
                       ...       Respondent

2. KANNAN,AGED 1 YEAR(MINOR),KOLLAMPARAMBIL

                For Petitioner  :SRI.M.V.THAMBAN

                For Respondent  : No Appearance

The Hon'ble MR. Justice P.S.GOPINATHAN

 Dated :21/10/2009

 O R D E R
                        P.S. GOPINATHAN, J.
                        ---------------------------
                      R.P(FC) NO. 378 OF 2009
                      --------------------------------
            DATED THIS THE 21ST DAY OF OCTOBER 2009

                                 ORDER
                                 ---------

      Revision petitioner is the counter petitioner in M.C No. 265 of

2008 on the file of the Family Court, Thiruvalla. The respondents 1

and 2 herein, who are the wife and son of the revision petitioner,

preferred the above petition before the lower court under Section

125 of the Code of Criminal Procedure with allegation that the

revision petitioner neglected the respondents            and was not

providing anything for their maintenance and they are unable to

maintain themself and demanding a sum of Rs. 1,500/- and Rs.

1,000/- per month respectively to the respondents for their

maintenance.    It was also pleaded that revision petitioner is a

goldsmith engaged in a jewellery in Coimbatore and had been

earning Rs. 15,000/- per month.

      2.   The revision petitioner contended that the respondents

were living separate without any just or reasonable cause and he

had been getting a meagre income of Rs. 1,500/- and with that

R.P(FC) NO. 378 OF 2009
                                   2

amount he has to maintain his mother and depending sister and he

was prepared to take back the respondents and to maintain and also

to pay Rs. 500/- for the maintenance of the child .

      2.    The 1st respondent was examined as PW1. Revision

petitioner was examined as CPW1 and Ext.B1 salary certificate was

marked on his side. The lower court on appraisal of the evidence

arrived a conclusion that respondents were living separate for

sufficient reasons and that the respondents are devoid of any

independent means for their maintenance.         Having taken into

account of the entire circumstances, the lower court arrived a

finding that income of the revision petitioner would be more than

Rs.300/- per day.      Consequently the petition was allowed and

revision petitioner was directed to pay monthly maintenance at the

rate of Rs. 1,000/- to the 1st respondent and Rs. 800/- to the 2nd

respondent.

      3.    Assailing the legality, correctness and propriety of the

above order this revision petition was filed.

R.P(FC) NO. 378 OF 2009
                                   3

      4.    Having heard the revision petitioner and perusing the

order impugned, I find that the lower court arrived a conclusion

that the revision petitioner had been demanding dowry and it is for

that reason the first respondent had been living separate. Though

the revision petitioner offered to take back the respondents and to

maintain them, no step was taken in this regard. I find lack of

sincerity in his offer. The conclusion arrived by the trial court is

not at all erroneous, but based on evidence and hence the

respondents are entitled to an order of separate maintenance.

      5.    According to the learned counsel, the revision petitioner

had preferred a petition for restitution of conjugal rights. In the

event of any change of circumstance occurs as a result of th

disposal of the petition for restitution of conjugal rights, revision

petitioner is at liberty to apply for alteration under Section 127 of

the Code of Criminal Procedure.

      6.    Taking into account of the value of the essential

commodity and the rate of inflation I find that the maintenance

R.P(FC) NO. 378 OF 2009
                                  4

awarded by the lower court       is not at all    exorbitant. Revision

petitioner is admittedly a goldsmith.     The contention that he is

getting only a meagre amount of Rs.1,500/- per month is not at all

believable. Now a days even the wages of coolies are very high. It

did not appear that the income of the revision petitioner estimated

by the lower court is very high or exaggerated. In the event the

work of a goldsmith is not remunerative he can go for casual work

and easily find out Rs. 1800/- to the respondents together. The

amount awarded is not at all beyond the means of the revision

petitioner. I find no merit in the revision petition. Accordingly it is

dismissed. The revision petitioner is granted two months time for

payment of arrears provided he continued to pay the monthly

maintenance without any default.




                                                 P.S. GOPINATHAN
                                                      JUDGE




PKK

