

 IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

CRL.A.No. 1707 of 2005()


1. K.M.SUJITH,
                      ...  Petitioner

                        Vs



1. STATE OF KERALA.
                       ...       Respondent

                For Petitioner  :SRI.S.SACHITHANANDA PAI

                For Respondent  :PUBLIC PROSECUTOR

The Hon'ble MR. Justice K.BALAKRISHNAN NAIR
The Hon'ble MR. Justice P.BHAVADASAN

 Dated :21/10/2009

 O R D E R
            K. BALAKRISHNAN NAIR & P. BHAVADASAN, JJ.
               - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                        Crl. Appeal No. 1707 of 2005
                  - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                 Dated this the 21st day of October, 2009.

                                      JUDGMENT


Bhavadasan, J,

            Accused was found guilty of the offence of

uxoricide. He was therefore convicted and sentenced to suffer

imprisonment for life and to pay a fine of Rs.10,000/- with a

default clause to undergo imprisonment for three years if the

fine is not paid.

            2.   The marriage between the deceased and the

accused took place on 8.2.2002. The accused and the deceased

were relatives and they had fallen in love. P.W.6, the mother

of the accused was closely related to the deceased. But she did

not attend the marriage. Even though the couple took up

independent residence soon after marriage, later they shifted to

the house of the accused. At the relevant time they were

residing along with the parents of the accused. The accused is

Crl.A.1707/2005.                  2

the third son of P.Ws. 6 and 7. P.W.6, his mother would say that

the accused often comes home drunk. On 21.5.2002 the accused

returned home late in the night. The room on the eastern side of

the house was occupied by the accused and the deceased. P.W.7,

the father of the accused opened the door for him on the eventful

day when he came late. The accused went to his room. According

to the prosecution, a short while thereafter P.W.6, the mother of the

accused heard groans and grunts of the deceased from her room.

She went near the room. It is the prosecution allegation that

P.W.6 had seen the accused dropping M.O.2 can of kerosene and

also a lighted match stick. P.W.6 cried aloud and then found that

the accused was not in the room. Her cries woke up the other

inmates of the house and they rushed to the place. They found

Ambily, the deceased engulfed in fire. P.W.6 tried to douse the

fire. The victim was removed to the hospital. Initially P.W.3

attended to the victim in Care Well Hospital, Ramanattukara, and

on seeing the condition of the patient, referred the victim to the

Crl.A.1707/2005.                  3

Medical College Hospital for better management. She was given

first aid by P.W.3. The victim was taken to Koya's Hospital and

P.W.17, the doctor attached to the said hospital attended to the

patient. Ext.P22 certificate is issued by him. She was admitted in

the ICU of the hospital. The next day, the Doctor advised that she

be taken to the Medical College Hospital. On 21.5.2002 by about

noon the victim was admitted in the Medical College Hospital.

P.W.5, the doctor attached to the Medical College Hospital,

attended to her and he had issued Ext.P5 certificate, which is the

treatment certificate relating to Ambily. On getting information

about the incident, P.W.13, the Police Constable attached to

Thenjipalam Police Station went to the Medical College Hospital.

He found that Ambily was not in a fit condition to give any

statement. So he recorded Ext.P6, First Information Statement,

furnished by P.W.6. P.W.13 returned to the police station. Based

on Ext.P6 first information statement, P.W.16, Sub Inspector of

Police registered First Information Report, Ext.P17, for the

Crl.A.1707/2005.                  4

offences punishable under Sections 498A and 307 Indian Penal

Code. He prepared Ext.P16 scene mahazar. He recorded the arrest

of the accused. Based on Ext.P15(a) confession statement said to

have been given by the accused M.Os. 1 and 2 were recovered as

per Ext.P15. Meanwhile, P.W.1 had recorded Ext.P1 declaration

given by the deceased from the Hospital.          P.W.2, the Doctor

attached to the Hospital had certified that the victim was fit enough

to give statement and Ext.P2 is the certificate issued by him. On

8.6.2002, Ambily, the victim, succumbed to her burn injuries.

Investigation was taken over by P.W.18. He had P.W.16 conduct

inquest over the body of the deceased and prepare Ext.P20 report.

Ext.P21 report was filed before Court incorporating charge under

Section 302 Indian Penal Code. In the meanwhile, autopsy was

conducted by P.W.4 and Ext.P4 report was furnished by him.

P.W.18 obtained site plan, recorded statements of other witnesses

and completed the investigation. He laid charge before court.

Crl.A.1707/2005.                 5




             3.  JFCM, Parappanangadi took cognizance of the

offences. On appearance of the accused before the said court, all

legal formalities were complied with.     The learned Magistrate

found that the offences are     exclusively triable by a court of

Sessions and accordingly committed the case to Sessions Court,

Manjeri under Section 209 of Code of Criminal Procedure.      The

said court made over the case to Additional Sessions Court, Fast

Track No.I (Ad Hoc), Manjeri for trial and disposal.

             4. That court issued summons to the accused and he

entered appearance.     After hearing both sides,   charges were

framed for the offences punishable under Sections 498A and 302

Indian Penal Code. To the charges, the accused pleaded not guilty

and claimed to be tried. Prosecution therefore had P.Ws. 1 to 18

examined Exts.P1 to P29 marked. M.Os. 1 and 2 were identified

and marked.       After the close of the prosecution evidence, the

accused was questioned under Section 313 of the Criminal

Crl.A.1707/2005.                  6

Procedure Code. He denied all the offences alleged against him

and maintained that he is innocent. He would say that on the date

of the incident when he returned home, it was Ambily, who had

opened the door for him. He claims that thereafter he went to the

temple pond to take bath. While taking his bath, he heard cries

from his house and he rushed to his house. He found that Ambily

was on fire. He fetched a vehicle and took Ambily to Hospital.

Finding that the accused could not be acquitted under Section 232

Cr.P.C., he was asked to enter on his defence. The accused chose

to adduce no evidence. On an appreciation of the materials before

it, the court below found that the prosecution has established the

case against the accused and accordingly found the accused guilty.

Conviction and sentence already mentioned followed. The said

conviction and sentence are assailed in this appeal.

             5. The question that arises for consideration is whether

any interference is called for with the judgment of the court below.

Crl.A.1707/2005.                   7

             6. The prosecution case appears to be that after the

marriage the accused began to ill-treat his wife for several reasons.

On the date of the incident, the prosecution case is that, the victim

was stabbed with a knife, thereafter strangulated and set her

ablaze.

             7.   The court below found the following materials

sufficient to come to the conclusion that the offences have been

made out:

             (i) Evidence of P.W.6 taken along with Exts.P7, P7(a)

             and P7(b).

             (ii) Exts.P9 and P7(c).

             (iii) Evidence of P.W.9.

             (iv) There is evidence to show that the accused used

             to come home drunk and torture Ambily. He had

             also sold some of the gold ornaments of the victim.

             (v) The accused and the deceased were sharing the

             same room and they were seen last together.

             Therefore the burden is on the accused to show what

             actually had occurred in the room going by Section

Crl.A.1707/2005.                  8

             106 of the Indian Evidence Act.

             (vi)  The explanation given by the accused when

             questioned under Section 313 Cr.P.C. is false.

             (vii) The victim was stabbed and strangulated by the

             accused before setting her on fire to ensure that she

             could not respond.

             8. The learned counsel appearing for the appellant,

Smt.Saritha David Chunkath, attacked the findings of the court

below on the following grounds:

             The learned counsel contended that the finding is based

on conjunctures and surmises, rather than evidence on record. It is

strange to note, according to learned counsel, that the court below

has taken aid of portions of Section 161 statement of the witnesses

to hold in favour of the prosecution.       That is clearly illegal.

Learned counsel also pointed out that even assuming that P.W.6

had given a statement under Section 164 of Cr.P.C. to P.W.9, the

learned Magistrate, it needs to be noticed that she has resiled from

the same. Even if one takes the statement under Section 164 as

Crl.A.1707/2005.                   9

evidence, it can never be treated as substantive evidence. It can at

best only be an item of corroborative evidence. Learned counsel

drew attention of this court to Ext.P1, the dying declaration

furnished by the victim, which contained nothing regarding any

role played by her husband or anybody else in the mishap that had

happened to her. Learned counsel for the appellant pointed out

that if as a matter of fact what the prosecution says is true, the

victim would not have been so kind and benevolent. She had no

complaints against anybody. Learned counsel pointed out that it is

interesting to note that the police officer, who had gone to take the

first information statement says that the victim was incapable of

giving a statement and therefore the statement of P.W.6 was taken.

The First Information Statement was taken on 23.5.2002. The

dying declaration was recorded on 24.5.2002 and the doctor found

her fit enough to give the statement. There is nothing to indicate

that the condition of the victim was so bad that on 23.5.2002 she

was unable to speak. According to the learned counsel, none of

Crl.A.1707/2005.                  10

the grounds relied on by the court below to hold the accused

guilty, are sustainable either in law or on the facts. There is

absolutely no evidence to show that there was an attempt to

strangulate the victim or that she was stabbed so as to make her

immobile as found by the court below. The prosecution did not

suggest to any of the medical witnesses examined by the

prosecution that there were corresponding injuries on the body of

the victim evidencing that she was either stabbed or there was an

attempt to strangulate her.       Those findings are figments of

imagination of the court below and get no support from the

evidence on record. Finally, learned counsel contended that the

act of lower court in casting the burden on the accused on the basis

of Section 106 of the Indian Evidence Act is unjustifiable.

According to the learned counsel, even assuming that they were

last seen together, that does not mean that the burden automatically

shifts to the accused. The question of shifting the burden to the

accused arises only when the prosecution has established its case

Crl.A.1707/2005.                11

beyond reasonable doubt. Section 106 of the Indian Evidence Act

does not relieve the prosecution of its burden to prove the case

beyond reasonable doubt.

             9. The learned Public Prosecutor on the other hand

pointed out that the court below has approached the issue in the

proper perspective and had come to the conclusion that offences

have been established. The learned Public Prosecutor pointed out

that the court below had meticulously analysed the evidence in the

case and based on the testimony of P.Ws.6 and 15 etc., and other

items of evidence had come to the right conclusion. The court

below, according to the learned Public Prosecutor, had taken note

of the conduct of the accused prior to and subsequent to the

incident and that is very relevant in the present case. Attention

was drawn to the fact that there is nothing to indicate that the

accused was by the side of his wife while she was in the hospital.

These facts taken along with the statement given by P.W.6 under

Section 164 of the Code of Criminal Procedure recorded by P.W.9

Crl.A.1707/2005.                  12

are incriminating items of evidence to fasten the liability on the

accused. According to learned Public Prosecutor no grounds are

made out to interfere with the conviction and sentence passed by

the court below.

             10. It may first be noticed that there is absolutely no

evidence at all in this case to show that there was any attempt to

strangulate the victim and so also that she was stabbed by using

M.O.1 knife. The medical evidence is to the effect that she died of

burns, which was on the lower portion of her body. There is no

entry in any of the certificates issued by any of the Doctors, who

had attended to her including the postmortem certificate issued by

P.W.4 suggesting that there was any attempt to strangulate the

victim or that any stab injury had been inflicted on her body. Not

even a suggestion was made to any of the doctors examined that

any of the injuries found on the body of the victim could be related

to the attempted strangulation or injury inflicted with a knife.

Therefore, the observation of the court below that the accused had

Crl.A.1707/2005.                 13

attempted to strangulate the deceased and also had inflicted a stab

injury on her is without any basis.

             11. The most important items of evidence, which

impressed the court below are the testimony of P.W.6, Ext.P7

series and Ext.P9.

             12. P.W.6 is none other than the mother in law of the

victim and the mother of the accused. She says that the marriage

between the victim and the accused was solemnized four months

prior to the date of incident and that the bride is closely related to

her. She had not attended the marriage. After staying separately

initially for a few months, the newly wedded couple took up

residence with P.W.6 and others. She says that Ambily, the victim

suffered burns on 21.5.2002 in the night and the incident occurred

in the room occupied by the victim and the accused. At the

relevant time, according to this witness, her husband, her eldest

son and his wife were at home. All of them had supper and had

gone to sleep. The accused arrived late in the night. She does not

Crl.A.1707/2005.                    14

know when the accused had come home in the night. But she

learned that his father had opened the door for him. It was hearing

the groans and grunts of Ambily that she had gone near their room.

When she opened the door, she found that the accused was not

there. She found that Ambily was on fire. She at once attempted

to douse the fire by throwing water over her. By that time, the

neighbours came to the place and the victim was removed to the

hospital. She says that the accused had also gone along with the

victim to the hospital. She resiled from Ext.P6 statement given by

her and so also Ext.P9 statement said to have been given by her.

Ext.P6 is the first information statement and Ext.P9 is           the

statement given by her to the Magistrate under Section 164 Cr.P.C.

             13. It is true that at the time of giving Ext.P6 she had

implicated the accused. One may notice that FIS was lodged after

two days of the incident. It is strange to note that the hospitals,

where she had been taken for treatment, did not feel it necessary to

inform the police. P.W.6 admitted her signature in Exts. P6 and

Crl.A.1707/2005.                 15

P9. As far as Ext.P9 is concerned, she has a case that it was given

under threat and coercion.

             14.  P.W.7, as already noticed, is the father of the

accused. He would say that Ambily died of burns. He says that

there was no disharmony between the couple. It has come out in

his evidence that the accused used to take drinks. But his evidence

does not contain anything to implicate the accused as such.

             15. In this regard, one may notice the evidence of

P.W.15. P.W.15 is the brother of the deceased. He says that he

came to know about the incident by 11 A.M. the next day. As far

as he knows, there was no difference of opinion or displeasure in

the marital life of the accused and the victim. He however does

say that P.W.6 had told him that the act was committed by the

accused. He would also depose that after the victim was admitted

in the hospital, the accused had not come there at all.

             16. These are the items of oral evidence in the case.

One may recall that the prosecution case is that Ambily was being

Crl.A.1707/2005.                 16

continuously harassed and tortured demanding more dowry and

money. The accused made life miserable for her. It is strange to

note that even P.W.15, the brother of the victim has no such case.

It is not discernible from the records the details of the other kith

and kin of the deceased. Whatever that be, the allegation of the

prosecution that she was being ill-treated remains unsubstantiated.

There is nothing to indicate that the accused had squandered away

the money received at the time of marriage      (if at all there was

any) or that he had sold the gold ornaments of his wife. One fails

to understand as to how the lower court came to the conclusion

that the accused had sold the gold ornaments of the deceased.

             17. It is here that Ext.P1 assumes much significance.

The incident took place on 21.5.2002. The dying declaration of

the victim was taken on 24.5.2002, while she was in the hospital.

It was recorded by P.W.1. P.W.2 is the doctor, who certified that

the victim was in a fit condition to give the statement. After

Crl.A.1707/2005.                 17

following the necessary formalities, the statement of the victim

was taken by P.W.1. The victim stated that she was not fully

conscious at the time of the incident. She says that she caught fire

while she was sleeping. She does not say about anything done by

her husband nor has implicated anybody in her statement. If as a

matter of fact, her husband was so unkind, cruel and merciless to

her, it is inconceivable that she would have given a statement of

the nature of Ext.P1. One must remember here that she died after

about 14 days of suffering of burn injuries.

             18. The court below placed considerable reliance on

Exts.P7, P7(a) and P7(b), which are the statements put to P.W.6

when she was being examined in court. Exts.P7, P7(a) and P7(b)

are part of statements under Section 161 Cr.P.C. to the

investigating officer.    The court below feels that since the

investigating officer has stated that those statements had been

given by P.W.6, that forms substantive evidence.

Crl.A.1707/2005.                 18

             19. The above view has no legal support. It is well

settled that a statement under Section 161 Cr.P.C. given to an

investigating officer can be used in the manner prescribed by

Section 162 Cr.P.C. alone. The portions of that statement can

never be treated as evidence.

             20. P.W.6 admitted the signature on Ext.P9. That is a

statement recorded by the learned Magistrate under Section 164

Cr.P.C. At the time of evidence she deviated a lot from that

statement. One may note that even though P.W.6 had admitted her

signature in Ext.P6, which is the First Information Statement given

by her, she had retracted from it at the time of evidence. In the

decision reported in Chandrasekharan v. Station of Kerala

(1993(1) K.L.T. 571), it has been held as follows:

             "We may point out, at this stage itself, that

      learned Sessions Judge has relied on certain materials

      which are totally inadmissible in evidence.     Eg: He

      relied on the statements made by two witnesses before

      Judicial Magistrate of the Second Class who recorded

Crl.A.1707/2005.                    19

      them under S.164 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.

      It is well settled that the statement of a witness recorded

      by a Magistrate under S.164 of the Code is not

      substantive evidence and the most that can be used of it

      is only for corroboration of the testimony of that

      witness as provided in S.157 of the Evidence Act or for

      contradicting the witness in the manner provided in

      S.143 of the Evidence Act."

             21. The act of the learned Sessions Judge in placing

reliance on the statements made by the witnesses under Section

161 of the Cr.P.C. cannot be justified in the light of the decision

reported in Parameswaran v. State of Kerala (2004(2) K.L.T.

SN 103), wherein it was held as follows:

             "Previous statement of witnesses alleged to have

      been given by him before the police, and denied by him,

      is not part of his testimony.         Hence, the learned

      Sessions Judge committed a fundamental error in

      accepting the prosecution case solely based on the

      evidence of the investigating officer as his version is

      corroborated by the previous statement given to the

Crl.A.1707/2005.                 20

      police    officer  by  the   witnesses.      Under    no

      circumstances, statements recorded under S.161 can be

      used to corroborate the evidence of investigating

      officer. All previous statements of witness to the police

      are not admissible in evidence for any purpose and

      there is absolute ban regarding acceptance of such

      evidence except as allowed by S.162 Cr.P.C., viz.,

      contradiction of a prosecution (1) by the accused; (2)

      by the prosecution themselves with permission of the

      Court; (3)      statements coming under S.32 of the

      Evidence Act; and (4) for the purpose of S.27 of the

      Evidence Act. Police statement given by one witness

      cannot be used to contradict or corroborate the

      evidence of any other witnesses. S.162 Cr.P.C., is a

      special law and notwithstanding Ss.145 and 157 of the

      Evidence Act, the above section completely prohibits

      the admission of evidence of alleged statements

      recorded by the police officer in the course of

      investigation except for the strictly limited purpose as

      provided in the provisions of S.162 itself.     Previous

      statement to the police can be used to contradict the

      witnesses in the manner provided in the section only if

Crl.A.1707/2005.                 21

      the 'statement is duly proved'. There is no presumption

      of genuineness of the statements reduced to writing by

      the police. Investigating Officer can only depose the

      investigation he has conducted. But finding of guilt

      solely based on the evidence of the investigating officer

      regarding previous statements of witnesses cannot be

      justified."

             22. In the decision reported in Rajendra Singh v.

State of U.P. ((2007) 7 SCC 378) it was held as follows:

             "The High Court has basically relied upon the

      statements of six witnesses which had been recorded by

      the investigating officer under Section 161 Cr.P.C. to

      record a positive finding that the respondent could not

      have been present at the scene of commission of the

      crime as he was present in a meeting of Nagar Nigam

      at Allahabad. A statement under Section 161 Cr.P.C. is

      not a substantive piece of evidence. In view of the

      proviso to sub-section (1) of Section 162 Cr.P.C., the

      statement can be used only for the limited purpose of

      contradicting the maker thereof in the manner laid

      down in the said proviso. Therefore, the High Court

Crl.A.1707/2005.                  22

      committed a manifest error of law in relying upon

      wholly inadmissible evidence in recording a finding

      that Kapil Dev Singh could not have been present at the

      scene of commission of the crime."

             23. There is absolutely no evidence of any cruel acts by

the accused towards his wife nor is there any evidence of

harassment or torture. The allegations of the prosecution in this

regard remain as mere allegations. There is nothing to show that

the victim had ever complained to anybody about the misdeeds of

her husband. As already noted, if as a matter of fact the accused

had harassed or tortured her, she would have mentioned that fact at

the time of giving Ext.P1 statement. The lower court ignored these

aspects altogether.

             24. The lower court had strained itself much to hold

that the deceased was strangulated and stabbed. The lower court

ought to have noticed that the cause of death as shown in the

postmortem certificate is due to burns. P.W.4, who had conducted

Crl.A.1707/2005.                   23

the autopsy in his evidence says that he is unable to say whether

any inflammable oil was involved in the accident.            There is

absolutely no medical evidence in this case even to suggest that the

incident was due to the act of another person or that the victim was

strangulated and knifed. There is no convincing evidence to

indicate as to how the incident had occurred.

             25. Being together is no sin as far as the accused and

the victim are concerned, since they are husband and wife. The

evidence of P.W.6, on which considerable reliance is placed by the

court below, stated that when she opened the door hearing the

groans and grunts of the victim, she found that the accused was not

in the room. It is also interesting to note that there is no evidence

in this case at all to show that the victim was drenched in kerosene.

Even going by P.W.6, all that she says is that she saw the accused

dropping a can and a lighted matchstick. It is true that P.W.15, the

brother of the victim says that P.W.6 told him that it was the

accused who had done the act.           But that was long after the

Crl.A.1707/2005.                  24

incident, and such evidence does not even qualify as res gestae

evidence. There is no suggestion to P.Ws. 6, 7 or 15 that Ambily,

the victim, had ever complained to them or anybody else about the

cruel acts of the accused. If as a matter of fact, the prosecution

allegations are true, Ambily had ample time to narrate her

difficulties and the inhuman and intolerable acts of the accused to

her brothers. P.W.15 has no case that any of them (ie., brothers of

the deceased) had looked after her while she was in the hospital

even though the victim had undergone treatment in the hospital for

nearly 14 days. On the other hand, it would appear that P.W.6 was

attending to her.

             26. There is yet another significant aspect. May be that

the explanation offered by the accused when questioned under

Section 313 of the Cr.P.C. is unsatisfactory. But the fact remains

that he had brought the jeep and taken his wife to the hospital

along with P.W.6 and his brother. The anxiety shown by the

accused suggests that it was not he who had set Ambily on fire.

Crl.A.1707/2005.                  25

His conduct of immediately rushing the victim to the hospital

seems consistent with his innocence. May be his conduct after the

incident is unsatisfactory. But that by itself is not sufficient to

lead to the conclusion that it was he who was behind the incident.

             27. It has already been noticed that there is absolutely

no evidence at all to show that the victim was either strangulated

or had been stabbed. Even going by the prosecution case, the

incident occurred while she was sleeping. If as a matter of fact

kerosene was poured on her while she was sleeping, that would

have certainly woken her up and she would have reacted. There is

nothing to show that the accused had committed any act which had

made the victim immobile and unresponsive. This is yet another

circumstance which goes in favour of the accused.

             28. The court below was also not justified in throwing

the burden on the accused merely on the basis of last seen theory

and his conduct. In the decision reported in Murlidhar v. State

of Rajasthan (AIR 2005 SC 2345) it was held as follows:

Crl.A.1707/2005.                   26

             "In our judgment, the High Court was not

      justified in relying on and applying the rule of burden

      of proof under Section 106 of the Evidence Act to the

      case. As pointed out in Mir Mohammand Omar (supra)

      and Shambu Nath Mehra (supra), the rule in Section

      106 of the Evidence Act would apply when the facts are

      "especially within the knowledge of the accused" and it

      would be impossible, or at any rate disproportionately

      difficult for the prosecution to establish such facts,

      "especially within the knowledge of the accused." In

      the present case, the prosecution did not proceed on the

      footing that the facts were especially within the

      knowledge of the accused and, therefore, the principle

      in Section 106 could not apply."



             29. In the decision reported in Vikramjit Singh v.

State of Punjab ((2006) 12 SCC 306), it was held as follows:

             "In the instant case, there are two versions. The

      learned     Sessions Judge proceeded to weigh the

      probability of both of them and opined that the

      appellant having not been able to prove its case, the

Crl.A.1707/2005.                     27

      prosecution case should be accepted. In our opinion,

      the approach of the learned Sessions Judge was not

      correct. The High Court also appeared to have fallen

      into the same error.        It invoked Section 106 of the

      Evidence Act although opining:

             "The section is not intended to relieve the

      prosecution of its burden to prove the guilt of the accused

      beyond reasonable doubt. But the section would apply to

      cases where the prosecution has succeeded in proving facts

      from which a reasonable inference can be drawn

      regarding the existence of certain other facts, unless the

      accused by virtue of his special knowledge regarding such

      facts, failed to offer any explanation which might drive the

      court to draw a different inference."

             Section 106 of the Evidence Act does not relieve

      the prosecution to prove its case beyond all reasonable

      doubt. Only when the prosecution case has been proved

      the burden in regard to such facts which was within the

      special knowledge of the accused may be shifted to the

      accused for explaining the same. Of course, there are

      certain exceptions to the said rule e.g. Where burden of

      proof may be imposed upon the accused by reason of a

      statute.

Crl.A.1707/2005.                   28

             It may be that in a situation of this nature where

      the court legitimately may raise a strong suspicion that

      in all probabilities the accused was guilty of

      commission of heinous offence but applying the well-

      settled principle of law that suspicion, however, grave

      may be, cannot be a substitute for proof, the same

      would lead to the only conclusion herein that the

      prosecution has not been able to prove its case beyond

      all reasonable doubt.

             In Sharad Birdhichand Sarda v. State of

      Maharashtra this court laid down the law in the

      following terms:

             "153. A close analysis of this decision would show

      that the following conditions must be fulfilled before a

      case against an accused can be said to be fully established:

             (1) the circumstances from which the conclusion of

      guilt is to be drawn should be fully established.

      It may be noted here that this Court indicated that the

      circumstances concerned 'must or should' and not 'may be'

      established. There is not only a grammatical but a legal

      distinction between 'may be proved' and 'must be         or

      should be proved' as was held by this Court in Shivaji

      Sahabrao Bobade v. State of Maharashtra where the

Crl.A.1707/2005.                     29

      observations were made:

             'Certainly, it is a primary principle that the accused

      must be and not merely may be guilty before a court can

      convict and the mental distance between "my be" and

      "must be" is long and divides vague conjectures from sure

      conclusions.'

             (2) the facts so established should be consistent only

      with the hypothesis of the guilt of the accused, that is to

      say, they should not be explainable on any other hypothesis

      except that the accused is guilty,

             (3)  the circumstances should be of a conclusive

      nature and tendency,

             (4) they should exclude every possible hypothesis

      except the one to be proved, and

             (5) there must be a chain of evidence so complete as

      not to leave any reasonable ground for the conclusion

      consistent with the innocence of the accused and must

      show that in all human probability the act must have been

      done by the accused."

      It was further observed:

             "179. We can fully understand that though the case

      superficially viewed bears an ugly look so as to prima facie

      shock the conscience of any court yet suspicion, however

Crl.A.1707/2005.                    30

      great it may be, cannot take the place of legal proof. A

      moral conviction however strong or genuine cannot

      amount to a legal conviction supportable in law.

             180. It must be recalled that the well-established

      rule of criminal justice is that 'fouler the crime higher the

      proof'. In the instant case, the life and liberty of a subject

      was at stake. As the accused was given a capital sentence,

      a very careful, cautious and meticulous approach was

      necessary to be made."



             30. The law is well settled in this regard. As rightly

pointed out by the learned counsel for the appellant, Section 106 of

the Indian Evidence Act is not intended to relieve the prosecution

of its burden to prove the case beyond doubt. The burden to prove

the case beyond reasonable doubt rests on the prosecution. When

that burden is discharged, then the burden shifts to the accused.

Viewed from that angle, it could not be said that in the instant case,

Section 106 of the Indian Evidence Act has any application.

Crl.A.1707/2005.                 31

             31.  We are unable to uphold the conviction and

sentence passed by the court below for the offences punishable

under Section 302 I.P.C. in the light of the discussion made above.

We are constrained to hold that the prosecution has not succeeded

in proving the case beyond reasonable doubt.

             32. But the matter does not end there. Question that

still remains to be considered is whether the offence punishable

under Section 304B is attracted. Section 304B of IPC reads as

follows:

      "304B. Dowry death.-(1) Where the death of a women

      is caused by any burns or bodily injury or occurs

      otherwise than under normal circumstances within

      seven years of her marriage and it is shown that soon

      before her death she was subjected to cruelty or

      harassment by her husband or any relative of her

      husband for, or in connection with, any demand for

      dowry, such death shall be called "dowry death", and

      such husband or relative shall be deemed to have

      caused her death.

Crl.A.1707/2005.                  32

      Explanation.-    For the purpose of this sub-section

      "dowry shall have the same meaning as in section 2 of

      the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961 (28 of 1961).

             (2)  Whoever commits dowry death shall be

      punished with imprisonment for a term which shall not

      be less than seven years but which may extend to

      imprisonment for life."


It will not be out of place here to refer to Section 113B of the

Indian Evidence Act to raise the presumption in case of dowry

death. That portion reads as follows:

      "113B. Presumption as to dowry death.- When the

      question is whether a person has committed the dowry

      death of a woman and it is shown that soon before her

      death such woman has been subjected by such person

      to cruelty or harassment for, or in connection with, any

      demand for dowry, the Court shall presume that such

      person had caused the dowry death."

             33. In order to attract Section 304B of the IPC, the

following ingredients will have to be established:

Crl.A.1707/2005.                  33

      (a)    The death of women is caused by any burns or

      bodily    injury   or   otherwise    than   under    normal

      circumstances within seven years of marriage.

      (b) It must be shown that soon before her death, she was

      subjected to cruelty or harassment by her husband or any

      relative of her husband in connection with demand for

      dowry.

If the above ingredients are established, then the death is known as

dowry death. If the aforesaid ingredients are established, legal

presumption under Section 113B of the Indian Evidence Act is

attracted.

             34. In the case on hand, the evidence clearly shows that

the death was within seven years of marriage and it was due to

burn injuries. Therefore, the first part of Section 304B is attracted.

But that may not be sufficient. The prosecution will have to prove

that soon before the death of the victim, she was subjected to

cruelty or harassment by her husband or his relatives and that was

in connection with the demand for dowry.           Even though the

Crl.A.1707/2005.                  34

prosecution has such an allegation that the accused was

continuously harassing and torturing the victim for dowry, there is

absolutely no evidence to establish the said fact. The lower court

has observed that the accused had sold the gold ornaments of the

deceased. But we are unable to find any evidence in this regard.

There is no whisper in Ext.P1 dying declaration that either her

husband or any of his relatives had made any demand for dowry or

that the victim was subjected to cruelty or harassment in

connection with the demand for dowry.          Evidence shows that

marriage was not to the liking of either of the families.

             35. In this connection it will be appropriate to refer to

the decision reported in Prem Kanwar v. State of Rajasthan

(AIR 2009 SC 1242), wherein it was held as follows:

             "The necessity for insertion of the two provisions

      has been amply analysed by the Law Commission of

      India in its 21st Report dated 10th August, 1988 on

      'Dowry Deaths and Law Reform'. Keeping in view the

      impediment in the pre-existing law in securing evidence

Crl.A.1707/2005.                 35

      to prove dowry related deaths, legislature thought it

      wise to insert a provision relating to presumption of

      dowry death on proof of certain essentials. It is in this

      background presumptive Section 113-B of the Evidence

      Act has been inserted. As per the definition of 'dowry

      death' in Section 304-B, IPC and the wording in the

      presumptive Section 113-B of the Evidence Act, one of

      the essential ingredients, amongst others, in both the

      provisions is that the concerned woman must have been

      "soon before her death" subjected to cruelty or

      harassment "for on in connection with the demand of

      dowry".     Presumption under Section 113-B is a

      presumption of law.      On     proof of the essentials

      mentioned therein, it becomes obligatory on the Court

      to raise a presumption that the accused caused the

      dowry death. The presumption shall be raised only on

      proof of the following essentials.

             (1)  The question before the Court must be

      whether the accused has committed the dowry death of

      a woman. (This means that the presumption can be

      raised only if the accused is being tried for the offence

      under Section 304-B, IPC).

Crl.A.1707/2005.                 36

             (2)  The woman was subjected to cruelty or

      harassment by her husband or his relatives.

             (3) Such cruelty or harassment was for, or in

      connection with any demand for dowry.

             (4) Such cruelty or harassment was soon before

      her death.

             A conjoint reading of Section 113-B of the

      Evidence Act and Section 304-B, IPC shows that there

      must be material to show that soon before her death the

      victim was subjected to cruelty or harassment.

      Prosecution has to rule out the possibility of a natural

      or accidental death so as to bring it within the purview

      of the 'death occurring     otherwise than in normal

      circumstances.' The expression 'soon before ' is very

      relevant where Section 113-B of the Evidence Act and

      Section     304-B, IPC are pressed into service.

      Prosecution is obliged to show that soon before the

      occurrence there was cruelty or harassment and only in

      that case presumption operates.       Evidence in that

      regard has to be led by prosecution. 'Soon before' is a

      relative term and it would depend upon circumstances

      of each case and no strait-jacket formula can be laid

Crl.A.1707/2005.                  37

      down as to what would constitute a period of soon

      before the occurrence. It would be hazardous to

      indicate any fixed period, and that brings in the

      importance of a proximity test both for the proof of an

      offence of dowry death as well as for raising a

      presumption under Section 113-B of the Evidence Act.

      The expression 'soon before her death' used in the

      substantive Section 304-B, IPC and Section 113-B of

      the Evidence Act is present with the idea of proximity

      test. No definite period has been indicated and the

      expression 'soon before' is not defined. A reference to

      expression    'soon   before' used    in  Section   114,

      Illustration (a) of the Evidence Act is relevant. It lays

      down that a Court may presume that a man who is in

      the possession of goods 'soon after' the theft, is either

      the thief or has received the goods knowing them to be

      stolen, unless he can account for the possession. The

      determination of he period which can come within the

      term 'soon before' is left to be determined by the

      Courts, depending upon facts and circumstances of

      each case.     Suffice, however, to indicate that the

      expression 'soon before' would normally imply that the

Crl.A.1707/2005.                  38

      interval should not be much between the concerned

      cruelty or harassment and the death in question. There

      must be existence of a proximate and live-link between

      the effect of cruelty based on dowry demand and the

      concerned death.     If alleged incident of cruelty is

      remote in time and has become stale enough not to

      disturb mental equilibrium of the woman concerned, it

      would be of no consequence."

      (Also see the decision reported in Beldev Singh v.

      State of Punjab (AIR 2009 SC 913).

             36. One may here refer to the ingredients that are to be

established in order to draw the legal presumption available under

Section 113 B of the Indian Evidence Act. They are as follows:

      (i) The question before the court must be whether the

      accused has committed the dowry death of the woman (this

      means that the presumption can be raised only if the

      accused is being tried for the offence under Section 304 B

      of IPC).

      (ii) The woman was subjected to cruelty or harassment by

      her husband or his relatives.

Crl.A.1707/2005.                  39

      (iii) Such cruelty or harassment was in connection with the

      demand for dowry.

      (iv) The cruelty or harassment was soon before her death.

It can therefore be seen that Section 113B of the Indian Evidence

Act is closely linked to Section 304 B of the IPC. From a reading

of the Section as well as the various decisions on the subject, it can

be seen that once the ingredients of Section 304B are established,

then it is obligatory on the court to raise the presumption under

Section 113 B of the Indian Evidence Act. In order to attract

Section 304 B, it has to be shown as already mentioned that the

victim was subjected to cruelty or harassment in connection with

the demand for dowry soon before her death. In the case on hand,

as already noticed, there is nothing to indicate that there was any

harassment or cruel treatment either from the husband or his

relatives against the victim. Therefore, the offence punishable

under Section 304B is also not attracted.

Crl.A.1707/2005.                   40

             37. It is surprising to note that even though the court

has framed charge under Section 498A of IPC, no finding is seen

entered in relation to the said offence. There can be no dispute

regarding the fact that Section 498A is a distinct and independent

offence. Merely because the accused had been found guilty of the

offence punishable under Section 302 IPC, that will not relieve the

trial court of the burden of considering whether offence punishable

under Section 498A is attracted. Section 498A reads as follows:

      "498A. Husband or relative of husband of a woman

      subjecting her to cruelty.-         Whoever, being the

      husband or the relative of the husband of a woman,

      subjects such woman to cruelty shall be punished with

      imprisonment for a term which may extend to three

      years and shall also be liable to fine.

             Explanation.- For the purpose of this section,

      "cruelty" means-

             (a) any wilful conduct which is of such a nature

      as is likely to drive the woman to commit suicide or to

      cause grave injury or danger to life, limb or health

Crl.A.1707/2005.                   41

      (whether mental or physical) of the woman; or

             (b)    harassment of the woman where such

      harassment is within a view to coercing her or any

      person related to her to meet any unlawful demand for

      any property or valuable security or is on account of

      failure by her or any person related to her to meet such

      demand."

The essential ingredients of the Section are :

      (1) The woman was married,

      (2) She was subjected to cruelty,

      (3) Cruelty consists of ;

      (a) Any wilful conduct which is of such a nature as is

      likely to drive the woman

             (i) to commit suicide to cause grave injury,

             (ii) to cause grave injury or danger to life, limb or

             health (whether mental or physical).

      (b) Harassment of such woman

             (i)   with a view to    coerce her to meet the

      unlawful demand for property or valuable security

             (ii) On    account of failure by her or any

      person related to her to meet such demand.

Crl.A.1707/2005.                  42

             (iii) The woman was subjected to cruelty either

      by the husband or his relatives.

             38. The offence punishable under Section 498A IPC is

not related to demand for dowry. The provision is attracted when

any of the conduct made mention of in the provision is established

resulting in the consequences mentioned thereof. Here too, the

prosecution has to establish that the woman concerned was

subjected to cruelty either by her husband or by his relatives.

While Section      306 of the IPC relates to abetment of suicide,

Section 498A in fact would deal with creating of circumstances

leading to commit suicide by the woman or grievous injury to

herself. Apart from the fact that there is no evidence in the case on

hand to show that the victim was subjected to cruelty, there is also

nothing to show that she was driven to commit suicide or to cause

grievous injury due to the conduct on the part of her husband or his

relatives. Therefore, this provision is also not attracted.

Crl.A.1707/2005.                  43

             39. There is yet another defect in the judgment of the

court below, though it may be only academic. The court below has

observed that set off under Section 428 Cr.P.C. is not allowed as it

is legally settled that life imprisonment implies remaining part of

life. Viewed in the abstract sense, it may be correct. But it has

been held that if the appropriate Government exercise their power

under Section 432 or Section 433 Cr.P.C., as the case may be,

subject ofcourse to Section 433A of the Code, then it becomes an

imprisonment for a term and Section 428 of the Code is attracted.

Therefore, the proper way would be to direct that set off as per law

will be allowed in case the appropriate Government choose to

exercise its power under Section 432 or Section 433 of the Code

subject to Section 433A of the Code. This aspect may not be of

much relevance in the case on hand, because it has been found that

the prosecution has miserably failed to establish the acts attributed

to the accused.

Crl.A.1707/2005.                   44

             In the result, this appeal is allowed, the conviction and

sentence awarded by the court below are set aside and the accused

in S.C. 178 of 2004 on the file of the Additional Sessions Court,

Fast Track No.I, (Ad Hoc), Manjeri stands acquitted for the

offences punishable under Section 498A and 302 IPC and he shall

be set at liberty forthwith unless wanted in any other case. If he

has paid the fine amount, it will be refunded to him.




                                            K. Balakrishnan Nair,
                                                    Judge




                                               P. Bhavadasan,
                                                     Judge




sb.


