

 IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

Mat.Appeal.No. 202 of 2004()


1. RUSSEL JOY, AGED 39 YEARS,
                      ...  Petitioner

                        Vs



1. GEETHA GILBERT,
                       ...       Respondent

                For Petitioner  :SRI.V.C.JAMES

                For Respondent  :SRI.T.KURIAKOSE PETER

The Hon'ble MR. Justice P.R.RAMAN
The Hon'ble MR. Justice C.T.RAVIKUMAR

 Dated :16/01/2009

 O R D E R
               P.R. RAMAN & C.T. RAVIKUMAR, JJ.
             ---------------------------------------------------------
                    MAT. APPEAL NO.202 OF 2004
             ---------------------------------------------------------
                 Dated this the 16th day of January, 2009

                                 JUDGMENT


Raman J.



      The above appeal arises out of the order and decree dated 12.1.2004

in O.P. No. 70 of 1998 passed by the Family Court, Ernakulam. The

second respondent in O.P. No. 70 of 1998 is the appellant before us and

the respondent herein was the third petitioner in the Original Petition. The

Original Petition was filed seeking recovery                  of an amount of

Rs.2,45,000/- from the appellant herein as also against Rosy Mathew, who

is the mother of the appellant. During the pendency of the proceedings

before the Family Court, the mother and brother of the respondent who

were petitioners 1 and 2 therein were removed from the party array. The

Family Court finally granted a decree as against the appellant only and

dismissed the claim made against his mother. Hence, the appellant has

chosen to implead only the third petitioner as others are not necessary

parties.

Mat. Appeal No. 202/2004                2




       2. The respondent herein is the divorced wife of the appellant. The

marital relationship of the parties was dissolved as per the order in O.P.

No. 216 of 1995 of the Family Court. It was the case of the respondent

herein that on the eve of the marriage, she was provided with share money

of Rs.2,00,000/- and towards the same, three cheques were issued, the

details of which are contained in paragraph 4 of the Original Petition, that

the cheques were entrusted with the mother of the appellant as per the

custom who also drew benefit from the cheques which were later encashed

by the appellant.    According to the respondent, the marital relationship

between herself and the appellant was strained due to the ill treatment

meted out to her by the appellant on account of constant demand for

enhanced dowry which could not be satisfied by her. It is her further case

that though the marriage was dissolved, the amount entrusted with the

appellant was not returned and hence, she filed the Original Petition.

Initially, the Original Petition was filed before the Sub Court, Ernakulam

and later transferred to the Family Court.



       3. In the counter affidavit filed by the mother of the appellant who

was the first respondent in the Original Petition, she denied of having been

entrusted with any amount on the date of the betrothal or at any time in

Mat. Appeal No. 202/2004              3




connection with the marriage as alleged in the petition. The allegation of

cruelty is also denied by her. The fact remains that both the husband and

wife were residing in a separate house and the first respondent-mother of

the appellant had no occasion to behave in a cruel manner as alleged. She

is ignorant of any payment, either by way of check or by cash and she also

contended that she is an unnecessary party.        The appellant, though

admitted the marriage, contended that in view of the subsequent events,

the marital status is not in force. He denied the allegation of entrustment

of the cheques and also denied of having any liability for the amount

claimed by the respondent herein. The allegation of cruelty is also denied

by him. He admitted that O.P. No.216 of 1995 filed by the wife for a

decree of divorce ended in her favour. It is his further case that the

respondent herein took away the thali mala worth ten sovereigns of gold,

the engagement ring and wedding ring each worth one sovereign and the

mantrakody saree worth Rs.9,000/-. According to him, on dissolution of

the marriage, the respondent is bound to return the said articles, but she

did not do so.



      4. The evidence in the case consists of the oral testimony of the

third petitioner who was examined as PW.1. Exts.A1 to A9 were marked

on her side. On the side of the respondents, the second respondent in the

Mat. Appeal No. 202/2004               4




Original Petition and three others were examined as RWs.1 to 4 and

Ext.B1 was marked. The Family Court considered two issues :



             i. Whether the O.P. is maintainable in view of
                 the order of divorce passed in O.P.216/95 ?

             ii. Whether the petitioner is entitled to recover an
                 amount of Rs.2 lakhs from the respondent and
                 if so, which of the respondents are liable for
                 payment of the said amount?

The maintainability of the petition was decided in favour of the third

petitioner in the light of the decisions of this Court reported in Abdul

Jaleel v. Sahida, 1997(1) K.L.T. 734 and Shyni v. George and Others,

A.I.R. 1997 Kerala 231. No argument was addressed to persuade us to

take a different view.

       5. The next point that arises for consideration is regarding the

entitlement for the amount sought for. The court below considered this

point with reference to the materials on record. According to PW.1, prior

to the engagement ceremony, there was a function on 6.11.1994 at the

house of the respondents and that on the said occasion, three cheques were

handed over to the second respondent which are illustrated by Ext.A6.

The first respondent contended that no amount was received under the

cheques. The court below found that all the three cheques were in the

name of the second respondent and that two crossed cheques were for

Mat. Appeal No. 202/2004              5




Rs.50,000/- each drawn on Maradu Service Co-operative Bank vide

Account Nos.1665 and 2558 and a third cheque for Rs.1,00,000/- dated

11.11.1994 drawn on Ernakulam District Co-operative Bank vide Account

No.2553. Ext.A1 is the pass book issued by Ernakulam            District Co-

operative Bank and Exts.A2 and A3 are pass books issued by Maradu

Service Co-operative Bank. Ext.A6 is the receipt of payment issued by

Maradu Service Co-operative Bank. Exts.A7 and A8 are the photostat

copies of the depositions of the Managers of the respective banks in C.C.

No.374 of 1997 on the file of the Judicial First Class Magistrate's Court,

Kolencherry. The court below found that prima facie evidence regarding

encashment of the cheques are available as per the above documents. The

Managers of the respective banks were examined by the Judicial First

Class Magistrate's Court, Kolencherry.     It is in evidence that the second

respondent, that is, the appellant herein had encashed the said cheques. It

is based on the said oral and documentary evidence as discussed above

that the court below found that the first respondent, namely mother of the

appellant was not liable for the amount claimed in the absence of any

evidence to show either entrustment or utilisation       of any amount as

alleged.   It also showed that the contention of the second respondent -

appellant herein     that he was not entrusted with any amount stands

disproved.

Mat. Appeal No. 202/2004              6




      6. A contention was raised that anybody can encash a bearer's

cheque. But in the light of the evidence of the Managers of the Banks and

in the absence of any steps taken by the appellant to cause production of

such cheques or in the absence of better evidence, it cannot be said that

the inference drawn by the court below that the second respondent has

derived the benefits    of the cheques is not correct.   The conclusion

reached by the court below on an analysis of the evidence as discussed

above is a probable one.     Though the second respondent - the appellant

herein had a different case, in the light of the documentary evidence

adduced, that cannot dislodge the presumption arising from the

encashment of the cheques.       The evidence of RWs.3 and 4 was not

believed by the court below in the light of the documentary evidence

Exts.A1 to A3 and Exts.A6 to A8.         There is not even a suggestion

regarding the presence of the witnesses at the time of the betrothal

ceremony. It was after analysing the entire records that the court below

came to the conclusion that the second respondent - appellant herein was

liable for the claim to return an amount of Rs.2,00,000/- with interest

thereon to the respondent herein.



      We have considered the judgment and have also gone through the

Mat. Appeal No. 202/2004              7




evidence on record. We agree with the finding entered by the court below

and we do not find any reason to interfere with the order impugned. The

appeal lacks merit and it is accordingly dismissed.



                                         (P.R. RAMAN)
                                            JUDGE



                                     (C.T. RAVIKUMAR)
                                            JUDGE


sp/

Mat. Appeal No. 202/2004    8




                               P.R. RAMAN
                                       &
                               C.T. RAVIKUMAR, JJ.




                               MAT.APPEALNO.202/2004



                                    JUDGMENT


                               13th January, 2009


