

 IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

SA.No. 65 of 2000(D)



1. ABRAHAM THOMAS
                      ...  Petitioner

                        Vs

1. KUNJAMMA JEEVAMONY
                       ...       Respondent

                For Petitioner  :SRI.ROY CHACKO

                For Respondent  :SRI.S.JAMES VINCENT

The Hon'ble MR. Justice THOMAS P.JOSEPH

 Dated :19/11/2009

 O R D E R
                                                                      "C.R."

                         THOMAS P.JOSEPH, J.
               = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = =
                         S.A. NOS.65 & 514 OF 2000
               = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = =
               Dated this the 19th     day of November,    2009

                               J U D G M E N T
                               ----------------------


      In these Second Appeals the common substantial questions              of

law which I have framed for a decision are whether the mere fact that

a Protestant Christian is living in Neyyattinkara Taluk (among other

Taluks mentioned in Section 30 of the Travancore Christian Succession

Act - for short, "the Act") is sufficient to hold that he is following the

customary usage as per which male and female heirs of the intestate

would inherit his property in equal proportion and whether the courts

below are legally correct in holding that plaintiffs have not proved the

customary usage.        The contestants in these cases claim title by

inheritance to the property of            Chadayan Pethiru,      a Protestant

Christian who lived in Neyyattinkara Taluk.           According to the learned

counsel for appellants/plaintiffs fact of such domicile is sufficient to

infer, as provided in Sec.30 of the Act that Chadayan Pethiru was

following that customary usage which Sec.30 itself recognised while

counsel for respondents/defendants would contend that apart from

the fact of such domicile it is also necessary to prove that Chadayan

Pethiru belonged to that group of Protestants who were following

S.A. NOS.65 & 514 of 2000
                                 -: 2 :-


such a customary usage.

      2.    Short facts necessary for a decision of the questions of law

framed are: The late Chadayan Pethiru, it is not disputed lived in

Neyyattinkara Taluk.      His children are Paulose, Rayamma and

Thankamma. Plaintiff No.1 is the daughter of Thankamma. Plaintiff

No.2 is the husband of plaintiff No.1. Defendant Nos.1 to 5 are the

legal heirs of Paulose.   Defendant Nos.6 to 12 are assignees from

defendant Nos.1 to 5.     Rayamma died as a spinster.          Plaint B

schedule, 1.28 acres belonged to Chadayan Pethiru. Plaintiffs claimed

that Sthreedanam was not paid to Thankamma and hence after the

death of Chadayan Pethiru, Paulose executed Ext.A1, Sthreedana

document of 1109 M.E. in favour of Thankamma on the previous day

of her marriage with Samuel as per which 64 cents out of the property

which belonged to Chadayan Pethiru was assigned to Thankamma in

lieu of Sthreedanam. Thankamma and her sister, Rayamma executed

Ext.A2, assignment deed dated 15.7.1964 in respect of 1.07 acres of

land in favour of the plaintiffs. The said 1.07 acres takes in the 64

cents acquired by Thankamma as per Ext.A1 and 43 cents which

Rayamma claimed for herself by inheritance        as    a legal heir of

Chadayan Pethiru. Paulose had created a mortgage in respect of 7.5

cents. Plaintiffs purchased right of the mortgagees. Plaintiffs thus

S.A. NOS.65 & 514 of 2000
                                  -: 3 :-


claimed title over 1.14= acres (1.07 acres acquired by them as per

Ext.A2 and the 7.5 cents which they said they had redeemed from the

mortgagees).       On that premise plaintiffs  prayed for partition and

separate possession of their share. Defendant Nos.2 to 5 resisted the

suit.  They claimed that Chadayan Pethiru belonged to the Salvation

Army and inheritance is through his only son, Paulose. Daughters of

Chadayan Pethiru acquired no right over the property by inheritance.

They admitted that in lieu of Sthreedanam Paulose had assigned 64

cents in favour of Thankamma as per Ext.A1. They denied that there

was any customary usage in the community as per which the female

children inherited    properties of the intestate father along with the

male children. It is also contended that though Ext.A1, Sthreedana

document stated extent of the property assigned to Thankamma as

64 cents, actual extent is only 1/3rd of plaint B schedule which is 42

and 2/3 cents.     Rayamma had no right over any portion of the suit

property to be conveyed as per Ext.A2.         Allegation that plaintiffs

redeemed the mortgage over 7.5 cents was denied.

      3.    O.S. No.268 of 1975 is a suit filed by the same plaintiffs

for partition of 3.50 acres which also originally belonged to Chadayan

Pethiru.    There also similar contentions are raised regarding right of

inheritance of the daughters of Chadayan Pethiru.       Learned Munsiff

S.A. NOS.65 & 514 of 2000
                                   -: 4 :-


found that customary usage pleaded by the plaintiffs is not proved

and dismissed the suit. That was confirmed by the first appellate

court against which plaintiffs    preferred Second Appeal Nos.527 and

580 of 1980. This Court as per common judgment dated 26.11.1985

(reported as Thankamma and Another v. Kunjamma and

Others - AIR 1986 Kerala 134) set aside the judgment and decree

and remitted the cases to the trial court to give the plaintiffs

opportunity to prove the customary usage relied on by them.       After

remand no further evidence was adduced by the parties.          Learned

Munsiff held that there is no evidence to prove customary usage

pleaded by the plaintiffs and dismissed the suit.        That has been

confirmed by the       first appellate court against which these Second

Appeals are preferred. It is contended by learned counsel for plaintiffs

that Sec.30 of the Act itself recognised the customary usage in the

community to which         Chadayan Pethiru      belonged and what is

required to be proved is only that Chadayan Pethiru lived in the Taluk

of Neyyattinkara which fact is not disputed. Hence according to the

learned counsel     Sec.30 of the Act should apply,     consequence of

which is that Secs.24 and 28 of the Act has no application.         The

female children of Chadayan Pethiru were entitled to a share in his

property along with his son, Paulose.             Learned counsel for

S.A. NOS.65 & 514 of 2000
                                     -: 5 :-


defendants in response contended that the mere fact of residence of

the late Chadayan Pethiru         in Neyyattinkara Taluk    will not render

Sec.30 of the Act applicable to the parties.        Apart from the   fact of

residence     plaintiffs were also to prove that Chadayan Pethiru

belonged to that group of         Protestant Christians of that Taluk who

followed the customary usage.            Learned counsel points out that

common judgment of this Court remitting the case to the trial court

specifically adverted to the absence of documentary evidence to prove

the customary usage and an opportunity was given to the plaintiffs to

produce such evidence which they did not. Hence courts below are

justified in holding that plaintiffs   cannot get the protection of Sec.30

of the Act.

       4.    It is admitted by both sides that Chadayan Pethiru died

much before 1.4.1951, succession to his properties          opened before

that date and hence the decision in Mary Roy v. State of

Kerala (1986 KLT 508) has no application.          Then the question is

whether Sec.30 of the Act applied. The Section says,




                   "30.   Sections 24, 28 & 29 not applicable to

             certain classes of Roman Catholic & Protestant

             Christians.-Sections 24,28 and 29 shall not be

             applicable to certain classes of the Roman Catholic

S.A. NOS.65 & 514 of 2000
                                      -: 6 :-


            Christians of the Latin Rite and also to certain

            Protestant Christians living in Karunagappally, Quilon,

            Chirayinkil, Trivandrum, Neyyattinkara and other

            taluks, according to the customary usage among

            whom the male and female heirs of an intestate share

            equally in the property of the intestate.


                   So far as those Christians are concerned,

            nothing in the aforesaid sections shall be deemed to

            affect the said custom obtaining among them".

                                            (emphasis supplied)




      5.    The mere fact of domicile of a particular person at a

particular place may not by itself attract application of          customary

law in the matter of intestate succession. Dealing with the provisions

of the Travancore Ezhava Act (Rugulation III of 1100) the Supreme

Court held in Narayanan Rajendran v. Lekshmy Sarojini

([2009] 5 SCC 264) that the mere fact of domicile is not by itself

decisive in such matters. That decision was based on Sec.1(2) of the

Travancore Ezhava Act which said that the said Act shall apply to all

Ezhavas domiciled       in Travancore        other than those who followed

Makkathayam and shall also apply to such Ezhavas whether domiciled

or not, as have       or shall have marital relationship with Ezhavas

domiciled in Travancore. The said provision indicated that all Ezhavas

S.A. NOS.65 & 514 of 2000
                                    -: 7 :-


domiciled   in   Travancore     need     not  necessarily    be   following

Makkathayam law of succession.        In that backdrop the Supreme Court

stated in Narayanan Rajendran's case (supra) that the mere fact of

domicile is not by itself decisive.   Section 30 the Act       referred to

above recognised the customary usage among 'certain' Protestant

Christians and 'certain' Roman Catholic Christians of Latin Rite living in

the Taluks mentioned therein but not among all such persons living in

those Taluks.

      6.    Reading Sec.30 of the Act it would appear that it is not

merely domicile of class of persons referred to therein in the Taluks

mentioned which would          attract customary usage; instead, they

should belong to that class or group        among the Roman        Catholic

Christians of Latin Rite or Protestant Christians living in the said Taluks

who follow the customary usage as per which female heirs inherited

equally with male heirs in the property of the intestate. The adjective

"certain" used before the words 'class of Roman Catholic Christians of

the Latin Rite' and 'Protestant Christians' in Sec.30 is eloquent

indication that it is not as if all the Roman Catholic Christians of Latin

Rite or Protestant Christians living in the Taluks referred to in Sec.30 of

the Act are following the customary usage. The Act only recognised

that of the Roman Catholic Christians of Latin Rite and Protestant

S.A. NOS.65 & 514 of 2000
                                  -: 8 :-


Christians living in the said Taluks, 'certain' persons followed that

customary usage.       The word "certain" when used as an adjective

refers to one particular thing, person or group although one may not

be saying exactly which, it is. When reference is to certain of a group

of people, reference is to some particular members of that group. The

adjective 'certain' used before the proper nouns in Sec.30 of the Act

indicated that plaintiffs had to show that Chadayan Pethiru belonged

to that group of Protestant Christians living in Neyyattinkara Taluk

who followed     customary usage.      The principle laid down by the

Supreme Court in Narayanan Rajendran's case applies to the facts

of these cases. Section 30 of the Act does not lay down an invariable

rule that all Protestant Christians and Roman Catholic Christians of

Latin Rite domiciled in the Taluks referred to therein follow customary

usage as per which       female heirs also inherited property of the

intestate along with male heirs.

      7.    Support for this view can be had       from the decision in

Kunjupillai Kurup v. Fernandez (1963 KLT 737 ([F.B.]). That

was a case where parties who belonged to the Roman Catholic

Christians of Latin Rite belonging to Neyyattinkara Taluk were

agitating over right of inheritance of female children. Reference was

made to the decision in an unreported case,        A.S. No.361 of 1959

S.A. NOS.65 & 514 of 2000
                                  -: 9 :-


rendered by Justice Raghavan, J, (as His Lordship then was) where it

was held,




                  "This shows that the Roman Catholic of

            the Latin Rite or the Protestant Christians, who

            claims that S.30 applies to him, must establish

            that he belongs to a class of the          Roman

            Catholic Christians of the Latin Rite or to the

            Protestant   Christians   living  in  the   taluks

            mentioned in the section and must also prove

            that the customary usage among the class to

            which he belongs is that the male and female

            heirs of an intestate share equally in the

            property of the intestate. It is therefore in the

            nature of an exception and the one who pleads

            the benefit of that section must prove the facts

            necessary to bring the case within the section".

The Full Bench, referring to Sec.30 of the Act held,




                  What S.30 does is to grant an immunity

            from the operation of Ss.24, 28 and 29 to all

            Roman Catholic Christians of the Latin Rite

            'according to the customary usage among

            whom the male and female heirs of an

            intestate share equally in the property of the

            intestate." It follows that in order to obtain the

S.A. NOS.65 & 514 of 2000
                                  -: 10 :-


            immunity it is not enough if the plaintiff proves

            that she is a Roman Catholic Christian of the

            Latin Rite; she must also establish that she

            belongs to a class of Roman Catholic Christians

            of the Latin Rite among whom the usage

            specified does obtain."




The decision in Kunjupillai Kurup's case (supra) was followed in

Daisy v. Annamma George (1982 KLT 196).                       Hence the

plaintiffs were obliged to prove that Chadayan Pethiru belonged to that

group of Protestant Christians domiciled in Neyyattinkara Taluk who

followed the customary usage referred to in Sec.30 of the Act to get

rid of application of Secs.24 and 28 of the Act. The         Substantial

question of law framed above is answered accordingly.

      8.    Then the question is whether that obligation has been

discharged by the plaintiffs. Learned counsel for plaintiffs referred me

to the oral evidence let in by the parties as also Exts.A1, A2 and A6.

Learned counsel also brought to my notice decision of the Privy

Council in Ahmad Khan v. MT. Channi Bibi (AIR 1925 PC 267)

where in page 271 it is stated as to the nature and amount of evidence

required to prove a custom,

S.A. NOS.65 & 514 of 2000
                                 -: 11 :-


                  "As regards the custom in respect of

            which the two Courts in India have differed,

            their Lordships think the Subordinate Judge was

            in error in putting aside the large body of

            evidence on the plaintiff's side merely on the

            ground that specific instances had not been

            proved. They are of opinion that the learned

            Judges of the High Court are right in holding

            that a custom of the kind alleged in this case

            may be proved by general evidence as to its

            existence by members of the tribe or family

            who would naturally be cognizant of its

            existence and its exercise without controversy.


                  There is a large body of oral evidence

            establishing the custom, wholly unrebutted by

            the defendants who have relied exclusively on

            the Riwaj-i-Aam. The Judges of the High Court

            have commented on these documents, and

            their Lordships see no reason to differ from

            them."



According to the learned counsel it is not the requirement of law that

there should be documentary evidence to prove customary usage.

Such evidence can be oral also and in these cases persons who were

competent to speak about       customary usage have     given evidence

S.A. NOS.65 & 514 of 2000
                                 -: 12 :-


which gets support from Exts.A1, A2 and A6 as well.     Per contra it is

argued by learned counsel for defendants that this Court is bound by

the common judgment dated 26.11.1985 where, in paragraphs 24

and 28 it was specifically found that evidence on record is insufficient

to prove customary usage referred to in Sec.30 of the Act. Learned

counsel took my attention to paragraph 24 of the judgment where this

Court     observed that "to prove this customary usage, no

document which would certainly indicate such a usage, has

been produced and proved." Learned counsel also contended that

in paragraphs 24 and 26 of the judgment this Court after referring to

Exts.A1 and A6 observed that the evidence is insufficient to prove that

Chadayan Pethiru belonged to the group of Protestant Christians who

followed the customary usage.

      9.    This Court while remanding the case directed the trial

court to consider the matter afresh. Parties were given opportunity to

adduce further evidence.     But    no further evidence was adduced.

P.W.2 who gave evidence regarding the customary usage was not able

to point out any specific instance of female heirs (among Protestant

Christians) inheriting property of an intestate. P.W3 had to admit that

he had not seen any document in which male and            female heirs

(among Protestant Christians) were given equal shares. Courts below

S.A. NOS.65 & 514 of 2000
                                 -: 13 :-


found the evidence of P.Ws.2 and 3 as insufficient.  Exhibit A1 shows

that one third of the property of Chadayan Pethiru was assigned by

Paulose to Thankamma and her husband. This document was not

accepted     by the courts below as indicating that Thankamma,

daughter of Chadayan Pethiru was having equal right over property of

her father along with her brother, Paulose and Sister, Rayamma.

Exhibit A1 is an assignment by Paulose and accepted by Thankamma

and her husband acknowledging title of Paulose over the entire

property. Exhibit A1 says that Paulose was in possession of the entire

property. Exhibit A6 executed by the legal heirs of Paulose referred to

Rayamma having right over the property but in that case Thankamma

also should have had right in the property and should have joined

Ext.A6. Exhibit A6 could only be taken as indicating that Rayamma

had a charge over the property for dowry. With the above evidence on

record, this Court in the remand judgment observed in paragraph 24

that to prove customary usage no document which would certainly

indicate such a usage has been produced and proved and in that

backdrop gave plaintiffs an opportunity to adduce further evidence.

This Court was not satisfied with the evidence let in by the plaintiffs.

Plaintiffs cannot    rely on the same     evidence to contend     that

Chadayan Pethiru belonged to the group of Protestant Christians who

S.A. NOS.65 & 514 of 2000
                                 -: 14 :-


followed customary usage. Courts below were not satisfied with the

evidence adduced by the plaintiffs. That is a finding on fact based on

evidence which does not involve any substantial question of law.

       10.   Learned counsel for plaintiffs contended that in the first

appellate court an application (I.A. No.74 of 1996) was preferred for

receiving additional evidence under Order XLI Rule 27 of the Code of

Civil Procedure and documents produced, according to the plaintiffs

proved their case.       That application was dismissed by the first

appellate court stating that there is no satisfactory explanation for not

producing those     documents in the trial court. That order, according

to the learned counsel is illegal. Learned counsel contends that first

appellate court has not given sufficient opportunity to the plaintiffs to

adduce further documentary evidence.

       11.   Reason for refusing permission to receive additional

evidence is given by the first appellate court in paragraph 16 of the

judgment under challenge. On going through the judgment it is seen

that the documents produced along with I.A. No.74 of 1996 were not

sufficient to throw light into the controversy involved in these cases.

The documents produced        are  copy of judgments    involving some

persons     in the same family.       Learned counsel for defendants

submitted that in those cases issue regarding customary usage did

S.A. NOS.65 & 514 of 2000
                                  -: 15 :-


not arise for a decision.   First appellate court observed that there is

no satisfactory explanation for not producing the documents in the trial

court. I do not find any illegality or irregularity in the first appellate

court not allowing I.A. No.74 of 1996. It follows that plaintiffs cannot

succeed in these appeals.

      Resultantly, these Second Appeals fail and are dismissed

directing the parties to suffer their respective costs.




                                              THOMAS P.JOSEPH, JUDGE.

vsv

S.A. NOS.65 & 514 of 2000
                             -: 16 :-


                                                        "C.R."

                                        THOMAS P.JOSEPH, J.
                                     ===================
                                     S.A. NOS.65 & 514 OF 2000
                                     ===================


                                         J U D G M E N T




                                     19TH NOVEMBER, 2009


