

 IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

SA.No. 686 of 1994()



1. P.E.MATHAI
                      ...  Petitioner

                        Vs

1. EAPEN CHERIAN
                       ...       Respondent

                For Petitioner  :P.R. VENKITESH

                For Respondent  :SRI.GEORGE VARGHESE (MANACHIRACKEL)

The Hon'ble MR. Justice THOMAS P.JOSEPH

 Dated :12/03/2009

 O R D E R
               THOMAS P.JOSEPH, J.
   = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = =
                S.A. No.686 of 1994
    = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = =
     Dated this the     12th      day of March, 2009

                    J U D G M E N T
                    ----------------------


      "A Will is an instrument by which a person

makes a disposition of his property to take

effect after his decease, and which is in its own

nature ambulatory and revocable             during his

life. It is this ambulatory quality which forms

the characteristic of wills; for, though the death

of disposing party, yet the postponement is in

such case produced by the express terms, and

does not result from the nature of the

instrument. Thus, if a man by deed, limit lands

to the use of himself for life, with remainder to

the use of A in fee, the effect upon the

usufructuary enjoyment is precisely the same

as if he should by his will, make an immediate

devise of such lands to A in fee; and yet the

case fully illustrates the distinction in question;

for, in the former instance, A immediately on

the execution of the deed, becomes entitled to

S.A. No.686 of 1994
                                  -: 2 :-


            a remainder in fee, though it is not to take

            effect in possession until the decease of the

            settlor, while, in the latter, he would take no

            interest whatever until the decease of the

            testator should have called the instrument into

            operation".

                   (Jarman on Wills, 8th Edn., Vol.I, Page 26).




Is the disposition under challenge ambulatory in nature and revocable

in character during the life of the disposer or, it only postponed

possession and enjoyment of the property till his death?           That

precisely is one of the substantial questions of law I am called upon to

decide in this appeal at the instance of defendant Nos.3 and 4.

Another substantial question of law raised is whether the person in

possession has perfected title by adverse possession and limitation.

Parties are referred to as plaintiffs and defendants for convenience.

      2.    Plaintiffs and defendant Nos.1 to 3 are the sons of

Chandapilla Eapen and Sosamma Eapen.              Defendant Nos.4 to 8

(defendant No.6 was removed from the party array in the trial court

following some settlement with him) are assignees from defendant

No.3. Defendant No.8 died during the course of the trial and his legal

S.A. No.686 of 1994
                                 -: 3 :-


representatives are additional defendants 9 to 14.           Properties

scheduled in the plaint originally belonged to Chandapilla Eapen.

Himself and wife, Sosamma Eapen executed Ext.A1, styled as an

'udampady' (agreement) dated, 2nd Thulam 1125 M.E. and registered

as document No.511/1125 M.E. in respect of their properties.       The

properties referred to as item Nos.1 to 6 of Ext.A1 were settled in

favour of the plaintiffs and defendant Nos.1 to 3, their sons. Property

referred to as item No.7 was retained by the executants to meet the

marriage expenses of their daughter, Thankamma and it was recited

that in case the executants were not able to conduct the marriage of

Thankamma during their lifetime and if that property was available

after their death, that property   would go to Thankamma.      There is

no dispute between the parties regarding the properties referred to as

item Nos.1 to 7 in Ext.A1.     Chandapilla Eapen and Sosamma Eapen

are no more. In respect of the properties referred to in item Nos.8

and 9    of Ext.A1, plaintiffs sued the  defendants for partition and

separate possession of their 3/6 shares (Those           properties are

described as item Nos.1 to 6 in the plaint schedule). Regarding the

properties referred to in item No.9 of    Ext.A1, trial court granted a

decree for partition.    That also is not under challenge.      Dispute

surviving is as to the partibility of item No.1 of plaint A schedule

S.A. No.686 of 1994
                                -: 4 :-


which corresponds to item No.1 of      8th item in  Ext.A1.  Plaintiffs

claimed that     said item was settled  in favour of themselves and

defendant Nos.1 to 3 jointly as per Ext.A1 though its enjoyment was

deferred till the death of the executants.    Defendant No.3 and his

assignee, defendant No.4 contended that the        recitals in Ext.A1

concerning plaint schedule item No.1 (item No.1 in the 8th item in

Ext.A1) disclosed only a testamentary disposition to take effect after

the death of Chandapilla Eapen and Sosamma Eapen. After the death

of Chandapilla Eapen, Sosamma Eapen assigned that item in favour

of defendant No.3 as per Ext.B3, assignment deed No.1764 dated

18.7.1964 for valid consideration. Defendant No.3 assigned that item

through his Power of Attorney in favour of       defendant No.4    for

consideration as per Ext.B1,   assignment deed No.156/1978 dated

23.1.1978. Thus, that item is not available for partition. Defendant

Nos.3 and 4 also contended that the suit to the extent it concerned

that item is barred by limitation as they have perfected title by

adverse possession and limitation.     Learned Munsiff accepted the

contention raised by defendant Nos.3 and 4 and refused to order

partition of that item.   In appeal at the instance of the plaintiffs,

learned District Judge found that item No.1 of plaint schedule (item

No.1 of 8th item in Ext.A1) was settled by Chandapilla Eapen as per

S.A. No.686 of 1994
                                  -: 5 :-


Ext.A1 in favour of the plaintiffs and defendant Nos.1 to 3, jointly

though its possession and enjoyment by them was deferred till the

death of the executants. Therefore, on the death of the executants

that item is liable for partition. Learned District Judge found that the

assignment deeds executed by Sosamma Eapen and later by

defendant No.3     are not binding on the plaintiffs.   Plea of adverse

possession and limitation was also not accepted. Accordingly learned

District Judge granted a decree for partition in respect of the said item

as well.    That judgment and decree are under challenge at the

instance   of   defendant     Nos.3  and  4.      Learned   counsel    for

appellants/defendant Nos.3 and 4 contended that         learned District

Judge was not justified in reversing the finding entered by the learned

Munsiff which rested on a proper appreciation of evidence and

interpretation of the relevant clauses of    Ext.A1.   According to the

learned counsel, conduct of the parties as revealed by the oral and

documentary evidence supported the conclusion that the recitals in

Ext.A1 concerning the disputed item indicated only a testamentary

disposition and hence Sosamma Eapen was competent to transfer the

property in revocation of that testamentary disposition to defendant

No.3. Learned counsel further contended that at any rate, plaintiffs

were well aware of the transactions entered into by Sosamma Eapen

S.A. No.686 of 1994
                                 -: 6 :-


and later, by defendant No.3 but they slept over the matter. As such

at this distant point of time when defendant No.4 has perfected title

by adverse possession and limitation, plaintiffs cannot justifiably be

granted a decree for partition in respect of that item.       Learned

counsel for the plaintiffs supported the view taken by the learned

District Judge.

      3.    The question primarily involved is whether the recitals in

Ext.A1 concerning the disposition of item No.8 therein (which takes in

item No.1 of the plaint schedule) disclosed a testamentary disposition

or, is a settlement     of that item in favour of the    plaintiffs and

defendant Nos.1 to 3 deferring its possession and enjoyment until the

death of the executants. The well accepted canons on interpretation

of deeds inform me that the right approach is to read the document as

a whole and not to read each clause as isolated provisions and to

construe the document in the light of the provisions therein.      The

question is not what the parties may have intended while executing

the document but, what exactly is the intention expressed as seen

from the various recitals in the document. It is only when the recitals

are ambiguous and do not reveal the real intention of the parties that

one can have reference to extraneous circumstances to find out the

real intention of the parties. Subsequent conduct of the parties can

S.A. No.686 of 1994
                                  -: 7 :-


also be looked into in interpreting the document, but only if the deed is

ambiguous. Even then, such subsequent conduct can be admitted in

evidence only against the maker of the document and not in his

favour.   Bearing in mind the above       principles, I shall attempt to

understand the intention of the executants as expressed by the

recitals in Ext.A1.

      4.     In Ext.A1 which is styled as an 'agreement' executed by

Chandapilla Eapen and Sosamma Eapen,           plaintiffs and defendant

Nos.1 to 3, their sons are referred to as parties though the sons are

not signatories to it. The document says that apart from the plaintiffs

and defendant Nos.1 to 3,      Chandapilla Eapen and Sosamma Eapen

have three daughters also, two of them already been sent in marriage

in accordance with the custom and practice prevalent in the

Community and that the third daughter, Thankamma was unmarried

but of marriageable age at the time of Ext.A1.     Plaintiff Nos.2 and 3

were married at the time of Ext.A1 and the document states that the

dowry which plaintiff Nos.2 and 3 got at the time of their marriage

was used for the purposes of the family.        Necessity to send the

daughter, Thankamma in marriage is highlighted in Ext.A1 and

Chandapilla Eapen and Sosamma Eapen expressed their intention and

wish to send Thankamma in marriage during their lifetime and          to

S.A. No.686 of 1994
                                 -: 8 :-


raise funds for the marriage (without relegating that responsibility to

the sons).     There was a loan outstanding with the Land Mortgage

Bank (for short, "the Bank") at the time of Ext.A1. The executants

wanted to discharge that loan       during their lifetime itself without

passing on the liability to the children. Since the sons (plaintiffs and

defendant Nos.1 to 3) had become majors and Chandapilla Eapen and

Sosamma Eapen were nearing old age, they thought that to preserve

the integrity of the family and    avoid disruption and for each of the

sons to prosper themselves with their own effort, the properties were

required to be distributed among the sons. Hence they executed

Ext.A1.     They stated that the parties are to conduct themselves in

accordance with the provisions contained in Ext.A1. All the existing

properties were divided as 9 items and item Nos.1 to 6 were settled in

favour of plaintiff Nos.1 to 3 and defendant Nos.1 to 3 transferring

right, title, interest and possession over the said items 'in presenti'.

The property described as item No.7 was retained by Chandapilla

Eapen and Sosamma Eapen as they wanted to meet the expenses of

the marriage of Thankamma during their lifetime. Hence regarding

that item, Ext.A1 stated that the    executants will have full power of

disposal and     that if the  marriage of    Thankamma could not be

performed during their lifetime (If necessary by disposing of the said

S.A. No.686 of 1994
                                   -: 9 :-


item) and if that item was available at the time of their death, that

item would go to Thankamma.

      5.     The crucial recitals regarding disposition of the properties

referred to in item No.8 of         Ext.A1 (plaint schedule item No.1

concerned in this appeal is item No.1 of the 8th item in Ext.A1) read

thus:

             ".......

























S.A. No.686 of 1994
                              -: 10 :-






                              .













                ............















            ....'

S.A. No.686 of 1994
                                    -: 11 :-


             ("......Immovable property in Schedule No.8 for

      repayment of the loan taken from the land mortgage

      bank and Schedule No.9 for our lifetime requirements,

      are retained within our domain and control. Schedule

      No.8 property is retained in our possession with right

      to take income ourselves, or by leasing out and with

      such income, the amounts due to the land mortgage

      bank shall be discharged without default and after the

      clearance of debt, the income from Schedule No.8

      property shall be utilised for our living expenses and

      after our lifetime Schedule No.8 item No.2 will go

      separately to the third among you and items 1 and 3

      therein will go to all of you in equal shares and

      accordingly you may enjoy the properties and pay

      taxes thereon.          Schedule No.9 property shall be

      possessed by us and income therefrom be taken

      directly or by leasing out and if need be, instruments

      be created on schedule No.9 property        and matters

      carried out and after our lifetime if the property of 9th

      schedule is        left, you all may take it in equal

      shares.............All income from Schedule No.8 property

S.A. No.686 of 1994
                                    -: 12 :-


       shall be utilised only for payment of debts due to the

       land mortgage bank without default, until discharge of

       the whole debt and the same shall be done to the

       satisfaction of one among Chacko or Eapen, brothers

       of 2nd executant herein and in accordance with his

       directions and accordingly income from Schedule No.8

       shall be utilised for the discharge of the said debt").




                                         (underline supplied)




       6.    So far as the property referred to as item No.9 of Ext.A1 is

concerned, there is no dispute and the learned Munsiff also found that

it is a testamentary disposition since that item was to go to plaintiffs

and defendant Nos.1 to 3 jointly only if it was available after the death

of Chandapilla Eapen and Sosamma Eapen.               Learned counsel for

defendant Nos.3 and 4 contended that similar recitals are made in

Ext.A1 concerning the property referred in item No.8 (including item

No.1 of the plaint schedule) also and hence the inescapable

conclusion is that regarding 8th item only testamentary disposition was

made.

       7.    Exhibit B2 is a deed of mortgage (Reg.No.2352/1955)

S.A. No.686 of 1994
                                  -: 13 :-


dated 12.1.1955 executed by Chandapilla Eapen and Sosamma Eapen

in favour of Mathew, S/o. Kurian. The executants created possessory

mortgage over the properties referred to in the 8th item of Ext.A1 for a

period of three years as security for the loan they availed from the said

Mathew for discharging the loan of the Bank. In Ext.B2, executants

referred to Ext.A1 and stated that the said property was set apart for

the discharge of the loan to the Bank.     After the death of Chandapilla

Eapen,     Sosamma      Eapen    executed   Ext.B3,   assignment   deed

No.1764/1964      dated    18.7.1964   in  favour  of  defendant    No.3

concerning the very same properties.        In Ext.B3 also reference is

made to Ext.A1 and states further that as per Ext.A1, the said item was

set apart for Chandapilla Eapen and Sosamma Eapen for the discharge

of liability and that the said property absolutely belonged to Sosamma

Eapen on the death of Chandapilla Eapen.           The further recital in

Ext.B3 is that at a time when the liability of the Bank could not be

cleared from the income from the property, it was given on possessory

mortgage in favour of      one of her daughters and to discharge the

remaining portion of the debt, that item is being sold for consideration

to defendant No.3. Exhibit B3 states that Sosamma Eapen divested

herself all her right, title and interest and conveyed the same to

defendant No.3      who was authorised to redeem the mortgage and

S.A. No.686 of 1994
                                  -: 14 :-


enjoy the property absolutely.      Treating the property as absolutely

belonging to him, defendant No.3 executed Ext.B1, assignment deed

No.156 of 1978 dated 23.1.1978 in favour of defendant No.4.

      8.    A 'Will' is an instrument by which a person makes a

disposition of his property to take effect after his death and it is in its

own nature ambulatory and revocable during his lifetime. Section 2(h)

of the Indian Succession Act defines "Will" as:




                   "Legal declaration of the intention of a

            testator with respect to his property which he

            desires to be carried into effect after his death"




The High Court of Madras in Rajammal v. Authiammal (ILR (33)

Madras series 304) said:




                   "one of the invariable tests in coming to a

            conclusion as to the testamentary character of

            a paper is whether the paper is revocable. If it

            is not revocable the document is not a Will.

            The fact that the paper is drawn in the form of

            an agreement and that it is registered, are

            circumstances to be taken into consideration,

            though they do not per se amount to much.

            Where the document contains provisions which

S.A. No.686 of 1994
                                  -: 15 :-


            are not of an ambulatory character, the

            presumption will be against the testamentary

            nature of the document and the fact that such

            provisions are expressed to create in the future

            will not affect the nature of the document".

                                     (underline supplied)




      9.    A 'settlement' is defined in Sec.2(q) of the Kerala Stamp

Act, 1959 as under:




                   "(q)     "Settlement" means any non-

            testamentary disposition in writing, of movable

            or immovable property made-

                   (i)   in consideration of marriage,

                   (ii)  for  the   purpose    of distributing

            property of the settler     among his family or

            those for whom he desires to provide, or for the

            purpose     of   providing    for  some    person

            dependent on him, or

                   (iii) for  any   religious   or charitable

            purpose".




Even in a 'settlement', the settler while transferring his right, title

and interest in the property in presenti may postpone the possession

S.A. No.686 of 1994
                                  -: 16 :-


and enjoyment of the property to the settlee to a future date or even

until his death. The Supreme Court stated, in relation to such

postponement and enjoyment in a gift in K. Balakrishnan v.

K.Kamalam (AIR 2004 SC 1257) that it is open to the donor to

transfer by gift, title and ownership in the property and at the same

time reserve its possession and enjoyment to herself and during her

lifetime.   There is no prohibition in law that ownership in property

cannot be gifted without its possession and right of enjoyment. That

principle in my view,       should apply  with equal vehemence to a

'settlement' also.     Hence, that possession and enjoyment of plaint

A schedule item No.1 (8th item in Ext.A1) was postponed as recited in

Ext.A1 need not necessarily indicate that the disposition of that item

was testamentary in character.

      10.    Much stress was made on behalf of defendant Nos.3 and 4

on the recital in Ext.A1 that:


      "....





                                                                .."


                   ("....After our lifetime, item No.2 of

S.A. No.686 of 1994
                                 -: 17 :-


             Schedule No.8 will go separately to the third

             party among you and item Nos.1 and 3 will go

             in equal shares to all of you and accordingly

             you may enjoy the properties")



                                    (underline supplied)

It is contended on behalf of     defendant Nos.3 and 4 that it is not

merely postponement of possession and enjoyment of plaint schedule

item No.1 but a case of right devolving on the parties above referred

over that item only after the death of Chandapilla Eapen and Sosamma

Eapen. To decide that, it is necessary to refer to other relevant details

in Ext.A1.

      11.    The salient feature of Ext.A1 as could be understood from

Ext.A1 itself and as I stated above is that the executants wanted to

distribute their property among their sons during their lifetime itself to

prevent disruption of the family     and ensure that the sons by their

own personal effort prospered further, while making provision for the

marriage of one of the daughters and to discharge the liability of the

Bank.       It is seen that while the executants retained right, title,

interest and possession of item No.7 for the purpose of meeting the

marriage expenses of daughter, Thankamma has specifically stated in

Ext.A1 that in case the executants were not        able to perform the

S.A. No.686 of 1994
                                -: 18 :-


marriage of Thankamma, if necessary by disposal of that item, it would

go to daughter, Thankamma on their death. The relevant recitals

are:

      "















                             ".

                ("The marriage of Thankamma will be conducted

         by us for which purpose we will be entitled to create any

         kind of instruments in respect of Schedule No.7 and in

         case marriage of Thankamma does not take place within

         our lifetime, then after our lifetime, Schedule 7 item

         would go absolutely to the said Thankamma and she

         shall pay taxes, redeem the mortgage and enjoy the

S.A. No.686 of 1994
                               -: 19 :-


         property".)

                                     (underline supplied)




Intention in respect of item No.7 was clear that       the executants

retained the power to raise funds from item No.7 by entering into any

transaction (which can include a sale also) in respect of that item and

in case the executants were not able to conduct the marriage of

daughter Thankamma during their lifetime if necessary by creating

such instruments, that item should go to Thankamma after their death.

This certainly was a testamentary disposition as is clear from the

reservation of a power for disposal of that item and the property

passed on to Thankamma only (if it was available) on the death of the

executants.

      12.   As regards Item No.9 also, one finds similar recital in

Ext.A1 thus:

                   "











                     ".

S.A. No.686 of 1994
                                  -: 20 :-




            ("Schedule 9 item shall be possessed by us and the

            income taken directly or by leasing out and if deemed

            necessary by creating any kind of instruments on

            Schedule 9 item of property         for carrying out the

            affairs and if after our lifetime Schedule 9 item is left

            behind, then, it shall go to all of you in equal shares")


                                            (underline supplied)

In respect of schedule No.9 also, there is no much difficulty to hold

that it was a testamentary disposition        as is clear from the words

that "if the property is left behind after our death", it will go to the

sons equally.

      13.   It is interesting to note that a similar clause as in the case

of item Nos.7 and 9 which I have extracted above is absent in respect

of item No.8 (which takes in item No.1 of the plaint schedule). It is

not stated in respect of item No.8 of Ext.A1 that it would go to the

parties referred to therein in case that item        is available after the

death of the executants.       Since the executants have made such

provisions concerning item Nos.7 and 9 which I have extracted above,

absence of similar provision regarding schedule No.8 is very conscious

and conspicuous.

      14.   It is also to be borne in mind that though the executants

S.A. No.686 of 1994
                                   -: 21 :-


reserved the right to create any kind of instruments     (which includes

sale)    in respect of    item   Nos.7 and 9 be it to raise funds for the

marriage of the daughter or for other needs of the executants during

their lifetime, what is stated concerning item No.8 (of Ext.A1) is only

that the executants will have the right to keep the said item in their

possession and take the         yield either directly or by   lease and

discharge the liability of the Bank and thereafter take the yield for

their livelihood till their death. The executants have not reserved with

them the power to create any kind of instruments of their choice in

respect of item No.8 as in the case of item Nos.7 and 9. Of course, it is

recited in Ext.A1 that item No.8 will go to the parties as stated therein

(item No.2 of the 8th item to plaintiff No.2 and item Nos.1 and 3 of the

8th item to the plaintiffs and defendant Nos.1 to 3 jointly) absolutely

after the death of the executants. That recital can only be understood

as a transfer of ownership in presenti subject to the right of the

executants to take the yield directly or by lease to discharge the loan

to the Bank and thereafter, a life interest for the executants and thus

the settlees getting absolute right on the death of the executants

(settlers).   Executants reserving possession and enjoyment of the 8th

item as per recitals in Ext.A1 does not in my view militate against the

recitals in Ext.A1 that executants conveyed right, title and interest in

S.A. No.686 of 1994
                                 -: 22 :-


respect of that item (item No.3 of 8th item to plaintiff No.3 and item

Nos.1 and 3 to the plaintiffs and defendant Nos.1 to 3 jointly).

      15.   It is contended on behalf of defendant Nos.3 and 4 that the

subsequent conduct of Chandapilla Eapen and Sosamma Eapen would

indicate that in respect of       item No.8 of     A schedule only a

testamentary disposition was made.         The thrust of the argument is

on Exts.B1 to B3. Exhibit B2 is a deed of mortgage executed by

Chandapilla Eapen and Sosamma Eapen in favour of Mathew,

S/o.Kurian.    It is stated in Ext.B2 that   the 8th item      in Ext.A1

was    set     apart   to   the   share    of   executants    absolutely

(                 ) and the said property is mortgaged in favour of

Mathew, S/o.Kurian. But it is interesting to note from Ext.B2 that the

object stated is to raise funds for the discharge of liability to the

Bank as stated in respect of 8th item in Ext.A1 itself. I stated from

Ext.A1 that the power retained by the executants over item No.8 (of

Ext.A1) was only to take the yield either directly or by way of lease to

discharge the liability to the Bank and thereafter for their livelihood.

Creation of mortgage as per Ext.B2 for a period of three years to

raise funds for discharging the liability to the Bank cannot be said to

be in derogation of the disposition made in respect of item No.8 as per

Ext.A1 in that, the said mortgage can be taken as the transfer of the

S.A. No.686 of 1994
                                -: 23 :-


interest the executants had (life interest) as security for the due

repayment of the loan taken for discharging the liability to the Bank in

terms of the recital in Ext.A1.   But so far as Ext.B3, assignment in

favour of defendant No.3 (executed by Sosamma Eapen) is concerned,

it is in derogation of the disposition as per Ext.A1. The subsequent

conduct of Chandapilla Eapen and Sosamma Eapen can be admitted in

evidence only as against the maker (i.e. against Chandapilla Eapen

and Sosamma Eapen) and not in their favour as held in Raghavan

v. Chirutha (1991(2) KLT 385). Therefore defendant Nos.3 and 4

cannot take the execution of Ext.B2 and B3 as a conduct in favour of

the makers of the said documents and against the disposition made

as per Ext.A1.

       16.   On going through Ext.A1, I am not inclined to think that

the disposition regarding item No.8 (including plaint schedule item

No.1) is ambulatory in quality or revocable in character during the

lifetime of the executants. I am inclined to agree with the view taken

by the learned District Judge that the disposition of plaint item No.1

(covered by the 8th item in Ext.A1) is a settlement (though possession

and enjoyment were deferred)        and hence Chandapilla Eapen or

Sosamma Eapen had no right of disposal of that item in view of Ext.A1.

Hence the transfer in favour of defendant No.3 and the subsequent

S.A. No.686 of 1994
                                 -: 24 :-


assignment in favour of defendant No.4 cannot survive.

      17.   It is contended on behalf of defendant Nos.3 and 4 that

Exts.B1 and B3 are not sought to be set aside and that there is no

averment in the plaint avoiding the said transaction. In the plaint, it is

stated that Chandapilla Eapen died about 19 years back (of the date of

institution of the suit in 1978) and Sosamma Eapen died in 1969.

Plaintiffs proceeded on the basis that on the death of Chandapilla

Eapen and Sosamma Eapen they, along with defendant Nos.1 to 3 are

in joint possession and enjoyment of the plaint schedule item No.1 (as

well). They alleged that defendant No.4 is making some claim over a

portion of the schedule property but he has no such right over any

portion of the schedule property.          Plaintiffs also alleged that

defendant No.4 is trying to take possession of the schedule property

on the strength of the claim he made but defendant No.4 has no right

or interest over the schedule property. I have concurred with the

finding of the learned District Judge that the disposition of 8th item in

Ext.A1 is a settlement. I also stated that in that situation, Chandapilla

Eapen or Sosamma Eapen had no power of disposal of that property. If

that be so, Exts.B1 and B3 are null and void so far as the plaintiffs are

concerned. They can ignore the said transactions and seek partition.

When the plaintiffs stated that defendant No.4 is making some claim

S.A. No.686 of 1994
                                    -: 25 :-


over the property but he has no manner of right over it, I understand

that statement as amounting to a repudiation of all claims defendant

No.4 was making by         virtue of Exts.B3 and B1,     respectively.   By

repudiating the claim being made by defendant No.4, plaintiffs have

ignored and avoided the documents of title of defendant No.4.

      18.     Next question is whether defendant No.4 has perfected

title by adverse possession and limitation. There is no doubt that

Ext.B3 is executed in derogation of the disposition of item No.8 of

Ext.A1 in the year 1964 and the suit is filed only in the year 1978. The

statement in the plaint that Sosamma Eapen died in the year 1969 is

not challenged.     As per Ext.A1, Chandapilla Eapen and Sosamma

Eapen were to take the usufructs from item No.8 either directly or by

way of lease for the discharge of the liability of the Bank and

thereafter for their livelihood till their death. The settlees under Ext.A1

could claim possession and enjoyment of the said item only on the

death of Sosamma Eapen in the year 1969 since till then she had a

limited interest over the said item. Plaintiffs need ask for partition and

separate possession of the property only after the death of Sosamma

Eapen in the year 1969. Possession of a trespasser cannot be said to

be adverse to the real owner so long as the real owner is not entitled

to immediate possession and is therefore, not in a position to put an

S.A. No.686 of 1994
                                -: 26 :-


end to the trespass (see Secretary of State v. Moulavi

Waszed Alikhan Pani - 65 IC 866 and Narattam Dey v.

Debendra Lal Khan - 173 IC 439).              In Devaki Amma v.

Meenakshy Amma (1989 (2) KLT 130) this Court held:



                   "Possession, actual,  open,    notorious,

            exclusive and adverse for the statutorily

            prescribed period is one mode of acquisition of

            tile recognised by the statute of   limitations.

            Permissive possession precludes a claim for

            adverse possession. Possession is not adverse

            unless it is asserted against a person who is

            entitled to immediate possession. This is the

            principle   of  the   Maxim,    CONTRA     NON

            VALENTEM AGERE NULLA CURRIT PRAESCIPTIO

            ("No prescription runs against a person unable

            to bring an action") (Black's Law Dictionary).

            Unless the person entitled to immediate

            possession is legally in a position to maintain

            an action for protecting his possession, period

            for prescribing a title by adverse possession

            does not commence....."

                                   (underline supplied)




In holding so, reliance was placed on the decision of the Supreme

S.A. No.686 of 1994
                                     -: 27 :-


Court in P.Lakshmi Reddy v. L.Lakshmi Reddy (AIR 1957 SC

314 at 319) where it was held thus:




                   "..........It is well settled that limitation

            cannot begin to run against a person unless at

            the time that person is legally in a position to

            vindicate his title by action. In Mitra's Tagore

            Law Lectures on Limitation and Prescription (6th

            Edition) Vol.I, lecture VI at page 159, quoting

            from Angell on Limitation, this principle is stated

            in the following terms:

                   "An adverse holding is an actual and

            exclusive appropriation of land commenced and

            continued under a claim of right, either under

            an openly avowed claim or under a constructive

            claim (arising from the acts and circumstances

            attending the appropriation), to hold the land

            against him (sic) who was in possession (Angell,

            Ss.390 and 398).        It is the intention to claim

            adversely accompanied by such an invasion of

            the rights of the opposite party as gives him a

            cause of action which constitutes adverse

            possession". Consonant with this principle the

            commencement           of  adverse   possession,   in

            favour of a person, implies that that person is in

            actual possession, at the time, with a notorious

            hostile claim of exclusive title, to repel which,

S.A. No.686 of 1994
                                   -: 28 :-


              the true owner would then be in a position to

              maintain an action....."

Plaintiffs' right to possess the property arose only in the year 1969.

The suit is filed in the year 1978.   There is also nothing to show that

plaintiffs were aware of Exts.B1 and B3 on the due dates or at any

time before 12 years preceding the institution of the suit in the year

1978. The contention that defendant Nos.3 and 4 perfected title over

plaint schedule item No.1 by adverse possession and limitation has to

fail.

      19.     For the above reasons I do not find reason to interfere with

the judgment and decree passed by the learned District Judge.

      This appeal fails. It is dismissed.    Costs shall come out of the

estate.




                                              THOMAS P.JOSEPH, JUDGE.


vsv

THOMAS P.JOSEPH, J.
===================
    S.A. NO.686 of 1994
===================


    J U D G M E N T




   12TH MARCH, 2009


