

 IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

WP(C).No. 16372 of 2009(N)


1. A.SHAMSUDEEN, PUTHUVAL PUTHEN VEEDU,
                      ...  Petitioner

                        Vs



1. THE KERALA STATE ROAD TRANSPORT
                       ...       Respondent

                For Petitioner  :SRI.N.SASIDHARAN UNNITHAN

                For Respondent  : No Appearance

The Hon'ble MR. Justice THOTTATHIL B.RADHAKRISHNAN

 Dated :15/06/2009

 O R D E R
            THOTTATHIL B.RADHAKRISHNAN, J.
                  -------------------------------------------
                   W.P(C).No.16372 OF 2009
                  -------------------------------------------
              Dated this the 15th day of June, 2009


                              JUDGMENT



1.Heard learned counsel for the petitioner and learned standing

  counsel for the respondent.



2.The petitioner states that he availed an amount of Rupees Four

  Lakhs as a loan on 10.4.2008 in connection with the marriage

  of his daughter on 17.4.2008, which preceded his retirement

  on 31.5.2008. On this premise, he seeks an order for out of

  turn disbursement of DCRG and Commuted Value of Pension.



3.In terms of the directions contained in the judgment of the

  Division Bench in W.A.No.289/01, exceptional situations which

  may require out of turn payment of retiral benefits is the

  criteria, on which, an employee whose due turn of seniority

  based on the date of retirement has not yet arrived, could seek

  a direction of the High Court for release of retiral benefits out

  of turn. This Court has consistently taken the stand that in

WPC.16372/09

                             Page numbers


  cases of immediate requirement for treatment, for avoiding

  distress action against homes and residences and also for

  marriage of daughters, amounts could be released.



4.In the case in hand, what shocks the conscience of this Court

  is that a person who expects an amount of around Rupees

  Four Lakhs as retiral benefits is stated to have spent Rupees

  Four Lakhs by availing loan in connection with the marriage of

  one daughter.



5.Learned counsel for the petitioner may be right in saying that

  in the true state of affairs, such amounts may be required for a

  marriage.     Adv.Sri.Mohammed Kunji, who made certain

  submissions at the request of this Court, said it would be a sin

  in Islam to give or receive dowry. In so far as Mohammedan

  law is concerned, the legally accepted norm is only mahr to the

  bride.    The fundamental tenets of Islam and the principles of

  Mohammedan law do not admit of the bride or her father

  giving any amount to the groom. This is notwithstanding the

WPC.16372/09

                            Page numbers


  fact that payment of dowry is itself one prohibited by law.

  Vociferous declarations are insufficient to curb the menace,

  not only of dowry but also of disproportionate spending when

  families try to demonstrate themselves, compelled by social

  pressures, when more than the day the wedding bells ring,

  what is more important for the bride and the groom, is their

  future in unison.



6. Taking into consideration that more than one year has elapsed

  after the marriage, I deem it appropriate that the retiral

  benefits due to the petitioner, viz., D.C.R.G. and Commuted

  Value of Pension are paid off within a period of six months

  from now, out of turn, in terms of the directions of the Division

  Bench of this Court. The writ petition is ordered accordingly.

                                               Sd/-

                          THOTTATHIL B.RADHAKRISHNAN,
                                               Judge.
kkb.16/6.


