

 IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

MFA.No. 1390 of 2000()



1. SURESH BABU
                      ...  Petitioner

                        Vs

1. C.K.MINI
                       ...       Respondent

                For Petitioner  :SRI.P.V.KUNHIKRISHNAN

                For Respondent  :SRI.SUNNY MATHEW

The Hon'ble MR. Justice P.R.RAMAN
The Hon'ble MR. Justice C.T.RAVIKUMAR

 Dated :14/01/2009

 O R D E R
                P.R. RAMAN & C.T. RAVIKUMAR, JJ.
              ---------------------------------------------------------
                          M.F.A. NO.1390 OF 2000
              ---------------------------------------------------------
                  Dated this the 14th day of January, 2009

                                  JUDGMENT


Ravikumar, J.

       The appellant herein was the petitioner in O.P. No.364 of 1999 filed

under Section 13(1)(i-a) and (i-b) of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 before

the Family Court, Kozhikode. The facts, shorn off unnecessary details, are

as follows:



       2. The marriage between the appellant and the first respondent was

solemnised on 3.9.1997. According to the appellant, no children was born

in the wedlock and the first respondent-wife left the matrimonial home and

started living separately since 22.12.1997. He sought for a decree of

divorce on the ground that the first respondent was living in adultery and

that she had voluntary sexual intercourse with the second respondent. The

second respondent remained ex parte in the proceedings. The appellant is

a tailor by profession and the first respondent is a Nursing Assistant. The

appellant also alleged desertion and cruelty on the part of the first

respondent as grounds for seeking divorce. According to the appellant,

the first respondent became pregnant after she started living separately.

According to him, on 13.1.1999, he was assaulted by the brothers of the

M.F.A. NO. 1390/2000                  2


first respondent and the second respondent at Ekarool market, that he was

subsequently hospitalised and discharged on 16.1.1999.          The serious

allegation made by the appellant against the first respondent is that on

22.12.1997 when he returned from the temple along with his mother and

sister's child, he found respondents     1 and 2      indulging    in sexual

intercourse. It was mainly with the said allegations that he filed O.P.

No.364 of 1999 before the Family Court.



       3. Prior to the filing of the said Original Petition by the appellant,

the first respondent herein had approached the Family Court, Kozhikode

by filing M.C. No.100 of 1999 under Section 125 Cr.P.C.. In the said

Maintenance Case, the first respondent - wife had contended that herself

and the appellant were living as man and wife and a child was born to

them in the wedlock. She contended that she was treated with cruelty by

the appellant and his people and that the appellant has some mental

problem. She also contended that the appellant, his mother and other

relatives had subjected her to physical torture demanding dowry and that

he had been entertaining suspicion of infidelity. According to her, it was

the ill treatment and the other circumstances mentioned above that made

her to leave the matrimonial home and to live separately and that even

during separation, she used to visit the appellant at his house and used to

M.F.A. NO. 1390/2000                   3


have sexual relationship. She further contended that the appellant had

even insisted her to abort the pregnancy. It was with the said allegations

and averments with respect to her incapacity to maintain herself and the

child that she filed the M.C. No.100 of 1999. In fact, in the written

statement filed by the first respondent in O.P. No.364 of 1999, she had

reiterated all the aforesaid contentions and further denied the allegations

of illegal connection with the second respondent and also with other men.

She had even stated therein that she was prepared to undergo D.N.A. test

at the expense of the appellant in view of the allegation that she had

conceived after living separately. She also denied the fact that she was a

Nursing Assistant. Further, the first respondent had contended that she

got love and affection towards the appellant and that it was solely on

account of his cruelty, both mental and physical, that she had to leave him

and start separate residence.     In fact, in her written statement, she had

denied all the allegations levelled against her by the appellant.



       4. Based on the rival contentions, the Family Court framed the

following points for consideration:



             i. Whether the first respondent had voluntary
                 sexual intercourse with the second respondent?

             ii. Whether the first respondent has deserted the

M.F.A. NO. 1390/2000                   4


                petitioner?

             iii.Whether the first respondent has treated the
                petitioner with cruelty?

The evidence in this case consists of the oral testimonies of PWs.1 to 3

and RWs.1 to 4. Exts.A1 to A3 were marked on the side of the appellant

and Exts.B1 and B2 were marked on the side of the first respondent.



       5. A scanning of the evidence would show that a solitary incident

of having sexual intercourse with the second respondent was alleged

against the first respondent by the appellant besides the vague allegation

regarding illegal connection with other men.      The Family Court had

considered the oral testimony of PWs.1 to 3 and found that there is

material inconsistency in their version regarding the alleged incident

which is sufficient to disbelieve and discard the allegation. As stated

earlier, the case of the appellant who was examined as PW.1 was that on

22.12.1997, when he returned from the temple along with his mother and

sister's child, he had seen respondents 1 and 2      indulging in sexual

intercourse.    According to the appellant, upon his sight, the second

respondent took to his heels after pushing him down and thereafter, the

first respondent left the house on the same morning itself after taking her

belongings. However, she returned by noon along with her brothers in a

tempo van and       removed all her movables from his house and the

M.F.A. NO. 1390/2000                   5


appellant was severely beaten up by her brother Gangadharan. PW.2, his

mother on seeing this cried aloud for help and she was also pushed by the

said Gangadharan.       Subsequently, on 13.1.1999, the appellant was

assaulted by the brothers of the first respondent and also by the second

respondent at Ekarool market and consequently, he was admitted in the

hospital and was discharged      from there on 16.1.1999. The appellant

would further depose that in respect of the said incidents, he had lodged

complaints with the police. However, it has come out in evidence that he

did not file any such complaints in respect of the said incidents. Though

the appellant had denied the paternity of the child, he did not adduce any

evidence at all to rebut the presumption available under Section 112 of

the Indian Evidence Act. In fact, it is borne out from the records that

M.C. No.100 of 1999        was filed by the first respondent herein       on

8.3.1999 and the appellant herein had entered appearance on 10.6.1999.

Thereafter, he attended counselling on 24.6.1999. It was only thereafter

that the appellant had filed O.P. No.364 of 1999. The factum of non filing

of complaints in respect of the incidents alleged to have occurred on

22.12.1997 and 13.1.1999 coupled with the said circumstances would

probabilise the stand of the first respondent that the Original Petition was

filed only as a counter blast to M.C. No.100 of 1999. As held by the

Family Court , there is material inconsistency in regard to material facts in

M.F.A. NO. 1390/2000                   6


the evidence of the appellant and PW.2, his mother.



       6. The definite case of PW.2 is that on 22.12.1997 she had visited

Ithalat kavu Bhagavathi temple and made offerings at the temple like

Pushpanjali, Payasam etc. in her name as also in the name of her

grandchild. She would further depose that she had obtained receipts

from the temple in regard to the said offerings. In order to disprove the

case of PW.2, the first respondent had produced Ext.B1 and examined

RW.4     who was the Secretary of the concerned temple.             In Ext.B1

certificate issued by the Secretary of the said temple, it is stated that as per

the receipt (Book No.145), no offering is seen to have been made at the

temple as alleged by PW.2 on 22.12.1997.           RW.4 had deposed that

keeping carbon copies of the receipts was for the purpose of audit. PW.2

had deposed that she had not filed any complaint in respect of the alleged

incident on 22.12.1997 and according to her, the appellant herein had also

not lodged any such complaint in respect of the said incident. She would

further depose that she had not cried for any help on that day as stated by

PW.1. It has also come out in evidence that both the appellant and PW.2

had insisted the first respondent herein to discontinue her work at R.K.

Hospital, Balussery as Nursing Assistant and she did not oblige them.

The evidence of PW.2 would further go to show that she got a grievance

M.F.A. NO. 1390/2000                 7


that she was not cared properly by the first respondent.        PW.2 had

admitted that she had no complaints against the first respondent prior to

22.12.1997.



      7. An analysis of the evidence of PWs.1 and 2 would make it clear

that they have no consistent case and in the circumstances, the conclusion

of the Family Court that PWs.1 and 2 would have got a consistent case

had the incident as mentioned in paragraph 6 of the petition been true

cannot be held as perverse or improbable.       In the circumstances, the

Family Court was right in not relying on the evidence of PWs.1 and 2 in

the absence of any other independent evidence.



      8. PW.3 is a carpenter.     He would depose that he came to know

about the incident alleged to have occurred on 22.12.1997 from his wife.

Therefore, it can only be a hearsay evidence. The testimony of PW.3

would reveal that nothing was brought out from him to support and

sustain the case of the appellant. According to PW.3, he was present in

his house throughout the day on 22.12.1997. On an appraisal of his

evidence, the Family Court arrived at a conclusion       that the alleged

presence of PW.3 in his house on 22.12.1997 itself is doubtful and,

therefore, no reliance can be placed on his testimony. On going through

M.F.A. NO. 1390/2000                  8


his evidence, we found nothing to disagree with the said conclusion of the

Family Court.      Ext.A1 is an anonymous letter received by PW.1

containing serious allegations against the first respondent. Definitely,

Ext.A1 might have strengthened the suspicion about the first respondent

in the mind of the appellant. In short, the evidence adduced in this case is

not sufficient to prove that the first respondent had voluntary sexual

intercourse with the second respondent         and that she was living in

adultery, as alleged by the appellant herein.



       9. Another ground raised by the appellant for seeking a decree of

divorce was desertion. According to him, the first respondent had started

living separately    from 22.12.1997.      The definite case of the first

respondent is that the appellant is a man of suspicion and that she had

started living separately solely on account of the cruelty on the part of the

appellant. She had deposed that it was impossible for her to reside with

the appellant on account of his cruelty.      The allegations made by the

appellant in paragraph 6 of the petition and his attempts to establish the

same would probabilise the version of the first respondent that he was

entertaining suspicion of infidelity. If the husband's behaviour makes it

impossible for the wife to live in the house and she leaves the home, may

be with animus deserendi or animus revertendi, the said action cannot

M.F.A. NO. 1390/2000                   9


constitute desertion as in such a case it is the husband's behaviour that

gives the wife a reasonable ground to form such animus and to make the

departure. The statutory principle that one shall not be allowed to gain

from his/her own flaw lend support to the said view. Viewing the case in

hand in the said angle, it cannot be said that the first respondent is guilty

of desertion. As stated earlier, according to the first respondent, it was

cruelty, both mental and physical, and the factum of his being a man of

suspicion that made it impossible for her to live with him in his house. In

the circumstances of the case, the first respondent cannot be said to have

committed desertion so as to enable the appellant to raise that ground for

seeking a decree of divorce.       The ground of desertion raised by the

appellant was dispelled by the Family Court on another ground as well. In

paragraph 14 of the petition, the appellant had stated that the cause of

action had arisen on 22.12.1997. He had filed the Original Petition on

21.7.1999.    Based on the relevant provisions in law, the Family Court

held that the appellant had failed to prove that the first respondent had

deserted him for a continuous period of not less than two years

immediately prior to the filing of the Original Petition and, therefore, he is

not entitled to invoke the ground of desertion. The said finding of the

Family Court is perfectly legal and correct in view of Section 13(1)(i-b)

of the Hindu Marriage Act.

M.F.A. NO. 1390/2000                  10




       10.   Yet another ground of cruelty was raised by the appellant in

the Original Petition for seeking a decree of divorce. His case is that

though they resided together for about four months, he had no sex with

her, rather, she refused to have sex with him and even on the first night,

she did not allow him to touch her. Admittedly, a child was born to the

first respondent. Though the appellant denied the paternity of the said

child, he had failed to adduce any evidence to rebut the presumption

available under Section 112 of the Indian Evidence Act,1872.         In this

context, it is apposite to note that the first respondent had expressed her

willingness to undergo D.N.A. test at the expense of the appellant. In fact,

paternity can be decided by conducting D.N.A. test. He has failed to

adduce any evidence to sustain and support his denial of paternity. The

appellant could have taken step to get the question of paternity decided

by undergoing the D.N.A. test. Though the appellant has a definite case

that the first respondent is living in adultery, he has failed to prove the

same. It is of no doubt that false allegation of unchastity against the wife

by the husband amounts to cruelty. In short, the evidence borne out from

the records in this case would justify the observation of the Family Court

that it was the appellant who had treated the first respondent with cruelty.

The appellant has got a further case that the first respondent continued in

M.F.A. NO. 1390/2000                 11


her job inspite of his request and advise to resign. The Family Court has

rightly found that pursuing one's own profession cannot be treated as

cruelty against the other spouse and virtually it would only help the other

spouse financially.



      11. A scanning of the entire evidence in this case would thus go to

show that though the appellant who attributed adultery, desertion and

cruelty on the part of the first respondent had failed to prove the said

allegations. Suffice it to say that the appellant had failed to prove his

case on any of the grounds raised by him. In our view, the Family Court

has rightly dismissed O.P. No.364 of 1999 filed by the appellant herein

for a decree of divorce and as such the judgment and decree of the Family

Court does not warrant any interference.



      Accordingly, the appeal is dismissed. The parties shall bear their

respective costs.



                                         (P.R. RAMAN)
                                             JUDGE



                                     (C.T. RAVIKUMAR)
                                            JUDGE
sp/

M.F.A. NO. 1390/2000    12




                                 C.R.

                            P.R. RAMAN
                                    &
                            C.T. RAVIKUMAR, JJ.



                            M.F.A. NO. 1390/2000




                                 JUDGMENT


                            14th January, 2009

M.F.A. NO. 1390/2000    13


