

 IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

Bail Appl..No. 7891 of 2008()


1. BRIJESH NAIR @ BIJU, AGED 31 YEARS
                      ...  Petitioner
2. GANGADHARAN PILLAI,
3. SANKARI AMMA, W/O GANGADHARAN PILLAI,

                        Vs



1. STATE OF KERALA,REPRESENTED BY THE
                       ...       Respondent

                For Petitioner  :SRI.M.L.SURESH KUMAR

                For Respondent  :PUBLIC PROSECUTOR

The Hon'ble MRS. Justice K.HEMA

 Dated :11/02/2009

 O R D E R
                           K.HEMA, J.

               -----------------------------------------
                       B.A.No. 7891 of 2008
               -----------------------------------------

            Dated this the 11th February, 2009

                            O R D E R

      This petition is for anticipatory bail.

      2. The alleged offences are under Sections 498A and 34

of the Indian Penal Code. According to prosecution, de facto

complainant and first accused were married and at the time of

marriage, Rs.3,00,000/- and 30 sovereigns of gold were given.

Even on the date of marriage, complaints were made by

petitioners alleging that the amount and the gold given were

too low and they started harassing de facto complainant.

Harassment continued and hence, she had to live separately

from petitioners.

      3. Learned counsel for petitioners submitted that

petitioners are living separately from each other in the light of

an agreement. Annexure-2 is the agreement. Difference of

opinion occurred only because de facto complainant aborted

pregnancy without the knowledge of petitioners or the family

  BA.7891/08                      2

members. As per the agreement, money given to de facto

complainant was returned.

     4. This petition is opposed. Learned Public Prosecutor

submitted that as per the allegations made in the complaint,

de facto complainant was harassed for money and dowry by all

the accused even on the date of marriage. She was harassed

alleging that the money and gold given were too low. This is

not a fit case to grant anticipatory bail, it is submitted.

     5. On hearing both sides, in the nature of allegations

made, I am satisfied that this is not a fit case to grant

anticipatory bail. No special circumstance is made out to

invoke provision under Section 438 Cr.P.C. Petitioners are

bound to co-operate with the investigation. Hence, the

following order is passed:

      (1)   Petitioners   shall  surrender       before  the

             Magistrate     Court    concerned      or   the

             investigating officer    forthwith     and co-

             operate with the investigation. Whether they

             surrender or not, police is at liberty to

             arrest them and proceed in accordance with

             law.

 BA.7891/08                    3




     (2)    No further application for anticipatory bail

           by   petitioners  in  this  crime   will  be

           entertained by this Court.

    Petition is dismissed.



                                K.HEMA, JUDGE
vgs.


