

 IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

CRL.A.No. 348 of 2001(B)



1. ANI
                      ...  Petitioner

                        Vs

1. STATE
                       ...       Respondent

                For Petitioner  :SRI.PIRAPPANCODE V.SREEDHARAN NAIR

                For Respondent  :PUBLIC PROSECUTOR

The Hon'ble MR. Justice V.GIRI

 Dated :12/03/2009

 O R D E R
                        V.GIRI, J.
               -------------------------
                   Crl.A.No.348 of 2001
               -------------------------
           Dated this the 12th day of March, 2009.


                        JUDGMENT

          The first accused in S.C.No.314/96 on the files of

the 2nd Additional Sessions Court, Thiruvananthapuram, is the

appellant herein.

          2. The first accused was prosecuted for the offences

punishable under Sections 304(B) and 498(A) read with Section

34 of the Indian Penal Code {for short "the Code"}.    The 2nd

accused, the mother of the first accused, who was prosecuted

along with the first accused, was found not guilty and was

acquitted. Her acquittal has become final.

          3.  The first accused/appellant was convicted for

the offence under Section 304(B) as also under Section 498(A)

of the Code.       He was sentenced to undergo rigorous

imprisonment for a period of 7 years for the offence under

Section 304(B); but no separate sentence was awarded under

Section 498(A), though he was convicted for the said offence

also.

Crl.A.No.348 of 2001
                             :: 2 ::


           4. The case of the prosecution, in brief, is that on

3.9.1992, the first accused married Pushpam, the sister of

PW.1 at the Keezharoor St. Peter's Church. For the marriage,

4 sovereigns of gold ornaments and Rs.10,000/- were agreed to

be given.      Gold was given.    Cash could not be paid and

therefore, 15 cents of property was conveyed under Ext.P2

document in the joint names of Pushpam and the 1st accused.

Pushpam was constantly harassed by the 1st accused for money.

While so, on 5.9.1994 Pushpam committed suicide by jumping

into the well situated in the family house of accused 1 and 2.

Therefore, it was alleged that the accused have committed

offences under Sections 304(B) and 498(A) read with Section 34

of the Code.

           5. First information statement was given by CW.1,

at about 9 AM on 6.9.1994 (CW.1 could not be examined

because he passed away before trial). PW.1 is the mother of

the deceased.      PW.2 is the sister-in-law of the deceased.

PW.3 is an attester to Ext.P3 mahazar. PW.4 is a Priest who

Crl.A.No.348 of 2001
                             :: 3 ::


solemnised the marriage of Pushpam and the 1st accused.

PW.5 is a neighbour of Pushpam and the 1st accused. PW.6 is

an attester to Ext.P6 inquest report. PW.7 is the Fire Station

Officer, who had played a vital role in the retrieval of the body

of Pushpam from the well. PW.8 is another neighbour of the

1st accused and PW.9 is the doctor who issued Ext.P8 post

mortem certificate. PW.10 is the Tahsildar and PW.11 is the

Village Officer, who were examined to prove the inquest and

PW.12 had recorded the first information statement. PW.13 is

the Investigating Officer.

           6.   PW.1 deposed that there was a demand for 4

sovereigns of gold and Rs.10,000/- at the time of engagement

between Pushpam and 1st accused. The marriage was

solemnised on 3.9.1992. A child was born and the child was 9

months' old when Pushpam died.           Though Pushpam was

generally seen happy, it was noticed that Pushpam was

conveying the demand of Rs.10,000/- whenever she came

home and she was then found gloomy. She was brought to her

Crl.A.No.348 of 2001
                             :: 4 ::


mother's house viz., PW.1's house, by the first accused about

two months prior to her death. She was asked to stay there

for four days. Pushpam told PW.1 that there was a constant

demand for dowry. She cried when she narrated the same.

There was no sufficient clarity whether there was any

mediation at that point of time. It has come out that Pushpam

was brought back by the 1st accused to his house about 4/5

days later. She did not say that she came across any other ill-

treatment being meted out to Pushpam by the 1st accused.

           7.   PW.2, the sister-in-law, also spoke about the

demand for Rs.10,000/-, stated to have been made on

Pushpam, by her husband. Both Pws.1 and 2 speak about the

demand for Rs.10,000/-, which originated at the time of

marriage and which can, therefore, be treated as a demand for

dowry. Both of them speak about the conveyance of 15 cents

of property, which at the time of deposition, could be valued

at Rs.3000/- to Rs.5000/- per cent, having been conveyed in

the joint names of Pushpam and 1st accused.       One of the

Crl.A.No.348 of 2001
                             :: 5 ::


contentions that was taken up on behalf of the accused is that

the alleged demand of Rs.10,000/- does not seem to be

believable because, according to Pws.1 and 2, the total

demand was for 4 sovereigns of gold and Rs.10,000/- in cash

and if a property having more value than Rs.10,000/- had been

conveyed, then there would not have been a demand for a

lesser sum of Rs.10,000/-, which if paid would have resulted in

the property being re-conveyed to PW.1. But Pws.1 and 2 have

been consistent in their version about Pushpam coming to her

house two months prior to her death and narrating the demand

for Rs.10,000/-. Both of them said that 4/5 days thereafter 1st

accused came to their house and took her back.

           8. There is also the evidence of PW.5, a neighbour

and a retired Headmaster and a senior citizen aged 74. No

motives have been attributed or suggested against him. He

also deposed that though Pushpam was otherwise found to be

happy, he had also sometimes found her to be sad and he

stated about the demand for dowry being made by the 1st

Crl.A.No.348 of 2001
                              :: 6 ::


accused.   This version was corroborated by Pws.1 and 2. It is

also stated that the first information statement was given by

CW.1, the brother of the deceased on the following day.

Neither the accused nor any one in the family had given the

first information statement.     PW.7 is another neighbour of

Pushpam and 1st accused. Though he was declared hostile, he

stated that he had heard a sound on 5.9.1994 and having

rushed to the spot, he found accused 1 and 2 in tears crying

aloud that Pushpam had just jumped into the well. The case

of Pushpam committing suicide was found established by the

court below. On a re-appreciation of the evidence, I am in

complete agreement as regards the manner of death of

Pushpam.

           9. I am also in agreement with the findings of the

court below that the accused had made demand for dowry with

Pushpam and that Pushpam had been taken to her mother's

house and left there for about 4/5 days. But, I also take note

of the fact that even going by the evidence of Pws.1 and 2,

Crl.A.No.348 of 2001
                              :: 7 ::


Pushpam had not shown any reluctance in joining her husband

when he came to her house. PW.1 has said that generally she

found her daughter happy with her husband. But, there was a

demand for dowry and the said demand as such is spoken to by

Pws.1 and 2 and corroborated by PW.5.

           10. There is yet another aspect, which has to be

taken note of. PW.8 the doctor has deposed that out of the 13

injuries, which were found on the body of the deceased,

injuries 7, 8, 9 and 10 contusions, which were found to be blue

in colour, could have happened on account of a contact with

the blunt instrument prior to the fall into the well and the

consequent drowning, which led to the death of the deceased.

The said wounds, which were blue in colour, were on the left

shoulder, wrist, and left palm.       There was no reasonable

explanation offered by the accused as to how those injuries

could have been detected on the body of the deceased. It is

not possible to conclude that those injuries were caused due to

the fall, which had immediately preceded the drowning.

Crl.A.No.348 of 2001
                            :: 8 ::


Those wounds could have been inflicted well prior to the fall,

which had led to the death of the deceased. No doubt, there

is no clinching circumstance to show that Pushpam had been

subjected to physical harassment and Pws.1 and 2 also do not

depose that Pushpam had told that she was being beaten by

her husband.      There is a vague statement by PW.2 that

Pushpam had told her that a demand for dowry is sometimes

accompanied by beating as well. This answer is given at the

time of cross-examination.     But the time when this was

conveyed to her by Pushpam and whether this was pursued as

such is not spoken to by PW.2. PW.1, the mother does not say

anything about Pushpam having been subjected to any such

physical harassment or any such version being conveyed by

Pushpam. On an over all re-appreciation of the evidence, I am

of the view that Pushpam was subjected to repeated demands

of dowry and she was being harassed in that line. That the

demands were being made by the husband-1st accused is also

clear from the evidence of Pws.1 and 2, corroborated by PW.5.

Crl.A.No.348 of 2001
                               :: 9 ::


Since the 2nd accused has been acquitted and her acquittal has

become final, I refrain from making any comment as to

whether the 2nd accused was responsible for such demand. The

demand for dowry, therefore, being made on Pushpam would

definitely amount to harassment.

           11. The crucial question is whether the demand for

dowry so made on Pushpam, was the proximate cause which

led to Pushpam having jumped into the well on the fateful day

of 5.9.1994. The court below had referred to the injuries 7 to

10 in Ext.P8 postmortem certificate to come to the conclusion

that physical harassment which could have been meted out to

Pushpam would have persuaded her to take the ultimate

decision to jump into the well.           I am afraid that the

ingredients to make out an offence under Section 304(B) IPC

Pushpam has not been analyzed or appreciated by the court

below correctly. Section 304(B) reads as follows:

             "Dowry death: (1) Where the death of a woman is

      caused by any burns or bodily injury or occurs otherwise

      than under normal circumstances within seven years of

      her marriage and it is shown that soon before her death

Crl.A.No.348 of 2001
                              :: 10 ::


      she was subjected to cruelty or harassment by her

      husband or any relative of her husband for, or in

      connection with, any demand for dowry, such death shall

      be called 'dowry death' and such husband or relative

      shall be deemed to have caused her death.


            12.    That the death of Pushpam occurred on

account of the bodily injuries sustained by her, as noted in

Ext.P8 postmortem certificate, is a matter which has been

established beyond doubt. That the death took place within 7

years of marriage is also established. But the crucial link to

make an offence under Section 304(B) of the Code is that

Pushpam must have been subjected to cruelty or harassment

by the 1st accused, soon before her death and that such cruelty

or harassment was in connection with any payment of dowry.

In such circumstances, the death shall be called a "dowry

death". Is there any evidence, as such, to demonstrate that

Pushpam was subjected to physical harassment or cruelty

immediately before her death and the same was in relation to

the demand of dowry. There is total dearth of evidence in this

regard. It is PW.1, who has spoken to the fact that she had

Crl.A.No.348 of 2001
                            :: 11 ::


gone to Pushpam's house about 13 days prior to her death. But

PW.2 also does not say that Pushpam had said that she was

subjected to any physical harassment or that she was being

beaten by her husband or by any other inmate of his house in

connection with the demand for dowry. PW.2's testimony has

been accepted by the court below and at any rate, the

testimony is believable as such. But PW.2 has not spoken that

she had found any marks or injury on Pushpam when she had

come 13 days prior to her death and that Pushpam had stated

that her husband had been regularly beating her with a

demand for dowry. There is no other evidence on record to

show that there had been any fight between them and such

fight between the husband and wife was in relation to the non-

receipt of dowry. In fact, there is total dearth of evidence on

this aspect. If that be so, the crucial ingredients of Section

304(B) of the Code is absent in this case. Pushpam has not,

before her death, stated that she was subjected to cruelty or

harassment in connection with the demand of dowry and such

Crl.A.No.348 of 2001
                             :: 12 ::


an incident has not been established.      In fact, let alone

establishing the same beyond reasonable doubt, there does not

seem to be any evidence, attracting the crucial ingredients of

Section 304(B) of the Code. In the circumstances, I am of the

view that the conviction of the 1st accused under Section 304

(B) of the Code is unsustainable.

           13. But I am in agreement with the court below

that the 1st accused has committed the offence under Section

498(A) of the Code. The constant demand for dowry with the

wife and denying his company to the wife for the purpose of

dowry are matters, which will constitute physical harassment

within the meaning of Section 498(A) of the Code. Learned

counsel for the appellant submits that there is no acceptable

evidence to show that Pushpam was being subjected to any

physical harassment. The offence under Section 498(A) of the

Code is not dependent on any physical harassment. Cruelty for

the purpose of Section 498(A) would include any willful

conduct, which is likely to drive the woman to commit suicide.

Crl.A.No.348 of 2001
                             :: 13 ::


Pushpam was only 22 years at the time of her death. She had

a 9 month old child. There was no other cause for her, which

would have impelled her to commit suicide. She was aggrieved

by the demand for dowry as spoken to by witnesses. In these

circumstances, I am of the view that the prosecution has

established that the 1st accused is guilty of the offence under

Section 498(A) of the Code.

            14. In the circumstances, the 1st accused/appellant

is liable to be convicted for the offence under Section 498(A)

of the Code.

            15.   I heard learned counsel for the appellant/1st

accused    and learned Public Prosecutor on the question of

sentence as well.

            16. The court below had not awarded any separate

sentence for the offence under Section 498(A) of the Code.

In circumstances where the court below had sentenced the

appellant to undergo rigorous imprisonment for a period of 7

years under Section 304(B), the court below has not awarded a

Crl.A.No.348 of 2001
                              :: 14 ::


separate sentence under Section 498(A). Now that the

conviction for the offence under Section 304(B) is being set

aside and the conviction under Section 498(A) is being upheld,

it is necessary to impose a separate sentence on the 1st

accused/appellant for the offence under Section 498(A) of the

Code.

           17. I take note of the fact that the property having

an extent of 15 cents had been conveyed in favour of the 1st

accused and the deceased as per Ext.P2 document.         It has

come out in evidence that the only child of Pushpam and 1st

accused, 9 months old child at the time of the death of

Pushpam, is being looked after by the mother of Pushpam,

PW.1. It seems that the 1st accused has not taken any earnest

steps to look after the child. In the circumstances, I am of the

view that the 1st accused must be sentenced to pay a

reasonably high amount as fine and the said fine amount must

be paid to the only child of the deceased, who is now being

looked after by PW.1, as compensation under Section 357.

Crl.A.No.348 of 2001
                              :: 15 ::


            In the result, the appeal is allowed in part. The

conviction and sentence imposed on the appellant/1st accused

under Section 304(B) of the Code is set aside. The conviction

of the 1st accused for the offence under Section 498(A) of the

Code is affirmed. The appellant/1st accused is sentenced to

undergo rigorous imprisonment for a period of 9 months. He is

also directed to pay a fine of Rs.50,000/-. The fine amount

shall be deposited within three months from today. If the fine

amount is not paid, he shall undergo simple imprisonment for a

further period of 6 months. The fine amount, if deposited,

shall be handed over to the child of Pushpam and the 1st

accused, who is now a minor and in the custody of PW.1, by

depositing it in the name of the minor in a Nationalized Bank.

The child would be entitled to withdraw the said amount only

when she becomes a major. It is made clear that if the fine

amount is deposited, such deposit will have no impact on the

liability of the 1st accused for maintaining his daughter. This

direction to pay compensation to the child is only imposed

Crl.A.No.348 of 2001
                               :: 16 ::


under Section 357(3) of the Code of Criminal Procedure and

the Family Court, if called upon to adjudicate the liability of

the 1st accused for maintenance, shall do so, regardless of the

direction issued hereunder to see that the fine amount

deposited by the 1st accused is paid over to the child as

compensation.




                                               Sd/-
                                         (V.GIRI)
                                             JUDGE
sk/



                   //true copy//

                       P.S. to Judge


