

 IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

Mat.Appeal.No. 95 of 2009()


1. P.SIVAPRASAD,AGED 33 YEARS,
                      ...  Petitioner

                        Vs



1. M.RAJITHA, AGED 28 YEARS,
                       ...       Respondent

2. M. SREE NANDANA, AGED 2 YEARS,

3. P.JAGADAMMA ALIAS OMANA, W/O. P.V.

                For Petitioner  :SRI.K.B.ARUNKUMAR

                For Respondent  :SMT SALLY THOMAS CHACKO (MEDIATOR)

The Hon'ble MR. Justice R.BASANT
The Hon'ble MRS. Justice M.C.HARI RANI

 Dated :14/10/2009

 O R D E R
                           R. BASANT &
                      M.C. HARI RANI, JJ.
             -------------------------------------------------
                   Mat. Appeal No.95 of 2009,
                R.P.(FC) Nos.43 & 299 of 2009
             -------------------------------------------------
         Dated this the 14th day of October, 2009

                       JUDGMENT/ORDER

Basant,J.


     M.A.No.95/09 is filed by the appellant/husband/father to

assail an order passed by the Family Court obliging him to pay

past maintenance to the claimants - his wife and minor child, at

the rate of Rs.1,500/- and Rs.500/- per mensem respectively for

a period of 22 months and 26 days. RP.(FC) No.43/09 is filed

by the same appellant/husband/father assailing the direction

for payment of future maintenance under Sec.125 Cr.P.C. at

the rate of Rs.1,750/- and Rs.750/- per mensem from the date

of the petition.

     2. R.P.(FC) No.299/09 is filed by the claimants - wife and

minor child, aggrieved by the quantum of future maintenance

awarded under Sec.125 Cr.P.C.

     3.    Marriage is admitted.           Paternity is not disputed.

Mat. Appeal No.95 of 2009,
R.P.(FC) Nos.43 & 299 of 2009
                              -: 2 :-

Separate residence is also accepted.   The claimants - wife and

minor child, complained that the husband/father was refusing

and neglecting to pay maintenance to them. Parties are being

referred to hereafter as claimants and husband respectively for

the sake of convenience. According to them, the husband was

guilty of matrimonial cruelty of the contumacious variety and

this had obliged the claimants to take up residence along with

the wife's parents. The wife complained that there was demand

for dowry even when she was pregnant and she was physically

and mentally belaboured. According to her, after she conceived

she was persistently requested to abort the pregnancy; but she

could not do the same for various reasons.   She was left at her

parental home by her husband who allegedly did not care for or

maintain her thereafter.

     4. The husband had a different story to advance. According

to him, he was not guilty of any matrimonial cruelty. There was

no demand for dowry whatsoever.       He accepted that there was

separate residence.    He accepted that there were discussions

about abortion after the wife conceived.     Even, according to

him, the abortion did not take place for various reasons.    The

child, when it was born, was a disabled child. According to him,

Mat. Appeal No.95 of 2009,
R.P.(FC) Nos.43 & 299 of 2009
                                -: 3 :-

the wife was taking up separate residence without any justifiable

cause.   He was willing to look after and maintain his wife and

minor child on condition that they return to him.

      5. An amount of Rs.5,000/- was claimed as maintenance -

Rs.2,500/- each by the wife and the minor child. The husband at

the relevant time was employed as an employee in the N.S.S.

Estate. Admittedly, during the pendency of the proceedings he

secured employment as a Mazdoor in the Kerala State Electricity

Board. His gross pay, it is fairly accepted before us, in February,

2009 was Rs.8,361/- and after recoveries of GPF, PF arrears, LIC

premium etc., the carry home salary was Rs.7,080/-.

      6. Parties went to trial and the claimant/wife examined

herself as P.W.1; her father was examined as P.W.3 and a person

representing the then employer of the husband was examined as

P.W.2. The husband examined himself as R.W.1. Exts.A1 to A4

were marked on the side of the claimants; whereas Exts.B1 to

B14 were marked on the side of the respondent/husband.

Ext.X1 series were also marked.

      7. The court below, on an anxious consideration of all the

relevant inputs, came to the conclusion that the claimants are

entitled for past maintenance at the rate of Rs.1,500/- and

Mat. Appeal No.95 of 2009,
R.P.(FC) Nos.43 & 299 of 2009
                                -: 4 :-

Rs.500/- per mensem and future maintenance under Sec.125

Cr.P.C. at the rate of Rs.1,750/- and Rs.750/- per mensem

respectively.    The court below came to this conclusion, after

recording a finding, that the alleged demand for dowry has not

been proved satisfactorily.    The matrimonial cruelty so alleged

was not proved, it was held.      However, the court below found

that the acrimony development between the spouses after the

conception of the child, inability to undertake abortion and later

the birth of the disabled child. The court took the view that the

husband had not made any prompt offer to maintain his wife on

condition that she lives with him. In fact, he took the stand that

he was paying separate maintenance to his wife and child

consistently.    The offer made, in the course of the proceedings

that he is willing to take the wife and child, was thus found to be

not fair, reasonable or acceptable by the court below.        It is,

accordingly, that the court below proceeded to grant separate

maintenance for the wife.

     8. Before us, the parties were referred to the Mediator.

The parleys for mediation did not succeed.

     9. We have heard the learned counsel for the claimants

and the husband.         On the arguments advanced, following

Mat. Appeal No.95 of 2009,
R.P.(FC) Nos.43 & 299 of 2009
                                 -: 5 :-

questions fall for consideration:

            (i) Whether the court below erred in holding

      that the wife is entitled for separate maintenance?


            (ii) Whether the quantum of maintenance fixed

      deserves modification?



     10.    The learned counsel for the claimants submits that

though the claimants had raised other claims also in the O.P.,

they have been disallowed and the claimants do not want to

assail such rejection before this Court.       No appeal has been

preferred by the claimants against the order passed in the O.P.

But they contend that the quantum of monthly maintenance

fixed by the court below for the future under Sec.125 Cr.P.C. is

grossly inadequate and perverse.        The court below did not take

note of the employment of the respondent/husband as a Mazdoor

in the KSEB.     The court below did not also take note of the

pitiable physical condition of the disabled minor child who

requires treatment and has to incur expenditure for such

treatment.      The quantum of maintenance awarded is totally

unreal, inadequate and perverse, contends the learned counsel

for the claimants.

Mat. Appeal No.95 of 2009,
R.P.(FC) Nos.43 & 299 of 2009
                                -: 6 :-

     11. The learned counsel for the respondent/husband, on

the contrary, contends that the findings recorded by the court

below that the wife is entitled for separate maintenance is

grossly erroneous and calls for appellate/revisional interference.

He has a further grievance that the quantum of monthly

maintenance awarded is grossly excessive.

     12.   We shall first consider the challenge against the

finding that the wife is entitled for separate maintenance.   The

learned counsel for the husband relies heavily on the

circumstance that the court below has observed that the plea of

demand for dowry has not been established. But the claim that

the wife is entitled for separate maintenance is not founded on

that plea at all.  The court took note of the acrimony between

the parties and the circumstance that the wife and disabled child

were residing at the parental home of the wife without the

husband making any request to resume cohabitation.           That

request was made only in the course of the proceedings.       We

find merit in the finding of the court below that the husband

appears to have accepted the separate residence of his wife and

child at the parental home of the wife. That is evident from his

unsubstantiated assertion that he has been paying maintenance

Mat. Appeal No.95 of 2009,
R.P.(FC) Nos.43 & 299 of 2009
                               -: 7 :-

to the wife and child when they were residing at her parental

home.     According to him, he had sent amounts for the

maintenance of the claimants on a couple of occasions by Money

Order and thereafter through his sister.     The court below took

note of this claim/admission as indicative of the want of interest

on the part of the husband to get his wife and child along with

him for residence.      The sequence of events which has been

narrated in detail by the court below clearly shows that the

conception of the disabled child, the inability/refusal of the wife

to resort to abortion and the birth of the disabled child were the

real irritants in the relationship of the spouses.           Having

rendered our anxious consideration of the relevant inputs, we

are not persuaded to agree that the court below has committed

any such gross error warranting appellate or revisional

interference with the finding that the wife is entitled for separate

maintenance.      That finding does appears to us to be fair,

reasonable, just and correct.     The challenge against the same

only deserves to be turned down.

     13. We now come to the dispute about the quantum of

maintenance.     The evidence indicates that the monthly income

of the husband prior to his securing employment in the KSEB

Mat. Appeal No.95 of 2009,
R.P.(FC) Nos.43 & 299 of 2009
                               -: 8 :-

was around Rs.5,000/-.    Exts.A3 and A4 also indicated that the

husband had some properties in his name.       Be that as it may,

past maintenance was awarded only at the rate of Rs.1,500/- and

Rs.500/- per mensem respectively to the wife and child. Even

reckoning the husband only as an able bodied person, we are

satisfied that the amount fixed as monthly maintenance for the

past does not warrant interference. We note that the claimants

have not challenged the quantum of past maintenance awarded

in the O.P.      The challenge against the quantum of past

maintenance therefore only deserves to be rejected.

      14. We then come to the grievance of the claimants that

the future maintenance awarded under Sec.125 Cr.P.C. at the

rate of Rs.1,750/- and Rs.750/- per mensem is grossly

inadequate.    We take note of the evidence available about the

unfortunate physical condition of the child and the need for

medical treatment and expenses for the child. We further take

note of the undisputed circumstance that after securing

employment as Mazdoor in the KSEB the husband is getting

much higher salary.      The total monthly earnings as per the

certificate shown to us is Rs.8,361/- and the carry home salary is

Rs.7,080/-. We find merit in the contention that the quantum of

Mat. Appeal No.95 of 2009,
R.P.(FC) Nos.43 & 299 of 2009
                               -: 9 :-

maintenance awarded under Sec.125 Cr.P.C. is inadequate and

too meager.    That does not realistically take into account the

employment of the husband as Mazdoor in the KSEB, his

probable income about which documents placed before court

throw some light as also the needs of the claimants. We are, in

these circumstances, of the opinion that the quantum of

maintenance awarded is unreasonably low and the same does

warrant revisional interference. We take note of the indications

available about the properties owned by the husband. We take

note of the possibility of some income from such properties,

though quantum is not seen ascertained satisfactorily.    Taking

all the relevant circumstances into account, we are of the

opinion that the maintenance must have been awarded to the

wife and the child at least at the rate of Rs.2,000/- per mensem

each.   We take note of the fact that the identical amounts have

been claimed for the wife and child as monthly maintenance.

We are of the opinion that the said request is justified

considering the physical disability and the consequent needs of

the child.

     15. In the result:

     (a) M.A.No.95/09 is dismissed.

Mat. Appeal No.95 of 2009,
R.P.(FC) Nos.43 & 299 of 2009
                             -: 10 :-

     (b) R.P.(FC) No.43/09 is dismissed.

     (c) R.P.(FC) No.299/09 is allowed and in supersession of

the direction issued by the Family Court under Sec.125 Cr.P.C.

the respondent/husband is directed to pay maintenance to his

wife and child at the rate of Rs.2,000/- per mensem each from

the date of the petition.



                                            Sd/-
                                        R. BASANT
                                           (Judge)



                                            Sd/-
                                      M.C. HARI RANI
                                            (Judge)

Nan/

                //True Copy//



                                      P.S. to Judge

Mat. Appeal No.95 of 2009,
R.P.(FC) Nos.43 & 299 of 2009
                             -: 11 :-


