

 IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

Bail Appl..No. 7362 of 2008()


1. SUNIL, PATHEERETHU VEEDU,
                      ...  Petitioner
2. SUSI, PATHEERETHU VEEDU,

                        Vs



1. SUB INSPECTOR OF POLICE, MANNAR
                       ...       Respondent

                For Petitioner  :SRI.R.KRISHNA RAJ

                For Respondent  :PUBLIC PROSECUTOR

The Hon'ble MRS. Justice K.HEMA

 Dated :20/01/2009

 O R D E R
                            K.HEMA, J.
                     ------------------------------
                     B.A. No.7362 OF 2008
                     ------------------------------
            Dated this the 20th day of January, 2009


                             O R D E R


      This petition is for anticipatory bail.

      2. The alleged offence is under Section 498A read with

34 of I.P.C. According to prosecution, defacto complainant was

married by first accused and after the marriage, she was

harassed by the petitioners, who are her husband and mother

in law (second accused), demanding more dowry etc.

      3. Learned counsel for petitioners submitted that the

marriage took place in 2004 and there are 2 children in the

wedlock. But recently, first petitioner's mother fell in sick and

she had to be treated in the Sree Chitra Hospital, Trivandrum

for brain tumour and for heart surgery. First Petitioner is the

only son for her and he had the responsibility to look after her.

But at this crucial moment, the defacto complainant left the

house with the children and first petitioner made attempts to

bring her back, But, she was not heeding to the request.

      4. First petitioner, therefore, filed a petition for

restitution of conjugal rights and thereafter, this complaint is

B.A.No.7362 of 2008
                                  2


filed. It is also submitted that first petitioner was prepared to

maintain his wife and children and an order was passed by the

Family Court on petitioner agreeing to pay Rs.2,000/- per

month to the wife and children. In such circumstances,

anticipatory bail may be granted, it is submitted. The

documents relating to the mother's illness are produced as

Annexures A1 and A2.

       5. Learned Public Prosecutor submitted that he has no

objection in granting anticipatory bail to second petitioner,

since there are only vague allegations. But, he opposed the

prayer for anticipatory bail by first accused.

       On hearing both sides and on going through the records,

I find that anticipatory bail can be granted to both petitioners

on conditions, taking into consideration the various facts and

circumstances of the case.

        Hence, the following order is passed.

            Petitioners shall surrender before the Magistrate

            court concerned within seven days from today

            and they shall be released on bail on their

            executing bond for Rs.25,000/- each with two

B.A.No.7362 of 2008
                                   3


            solvent sureties each for like sum to the

            satisfaction of the learned Magistrate on the

            following conditions :

            i) Petitioners     shall   report   before   the

                 Investigating Officer as and when directed

                 and co-operate with the investigation.

            ii) Petitioners shall not influence or intimidate

                 any witness or commit any offence while

                 on bail.

       The petition is allowed.




                               K.HEMA, JUDGE

pac


