

 IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

Crl.Rev.Pet.No. 387 of 2010()


1. UBAID.T., AGED 63 YEARS,
                      ...  Petitioner

                        Vs



1. K.MAIMOONA, AGED 27 YEARS,
                       ...       Respondent

2. THE STATE OF KERALA, REPRESENTE BY

                For Petitioner  :SRI.JAWAHAR JOSE

                For Respondent  :PUBLIC PROSECUTOR

The Hon'ble MR. Justice V.K.MOHANAN

 Dated :02/02/2010

 O R D E R
                   V.K.MOHANAN, J.
         ---------------------------------------------
               Crl.R.P.No. 387 of 2010
         ---------------------------------------------
        Dated this the 2nd day of February, 2010

                        O R D E R

         Having failed in two consecutive proceedings,

the revision petitioner, who is the accused in a

proceedings for the offence punishable under Section

138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act (for short 'the

N.I.Act') approaches       this   Court     challenging the

conviction and sentence imposed against him.

    2.   By the impugned judgment of the trial court

in C.C.No.989 of 2007, the revision petitioner is

convicted under Section 138 of the N.I.Act and

sentenced to undergo simple imprisonment for one year

and to pay compensation of Rs.4 lakhs to the

complainant under Section 357(3) of Cr.P.C., failing

which he shall undergo simple imprisonment for four

months.     Challenging the above conviction and

sentence, the revision petitioner approached the lower

appellate court by preferring Crl.A.No.5 of 2009 which

Crl.R.PNO.387 of 2010

                              :-2-:

was disposed of by the court below by judgment dated

10.11.2009, confirming the conviction, but the sentence was

modified and reduced to 15 days simple imprisonment. No

interference is made with respect to the compensation

ordered. It is the above judgment, conviction, sentence and

orders are challenged in this revision petition.

      3.   The son of the revision petitioner/accused married

the first respondent/the complainant.       According to the

complainant, her father gave a sum of Rs.3,50,000/- to the

son of the revision petitioner as dowry and apart from that

amount, a motor bike worth Rs.50,000/- was also given.

Subsequently, the matrimonial relationship between the son

of the revision petitioner and the complainant put an end to

and through mediation, the son of the accused had agreed

to return a sum of Rs.4 lakhs to the complainant and in

discharge of the said liability of the son of the revision

petitioner, the revision petitioner issued a cheque dated

30.6.2007 which was handed over to the complainant on

Crl.R.PNO.387 of 2010

                              :-3-:

20.12.2006. According to the complainant, the said cheque

was dishonoured when presented for encashment and

therefore, a proper complaint was filed after compliance

with the statutory requirement and C.C.No.989 of 2007

was instituted in the trial court.

      4.   During the course of trial, the complainant herself

was examined as PW1 and Exts.P1 to P5 documents were

marked as evidence of the complainant. No evidence was

adduced from the side of the accused. It is on the basis of

the evidence and materials on record, the trial court found

that the accused is guilty. It is the above findings of the

trial court as well as the lower appellate court and the

sentence, this revision petition is filed before this Court.

      5.   I have heard Mr.Jawahar Jose, learned counsel

appearing for the revision petitioner.

      6.   The learned counsel for the revision petitioner

emphatically submitted that there is no transaction between

the revision petitioner and the complainant. It is pointed

Crl.R.PNO.387 of 2010

                              :-4-:

out that even going by Ext.P1 agreement, the revision

petitioner is in no way bound by the terms of Ext.P1 because

Ext.P1 is an agreement only between the son of the revision

petitioner and the complainant. According to the learned

counsel, the courts below miserably failed to consider the

above facts and therefore, the findings arrived on by the

courts below are against the evidence.       Thus, it is the

submission of learned counsel that the complainant has

miserably failed to establish the alleged offence against the

revision petitioner.

      7.   I have carefully perused the judgments of the

courts    below      and also the   grounds   taken   in   the

memorandum of revision petition.

      8.   The facts that the son of the revision petitioner

married the complainant and the subsequent divorce are not

disputed. The specific case of the complainant is to the

effect that as the marital relationship between the son of the

accused and herself came into an end, the matter was

Crl.R.PNO.387 of 2010

                               :-5-:

amicably settled at the intervention of the mediators which

finally culminated in Ext.P1 agreement dated 20.12.2006

and as per the terms contained therein, the son of the

revision petitioner had agreed to pay a sum of Rs.4 lakhs to

the complainant.      It is also brought on record that the

revision petitioner has put his signature as a witness to the

said agreement. The case of the complainant is that towards

the discharge of the liability of the son of the revision

petitioner, he had issued Ext.P2 cheque drawn by him and

he had put his signature in the cheque leaf pertained to the

account maintained by the revision petitioner. On the basis

of the said unimpeaching evidence on record, the trial court

as well as the lower appellate court have found that the

complainant had discharged her duty in establishing a case

against the revision petitioner under Section 138 of the

N.I.Act. In this juncture, it is relevant to note that a formal

notice was sent to the revision petitioner/accused. He did

not issued any reply to the said notice. There is also no

Crl.R.PNO.387 of 2010

                             :-6-:

explanation as to how the signed cheque of the revision

petitioner reached at the hands of the complainant. More

over, the facts and circumstances relied on by the

complainant established through evidence especially by

producing Ext.P1 positively proved the case of the

complainant. Therefore, the complainant is entitled to get

presumption under Section 139 of the N.I.Act and the

revision petitioner has miserably failed to rebut the same.

Therefore, I find no reason to interfere with the judgments

and the findings arrived on by the courts below against the

revision petitioner. Therefore, the conviction arrived on by

the courts below is to be approved by this Court.

      9.     Learned counsel for the revision petitioner

submitted that the sentence awarded by the courts below is

too harsh and excessive and a lenient view may be taken

considering the fact that the revision petitioner/accused is

an aged man and also some time may be granted to make

the payment.

Crl.R.PNO.387 of 2010

                               :-7-:

           10.      Considering the facts and circumstances

involved in the case, I am of the view that some modification

can be made with respect to the sentence and also time can

be granted for making the payment. But, it is relevant to

note that the cheque in question dated 30.6.2007         was

issued on the basis of Ext.P1 settlement dated 20.12.2006.

So far, no amount is paid to the complainant. Therefore,

three months time sought for by the learned counsel for the

revision petitioner cannot be granted. According to me, it is

also relevant to note that the revision petitioner is now at

the age of 62 years and he had issued cheque to meet the

liability of his son and not for his personal purpose.

Therefore, I am of the view that the sentence can be

modified and reduced till the rising of the court. Similarly,

time for paying the compensation amount ordered by the

court below, can be extended till 30.3.2010.

           In the result, this Crl.R.P. is disposed of

confirming the conviction of the revision petitioner for the

Crl.R.PNO.387 of 2010

                              :-8-:

offence under Section 138 of the N.I.Act and he is sentenced

to undergo simple imprisonment till the rising of the court

and to pay compensation of Rs.4 lakhs to the complainant

under Section 357(3) of the Cr.P.C. In case of his default to

pay the amount, imprisonment fixed by the court below is

enhanced to six months instead of four months.           The

revision petitioner is directed to appear before the court

below on 30.3.2010 to receive the sentence and to make a

deposit of Rs.4 lakhs in the trial court to be paid as

compensation to the complainant under Section 357(3) of

the Cr.P.C.        In case of default from the side of the

complainant in making the deposit, he is directed to

undergo simple imprisonment for a period of six months. It

is also made clear that if there is any default on the part of

the revision petitioner in appearing before the court below

on 30.3.2010 and making the payment of compensation, the

trial court is free to procure the presence of the revision

Crl.R.PNO.387 of 2010

                            :-9-:

petitioner and take steps to execute the sentence and for

realising the compensation amount.




                                       V.K.Mohanan,
                                            Judge




MBS/

Crl.R.PNO.387 of 2010

                                          :-10-:




                                                   V.K.MOHANAN, J.

--------------------------------------------




                                                    Crl.R.P.NO. OF 200
                                                  ------------------------------------
                                         --------




                                                            O R D E R




                                                          DATED: -10-2009

Crl.R.PNO.387 of 2010

                         :-11-:


