

 IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

SA.No. 504 of 1996(B)



1. PADMANABHAN SARASWATHY
                      ...  Petitioner

                        Vs

1. SAIDU MUHAMMED KANNU
                       ...       Respondent

                For Petitioner  :SRI.M.P.RAMNATH

                For Respondent  :SRI.G.S.REGHUNATH

The Hon'ble MR. Justice HARUN-UL-RASHID

 Dated :18/08/2010

 O R D E R
                       HARUN-UL-RASHID, J.
                        ------------------------
                         S.A.No.504 Of 1996
                         ----------------------
              Dated this the 18th day of August, 2010.

                           J U D G M E N T




      The plaintiffs 1 to 3 and 5 in O.S.No.116 of 1984 of the

Munsiff Court, Attingal are the appellants. The appeal is directed

against the judgment and decree in A.S.No.129 of 1988 of the

Principal Sub Court, Attingal. The suit was filed for declaration of

easement right over plaint F schedule pathway, injunction and for

other consequential reliefs.     The trial court dismissed the suit

finding that the plaintiffs are not entitled to the reliefs claimed in

the plaint. The appeal preferred by the plaintiffs was dismissed

confirming the decree and judgment of the trial court. Parties

hereinafter are referred to as the plaintiffs and defendants as

arrayed in the suit.

      2.   The brief facts necessary for the disposal of the appeal

is as follows:

      Plaintiffs are the owners of plaint A, B, C, D and E schedule

properties respectively. The defendants are the owners of the

property lying on the northern side of plaint F schedule pathway.

S.A.No.504 Of 1996

                                  ::2::

F schedule is a pathway lying in between the properties of the

plaintiffs and defendants. The pathway begins from Mananakku-

Kadakkavoor road and ends in E schedule and the pathway is

described as F schedule. The property of the defendants lies on

the northern side of F schedule pathway and that of the plaintiffs

lies on the south of the said pathway. According to the plaintiffs,

the said pathway is the only pathway for the ingress and egress

to the properties of the plaintiffs and that their predecessors were

also used the pathway for their ingress and egress for the last

more than 100 years as of right and thus they acquired right of

easement by prescription. It is also the case of the plaintiffs that

the pathway was formerly a chal as is shown in the litho plan

which is produced as Ext.A6. According to the plaintiffs there is a

'kayyala' wall in between the A, B and D schedule properties and

the lane, and there was an age old boundary separating the

defendants' property and the lane. In short, it is pleaded that the

pathway that lies in between the kayyala walls on either side of

the pathway is the boundary of the plaintiffs and defendants.

The suit was necessitated when the defendants demolished a

S.A.No.504 Of 1996

                                ::3::

portion of the kayyala on their side and attempted to construct

bunds from north to south touching the southern kayyala wall

near plaint A, B and D schedule properties.          The plaintiffs

apprehended that the defendants at any time may close the path

way.

     3.    The defendants are husband and wife.         Admittedly,

they own property on the northern side of the plaintiffs' property.

In their joint written statement they have denied the material

averments in the plaint and prayed for dismissal of the suit.

According to them there is no pathway as F schedule on the north

of plaint A, B, C, D plots or on the west of plaint E schedule

property, that the plaintiffs have direct access to their properties

from a road lying on the southern side of their property, that they

have never used the pathway described as F schedule property,

that the plaintiffs' property and the property of the defendants

are separated by a strong kayyala wall, that no portion of F

schedule property is in fact a portion of plaintiffs' property in

survey No.1804, that the pathway mentioned in the documents

of the defendants for the ingress and egress is in survey No.1804

S.A.No.504 Of 1996

                                 ::4::

and in fact there is no kayyala wall separating the so called lane

(pathway) from the defendants' property and the defendants

have never demolished any such kayyala wall. On the basis of

the said contentions the defendants prayed for dismissal of the

suit.

      4.    Heard the substantial questions of law formulated in

the memorandum of appeal.

      5.    Plaintiffs and defendants adduced evidence in support

of their respective contentions.      The evidence consists of the

testimonies of PWs 1 to 5, DWs 1 & 2 and exhibits A1 to A9, B1

to B4, C1, C1(a), C2 and C2(a).

      6.    The trial court examined all the issues including the

question as to whether there exists any pathway as described in

plaint F schedule and as to whether the plaintiffs are using plaint

F schedule pathway for ingress and egress to plaint A, B, C, D

and E schedule properties. The court also examined other issues

including the issue as to whether the plaintiffs are entitled to the

reliefs of declaration and injunction prayed for in the plaint.

S.A.No.504 Of 1996

                               ::5::

     7.    Plaint F schedule pathway described in the plaint as a

pathway having about 150 metres length and 2= metres width

begins from the Mananakku-Kadakkavoor road and ends in E

schedule property, after passing through northern boundary of A,

B and D schedule properties. Exts.A1 to A5 are the title deeds in

the name of the plaintiffs.    Their properties are comprised in

survey No.1803. Defendants' property is lying immediately on

the north of plaint A, B and D schedule properties. In the light of

the contentions raised by the defendants that there is no

pathway in existence as mentioned in F schedule, the plaintiffs

produced several documents to prove the existence of the

pathway.

     8.    The trial court observed that the plaintiffs have not

filed any application to locate plaint F schedule pathway over

which they claimed right, that they have not produced any

documents to show that the pathway is comprised in survey

No.1804 and that there is only a mere statement on the part of

the plaintiff that the pathway is passing adjacent to plaint A, B

and D schedule properties. The trial court on the basis of the

S.A.No.504 Of 1996

                                 ::6::

above said observations held that the pathway is in survey

No.1803 i.e., in the plaintiffs' property. Referring to the recitals

in Ext.A1 trial court observed that it is not mentioned that the

pathway is part and parcel of defendants' property. The court

also accepted the contentions of the defendants that there is no

pathway in existence in between the properties of the plaintiffs

and defendants and there was only a water chal in the place of

pathway.     The trial court also accepted the contention of the

defendants that the water chal happened to be described as a

pathway in recent documents and actually it is only a water chal

for flow of rain water from the defendants' property. The trial

court also held that the plaintiffs failed to locate and identify the

pathway.

      9.    The trial court also observed that the definite case of

the plaintiffs is that the pathway is in survey No.1803, that at the

same time they would also state that in the northern boundary of

survey No.1803 there is a kayyala wall and that they have no

case that such a pathway was in existence and the defendants

have destroyed their kayyala wall. The trial court refused to rely

S.A.No.504 Of 1996

                                   ::7::

on the oral evidence of PWs 1 to 5 and held that from the

available evidence it can be concluded that what exists along the

boundary line of the property is only a water chal and not a

pathway as claimed by the plaintiffs. It is further found that

there is no pathway in existence as scheduled in the plaint. The

trial court also held that the plaintiffs are not using the pathway

shown as F schedule for the ingress and egress to the property.

The lower appellate court though not discussed in detail

considered the issues and confirmed the findings of the trial

court.

    10.     As I have stated earlier, the suit itself is for declaration

of plaintiffs' right of way by easement by prescription.            The

definite case of the plaintiffs is that plaint F schedule pathway lies

in between the properties of the plaintiffs and defendants and

that the plaintiffs are using the pathway as of right from time

immemorial.     In the plaint it is also stated that a portion of

pathway is in survey No.1803. The very fact pleaded that they

have got right of way by easement itself shows that plaint F

schedule pathway, according to the plaintiffs, runs through the

S.A.No.504 Of 1996

                                 ::8::

property of the defendants.       The suit itself was filed by the

plaintiffs on the allegation that the pathway which is lying on the

northern side of plaint A, B and D schedule properties and on the

west of plaint E schedule properties is used by the plaintiffs for

their ingress and egress to their respective properties and that

the defendants are trying to cause obstruction and to destroy the

pathway and attempts are made to annex the pathway to their

property. Ext.C1 is the first report of the commissioner. The

commissioner also produced a sketch showing the lie and location

of the properties of the plaintiffs and defendants and the F

schedule pathway.      Inspection date is on 25.5.1984.     Ext.C1

report and sketch was prepared after issuing notice to both sides.

The commissioner reported that there is a pathway lying in

between the properties of the plaintiffs and defendants having 4

to 6 feet width and 450 feet length. The commissioner reported

that the pathway is passing through northern boundary of plaint

A, B and D schedule properties and it ends at E schedule

property. The commissioner also noted obstructions caused at

the beginning portion of the pathway and reported that an

S.A.No.504 Of 1996

                                ::9::

attempt has been made to demolish the kayyala wall of the

defendants which is the separating wall of the defendants

property and the pathway, and to level the defendants property

in level with the pathway portion. In the sketch prepared by the

commissioner, the commissioner noted the main road, namely,

Mananakku-Kadakkavoor road, passing through the western side

of the properties, the location and lie of the pathway and the fact

that the property owners of plaint A, B, D and E have direct

access to the pathway.       The commissioner also noted steps

constructed for access to E schedule property and also noted the

obstruction caused to the pathway at the beginning portion by

the defendants.

     11. Plaintiffs relied on the description of the properties

scheduled in Exts.A7 & A8 sale deeds and Ext.A9 gift deed.

Ext.A7 sale deed is of the year 1972, Ext.A8, 1962 and Ext.A9,

1959. Ext.A7 is the sale deed executed by sister of the first

defendant by name Subaida Beevi in favour of the first

defendant.     Ext.A8 is the prior document.        Going by the

description in Exts.A7 & A8 the southern boundary of the

S.A.No.504 Of 1996

                                ::10::

property conveyed is shown as 'CShgn' (pathway).             Ext.A7

property is the 24 cents of land lying on the western most portion

of the defendants property touching the Mananakku-Kadakkavoor

road.   The property lies in further east of Ext.A7 property is

Ext.B1 property which is having an extent of 1.41 acres. Ext.B1

is a sthreedhana kuri executed in the year 1124 M.E.(1949)

executed by the father of the first defendant in the name of the

three daughters including the first defendant. Subsequently, by

Exts.B2 & B3 sale deeds the first defendant's husband purchased

the two plots allotted to the two sisters of the first defendant in

Ext.B1. Thus the two plots are lying on the western side of the

property allotted to the first defendant by Ext.B1. It is very clear

that the properties obtained by the defendants by virtue of

Exts.B1, B2, B3 and A7 are lying contiguously on the northern

side of plaint A, B and D schedule properties.

     12. Ext.A1 is the gift deed produced by the plaintiffs.

Ext.A1 is of the year 1964. Ext.A1 gift deed is in respect of plaint

A schedule property. The description in Ext.A1 shows that the

northern boundary of plaint A schedule property is the pathway.

S.A.No.504 Of 1996

                               ::11::

Ext.B1 is the dowry deed executed by the father of the first

defendant in favour of his three daughters including the first

defendant. Ext.B1 is executed in the year 1124 M.E.(1949).       In

Ext.B1, there is also reference to pathway. Exts.B2 and B3 are

sale deeds in favour of the second defendant who is the husband

of the first defendant.   The other two shares allotted to the

sisters are the subject matter of Exts.B2 & B3 sale deeds.

Exts.B2 and B3 properties are the portions of Ext.B1 property. In

Exts.B1 to B3 documents there is reference to the pathway lying

on the southern side of Exts.B1 to B3 properties. The very same

commissioner inspected the property again on 21.9.1986. The

commissioner in Ext.C2 reported that at present nobody is using

the pathway and that the pathway portion is now ladened with

wild plants. In Ext.C2(a) plan prepared by the village officer, the

properties of the defendants' were measured and it is shown in

the plan. The plan was prepared in such a way that the pathway

portion was also added to the property of the defendants. The

plan was prepared with the help of survey records. From Ext.C2

(a) plan it is seen that the pathway portion is comprised in

S.A.No.504 Of 1996

                                ::12::

survey No.1804.       The southern properties are shown as

properties comprised in survey Nos.1802 & 1803. Admittedly,

the properties comprised in survey No.1803 are the properties

belonging to the plaintiffs. Ext.C2(a) plan was prepared based on

Ext.A6 litho plan as well.

      13. I have discussed the material evidence adduced by the

parties in the case.  I have discussed the boundary descriptions

in Exts.A7, A8, A9, B1 to B3, C1 report and the sketch, C2 report

and C2(a) plan. The materials discussed above would positively

show that there exists a pathway in between the properties of the

plaintiffs and defendants.    Ext.C1 report also shows that the

property owners of plaint A, B, D & E schedule properties are

using the pathway for their ingress and egress to their respective

properties. The learned counsel for the appellants submitted that

the evidence in this case which were referred above positively

prove that there exists a pathway in between the properties of

the plaintiffs and defendants, that the major portion of the

pathway is comprised in survey No.1804 and that there is

sufficient proof adduced by the plaintiffs which would go to show

S.A.No.504 Of 1996

                                 ::13::

that they are using the pathway as of right from time

immemorial.     The trial court as well as the appellate court

overlooked the material evidence which I have discussed in the

preceding paragraphs and concluded that there is no proof

regarding the existence of the pathway. There is no justification

for arriving such a finding in the wake of overwhelming evidence.

The plaintiffs were non-suited based on the finding that there

exists no pathway in between the properties of the plaintiffs and

defendants. It is very clear that the material evidence in this

case adduced by the plaintiffs are overlooked. There is no proper

consideration of the oral and documentary evidence and the

findings arrived at are directly against the documents which

stands in the name of the plaintiffs and defendants. The court

below did not considered the relevant documents in the proper

perspective and the effect of those documents on the rights of

the parties. In the circumstance, interference by this Court is

necessary in the interest of justice. Hence the case has to be re-

tried for which the matter has to be remanded to the trial court.

The plaintiffs are at liberty to apply for a commission to measure

S.A.No.504 Of 1996

                              ::14::

and demarcate F schedule pathway reported by the commissioner

in Ext.C1 report.

     In the result, the appeal is allowed.    The judgment and

decree passed by the courts below are set aside. The case is

remanded to the trial court for fresh disposal in accordance with

law. The suit shall be disposed of within a period of nine months

from the date of appearance of the parties. The parties shall

appear before the court below on 28.9.2010.




                                            HARUN-UL-RASHID,
                                                    Judge.
bkn/-


