

 IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

Bail Appl..No. 2010 of 2010()


1. JAGANATHAN, AGED 33 YEARS,
                      ...  Petitioner

                        Vs



1. THE SUB INSPECTOR, KOODAL POLICE STATION
                       ...       Respondent

2. STATE OF KERALA, REPRESENTED BY THE

                For Petitioner  :SRI.V.SETHUNATH

                For Respondent  :PUBLIC PROSECUTOR

The Hon'ble MR. Justice K.T.SANKARAN

 Dated :08/04/2010

 O R D E R
                        K.T. SANKARAN, J.
                       ------------------------
                      B.A. No. 2010 of 2010
                 ------------------------------------
               Dated this the 8th day of April, 2010

                             O R D E R

      This is an application for bail under Section 439 of the Code

of Criminal Procedure. The petitioner is the accused in Crime No.

87/2010 of Koodal Police Station, Pathanamthitta District.

      2. The offences alleged against the petitioner are under

Section 304-B of the Indian Penal Code and Section 4 of the

Dowry Prohibition Act.

      3. It is alleged that the wife of the petitioner consumed

acid and jumped into the well with the child. She died. The

doctor, who conducted postmortem, opined that death was due

to the   consumption of poison.       It is alleged that there was

constant harassment of the deceased by the accused, demanding

property and money. To some extent, his claims were satisfied.

Thereafter, he was demanding more money and more property.

      4. The petitioner was arrested on 28.02.2010 and he was

remanded to judicial custody.

      5. Taking into account the facts and circumstances of the

case, the duration of the judicial custody undergone by the

petitioner, the nature of the offence and the present stage of

B.A. No. 2010 of 2010            2




investigation, I am of the view that bail can be granted to the

petitioner on stringent conditions.

         6. The petitioner shall be released on bail on his executing

bond for Rs.25,000/- with two solvent sureties each for the like

amount to the satisfaction of the Judicial Magistrate of the First

Class-I, Pathanamthitta subject to the following conditions:-

               A)     The petitioner shall report before the
                     Investigating Officer between 9 A.M. and
                     11 A.M. on all Mondays and Thursdays, till
                     the final report is filed or until further
                     orders.

               B)    The petitioner shall   appear before the
                     Investigating Officer for interrogation as
                     and when required.

               C) The petitioner shall not try to influence the
                     prosecution witnesses or tamper with the
                     evidence.

               D) The petitioner shall not commit any offence
                     or indulge in any prejudicial activity while
                     on bail.

               E)    In case of breach of any of the conditions
                     mentioned above, the bail shall be liable to
                     be cancelled.

         The Bail Application is allowed as above.




                                     K.T. SANKARAN, JUDGE

ln


