

 IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

Bail Appl..No. 6078 of 2009()


1. MUHAMMED HANEEFA, AGED 40 YEARS,
                      ...  Petitioner
2. MOHINUDEEN, AGED 45 YEARS,

                        Vs



1. STATE OF KERALA,
                       ...       Respondent

                For Petitioner  :SRI.KODOTH SREEDHARAN

                For Respondent  :PUBLIC PROSECUTOR

The Hon'ble MR. Justice K.T.SANKARAN

 Dated :05/01/2010

 O R D E R
                       K.T. SANKARAN, J.
                     ---------------------------
                     B.A. No. 6078 of 2009
                 ------------------------------------
              Dated this the 5th day of January, 2010

                            O R D E R


     This is an application for anticipatory bail under Section 438

of the Code of Criminal Procedure. The petitioners are accused

Nos.1 and 2 in Crime No. 279/2009 of Kumbala Police Station.

     2.    The offences alleged against the petitioners are under

Sections 498 A , 324 and 326 of the Indian Penal Code.

     3.    The first accused is the husband of the de facto

complainant. The second accused is the brother of the first

accused.   The marriage between the first accused and the de

facto complainant took place on 18.05.2000. The allegation is

that the wife of the first accused was being illtreated by the

accused demanding more dowry. It is also alleged that the first

accused had once thrown away the child causing serious injuries

to him. It is submitted that even now the child is suffering from

the consequences of the injuries sustained.

     4.    Taking into account the facts and circumstances of the

case,  I am not inclined to grant Anticipatory Bail to the first

accused.    However, the position of the second accused is

B.A. No. 6078 of 2009             2




different. The facts and circumstances, I am of the view that

anticipatory bail can be granted to the second petitioner(second

accused). There will be a direction that in the event of the arrest

of the second petitioner, the officer in charge of the police station

shall release him on bail on his executing bond for Rs.15,000/-

with two solvent sureties for the like amount to the satisfaction of

the officer concerned, subject to the following conditions:

         A) The second petitioner shall report before the
            investigating officer between 9 A.M and 11 A.M.
            on alternate Mondays, till the final report is filed
            or until further orders;

         B) The second petitioner shall appear before the
            investigating officer for interrogation as and when
            required;

         C) The second petitioner shall not try to influence the
            prosecution    witnesses    or   tamper    with  the
            evidence.

         D) The second petitioner shall not commit any offence
            or indulge in any prejudicial activity while on bail.

         E) In case of breach of any of the conditions
            mentioned above, the bail shall be liable to be
            cancelled.

B.A. No. 6078 of 2009            3




       The Bail Application is dismissed in so far as it relates to

 the first accused/first petitioner and it is allowed in so far as it

 relates to the second petitioner/second accused to the extent

 indicated above.




                                   K.T. SANKARAN, JUDGE

ln


