

 IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

Bail Appl..No. 155 of 2010()


1. KOCHUTHRESIA, AGED 64 YEARS,
                      ...  Petitioner

                        Vs



1. STATE OF KERALA, REPRESENTED BY THE
                       ...       Respondent

                For Petitioner  :SRI.DINESH MATHEW J.MURICKEN

                For Respondent  :PUBLIC PROSECUTOR

The Hon'ble MR. Justice K.T.SANKARAN

 Dated :15/02/2010

 O R D E R
                           K.T.SANKARAN, J.
              ------------------------------------------------------
                        B.A. NO. 155 OF 2010
              ------------------------------------------------------
             Dated this the 15th day of February, 2010


                                 O R D E R


       When the Bail Application came up for hearing on 2.2.2010,

the following order was passed:



              "This is an application for bail under Section 438

       of the Code of Criminal Procedure. The petitioner is

       accused No.1 in Crime No.540 of 2009 of Binanipuram

       Police Station, Ernakulam.


              2. The offences alleged against the petitioner

        are under Sections 498A and 306 read with Section

        34 of the Indian Penal Code.


              3. The petitioner (first accused) is the mother in

        law of the deceased. The petitioner and the second

        accused moved an application for anticipatory bail

        before the Sessions Court. As per the order dated

        14/12/2009, the learned Sessions Judge granted

        anticipatory bail to the second accused, but rejected

        the prayer made by the petitioner. The second

        accused is the grandson of the first accused.

B.A. NO. 155 OF 2010

                                  :: 2 ::

             4.    Ruby, the daughter in law of the petitioner

      committed suicide, by pouring Kerosene and igniting.

      She sustained serious burn injuries and she was

      admitted in the hospital. The F.I. Statement was given

      by her. The learned Magistrate recorded her dying

      declaration.


             5.    The allegation is that the petitioner used

      to accuse the deceased every now and then for silly

      matters. The deceased, however, stated that there

      was no demand for dowry and there was no

      harassment on account of the same. The deceased

      was suffering from Epilepsy. The allegation is that the

      petitioner used to mention about her disease and used

      to say that her son could get a wife having no such

      disease. However, there is no case of manhandling by

      the petitioner. It is also revealed that a few weeks

      before the incident, the deceased and her husband

      had shifted their residence to a rented house. On the

      previous day of the incident, the deceased and her

      husband had come to the house of the petitioner on

      coming to know that the petitioner was not keeping

      well. The allegation is that in the morning on

      2/11/2009, while the petitioner was going to the

      hospital, she directed the deceased to clean the house

      and courtyard. The deceased was dissatisfied with the

      behaviour of the petitioner towards her. She poured

      Kerosene on her dress and ignited.

B.A. NO. 155 OF 2010

                                   :: 3 ::



             6.   I have perused the Case Diary.


             7.   The learned counsel for the petitioner

      submitted that the petitioner is a woman aged 65

      years and if she is arrested and detained, she would

      be put to untold misery and hardship. The learned

      counsel for the petitioner also submitted that the

      petitioner  is  prepared     to  cooperate     with    the

      investigation and to appear before the investigating

      officer on any day on which she is directed to appear.


             8.   In the facts and circumstances of the

      case, I am of the view that before disposing of the Bail

      Application, an opportunity should be given to the

      petitioner to appear before the investigating officer.

      Accordingly, there will be a direction to the petitioner to

      appear before the investigating officer at 9 A.M. on 8th

      and 9th February,2010.


             9.   Post on 15/02/2010.


             10.  It is submitted by the learned Public

      Prosecutor that the petitioner will not be arrested until

      further orders in connection with Crime No. 540 of

      2009 of Binanipuram Police Station, Ernakulam.

B.A. NO. 155 OF 2010

                                       :: 4 ::



             The petitioner shall produce copy of this order

       before the investigating officer."



      2. It is submitted by the learned counsel for the petitioner as

well as the learned Public Prosecutor that the direction in the order

dated 2.2.2010 has been complied with by the petitioner.



      3. Taking into account the facts and circumstances of the

case, the nature of the offence and also taking note of the fact that

the direction in the order dated 2.2.2010 has been complied with by

the petitioner, I am of the view that anticipatory bail can be granted

to the petitioner. There will be a direction that in the event of the

arrest of the petitioner, the officer in charge of the police station shall

release her on bail on her executing bond for Rs.15,000/- with two

solvent sureties for the like amount to the satisfaction of the officer

concerned, subject to the following conditions:


      a)     The petitioner shall appear before the investigating
             officer for interrogation as and when required;

      b)     The petitioner shall not try to influence the prosecution
             witnesses or tamper with the evidence;

      c)     The petitioner shall not commit any offence or indulge in
             any prejudicial activity while on bail;

B.A. NO. 155 OF 2010

                                    :: 5 ::




      d)     In case of breach of any of the conditions mentioned
             above, the bail shall be liable to be cancelled.


      The Bail Application is allowed to the extent indicated above.




                                                   (K.T.SANKARAN)
                                                           Judge

ahz/


