

 IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

AS.No. 1058 of 1998()



1. V.R.PRASANNAN
                      ...  Petitioner

                        Vs

1. GIRIJA
                       ...       Respondent

                For Petitioner  :SRI.A.N.RAJAN BABU

                For Respondent  :SRI.A.KRISHNAN

The Hon'ble MR. Justice M.N.KRISHNAN

 Dated :07/10/2010

 O R D E R
                         M.N.KRISHNAN, J.
                 -----------------------------------------
                      A.S NO. 1058 OF 1998
                 ----------------------------------------
            Dated this the 7th day of October, 2010.

                              JUDGMENT


      This is an appeal preferred against the judgment and decree

of the Subordinate Judge's Court, Alappuzha in O.S.No.86 of 1993.

The estranged wife had filed a suit for realisation of Rs.20,000/-

paid to the husband at the time of marriage and also for return of

10 sovereigns of gold ornaments as well as for maintenance. The

trial court granted a decree with respect to Rs.20,000/- and 10

sovereigns of gold ornaments. It is against that decision      the

defendant has come up in appeal.

      2. Heard.

      3. It is the case of the plaintiff that the defendant had

married the first plaintiff as per custom in 1983 and a child had

been born in that wedlock. The relationship between the husband

and wife got strained and the husband used to treat the wife with

cruelty, ultimately which led to separate living. During the period

of living together the husband had appropriated Rs.20,000/-

given to him at the time of marriage and also appropriated 10

sovereigns of gold ornaments granted at the time of the

marriage. It is true that the word used in the plaint is dowry but

A.S NO. 1058 OF 1998             2

it has to be understood that it is used in generic sense and it is

only an amount given on the marriage as a gift or given as a

token of love and affection and trustee for the wife. It has also to

be stated that offering dowry and accepting dowry are both not

contemplated under law and, therefore, nobody is expected to

have any unjust enrichment. So it can be considered as an

amount given to the husband at the time of the marriage as a

trustee for the wife. When the matrimonial relationship breaks

down it has to be reimbursed as well.        Now the question is

whether any amount was paid or not.        The document Ext.A1,

which is a letter written by the husband to the wife clearly

mentions about the receipt of Rs.20,000/- at the time of marriage

as well as the pledging of the gold ornaments belonging to the

wife for a sum of Rs.7,000/-. Ext.A1 is produced and marked and

in the cross examination no serious challenge is made. As DW1

also the defendant has not attempted to deny Ext.A1 letter. From

the letters produced as Ext.B1 to Ext.B3 it can be seen that the

wife has been complaining about the husband for not writing

letters regularly. So the evidence of PW1 coupled with Ext.A1

would establish the husband had appropriated Rs.20,000/- and 10

sovereigns of gold. Then as per our practice in the society when a

A.S NO. 1058 OF 1998             3

daughter is given in marriage it is nothing but natural that the

parents give some ornaments to the daughter according to their

financial stability and capacity. Therefore, the contention of the

plaintiff supported by her evidence and coupled with Ext.A1 would

show that Rs.20,000/- have been received by defendant and he

had pledged the ornaments belonging to the wife. Therefore, he

is bound to reimburse the same. So far as the maintenance is

concerned, the trial court has found that the wife is living

separately without reasonable cause and, therefore, she was

declined order of maintenance. So judgment and decree of the

trial court regarding the return of money as well as return of the

gold ornaments do not suffer from any serious infirmity.

Therefore, judgment and decree of the trial court are confirmed

and appeal is dismissed but in the circumstances without any

order as to costs.




                                        M.N.KRISHNAN, JUDGE.


mns


