

 IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

RPFC.No. 14 of 2009()


1. USHAKIRANA, AGED 26 YEARS
                      ...  Petitioner
2. KISHOR KRISHNAN, AGED 1.1/2 YEARS

                        Vs



1. RAVISHANKAR BHAT.M.K.,AGED 32 YEARS
                       ...       Respondent

                For Petitioner  :SRI.T.G.RAJENDRAN

                For Respondent  :SRI.K.JAYAKUMAR

The Hon'ble MR. Justice M.N.KRISHNAN

 Dated :15/02/2010

 O R D E R
                        M.N. KRISHNAN, J.
                  = = = = = = = = = = = = = = =
                   R.P.(F.C.) NO. 14      OF 2009
                  = = = = = = = = = = = = = = =
        Dated this the 15th day of February, 2010.

                             O R D E R

      This revision is preferred by the wife against the refusal

to order maintenance to her and for enhancement of

maintenance to the child.      It is really unfortunate that two

qualified persons who got married had fallen apart and now

the matter has reached the Court for maintenance. They are

blessed with an young child who is the real sufferer which is

now increasing day by day in the society. The wife who is

complaining of the non performance of Seemantha should

have realised that the sacrosanct marriage and even the

performance of Seemantha is to get a son to liberate the soul

of the father. That is why it is always called Seemanthaputhra.

The    underlying    principles  behind    Sapthapathy   in  the

performance of a marriage takes in the undertaking by both

the spouses that they will suffer each other and they will live

jointly till their end. The concept of a valid Hindu marriage is

to live long as husband and wife and it never contemplates a

R.P.(F.C.) NO. 14    OF 2009
                              -:2:-

separation.  Now we find reasons for separation.    Husband is

well employed and wife is well qualified.      The demand for

dowry comes as a surprise after the marriage and it is alleged

that one was prepared to pay in instalments. But the so called

demand to the father could have been spoken by the father of

the girl and he conveniently avoids the court leaving it to the

mercy of his daughter.    Suppose there had been persistent

and consistent harassment and the life in the matrimonial

home was so worst the wife should not have accompanied the

husband to Bangalore, living there, became pregnant and

come back for delivery.  Materials are also here to show that

the husband and members of the family had gone to see the

child.   In any matrimonial life ordinary wear and tear is

inevitable  but  it  cannot  be considered as        a  serious

consequence for living apart. That is why it is always held that

there must be tolerance and especially in the Indian society

women are considered to be the epitome of patience which

now-a-days is gradually disappearing and which gives rise to

lots of matrimonial disputes unfortunately.      This does not

R.P.(F.C.) NO. 14    OF 2009
                              -:3:-

mean that wives are to be insulted or ignored but I make the

statement only to make it clear that the tolerance level has

come down.      Now if there had been tolerance for both

certainly it is not a matrimonial tie which could not be

restored. This Court also did endeavor by calling the husband

and wife to the Court and requesting them to reunite.      The

husband was prepared to take the wife. The wife said she

does not intend to go at all. It is submitted by the husband

that the wife wants to get some employment in her place and

when it is not agreed considering the age of the child the

cause of quarrel had started. Whatever it may be the Family

Court had analysed the matter and also found that the wife's

evidence is not trustworthy in this case and therefore repelled

maintenance to her.    I do not want to interfere with that

finding.

      2.   So far as the child is concerned it is true that the

child is very young. The Tribunal has awarded a maintenance

of Rs.1,000/-. I feel in the fitness of things as the child is

growing up it is desirable to give some enhancement of

R.P.(F.C.) NO. 14      OF 2009
                                -:4:-

maintenance and therefore I increase the maintenance to the

child at the rate of Rs.1,500/- per month.

      In the result R.P.(FC) is disposed of by confirming denial

of maintenance to the wife and at the same time enhancing

the maintenance of the child from Rs.1,000/- to Rs.1,500/-,

payable from the date of order.




                                 M.N. KRISHNAN, JUDGE.

ul/-


