

 IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

Bail Appl..No. 1088 of 2010()


1. SAJEEV.S., AGED 27 YEARS,
                      ...  Petitioner

                        Vs



1. SUB INSPECTOR OF POLICE, PALARIVATTOM
                       ...       Respondent

                For Petitioner  :SRI.N.HARIDAS

                For Respondent  :PUBLIC PROSECUTOR

The Hon'ble MR. Justice K.T.SANKARAN

 Dated :22/03/2010

 O R D E R
                          K.T.SANKARAN, J.
             ------------------------------------------------------
                       B.A. NO. 1088 OF 2010
             ------------------------------------------------------
             Dated this the 22nd day of March, 2010


                                O R D E R


       The petitioner, Sajeev, seeks anticipatory bail under Section

438 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, as he apprehends arrest in

Crime No.1662 of 2009 of Palarivattom Police Station.



       2. The offences alleged against the petitioner are under

Sections 376, 511 and 420 of the Indian Penal Code. The de facto

complainant filed a complaint before the Court of the Judicial

Magistrate of the First Class- I, Ernakulam.             The complaint was

forwarded to the police for investigation under Section 156 (3) of the

Code of Criminal Procedure. Accordingly, the Crime was registered.

Originally, the Crime was registered against the petitioner and his

mother under Sections 376, 312, 313, 511, 506 read with Section 34

of the Indian Penal Code. Later, the name of the mother of the

petitioner was deleted from the array of accused. Sections 312, 313

and 506 I.P.C. were also deleted. Section 420 I.P.C. was added.



       3. The petitioner had filed B.A. No.7761 of 2010 before this

B.A. NO. 1088 OF 2010

                                   :: 2 ::

Court for anticipatory bail.   The de facto complainant filed an

application for impleading.    However, B.A. No.7761 of 2010 was

withdrawn by the petitioner and it was accordingly dismissed as

withdrawn on 22nd January 2010.



       4. Thereafter, the petitioner moved an application for

anticipatory bail before the Court of the Sessions Judge, Ernakulam.

After hearing the petitioner and the de facto complainant, the Bail

Application was dismissed as per the order dated 5th February 2010.



       5. In the present Bail Application also, the de facto

complainant filed an application for impleading. Heard the learned

counsel for the petitioner and the learned counsel for the de facto

complainant in detail.



       6. Several facts are put forward by either party in support of

their respective contentions. I think it is apposite to extract the

relevant portions of the complaint (which constituted the FIR, later)

and also the relevant portions of the Bail Application, to comprehend

the rival contentions.

B.A. NO. 1088 OF 2010

                                  :: 3 ::

Relevant portions of the complaint:

      "1. The complainant is a business professional working for

      Cholamandalam Insurance.       The 1st accused is working in

      Chennai. The 2nd accused is the mother of the 1st accused.



  1. On 15-2-09, while the complainant was travelling from

      Thiurvananthapuram to Ernakulam, the 1st accused came to

      the complainant and introduced himself as an IT professional

      working at Chennai. The 1st accused by words, acts and

      behaviour made the complainant believe that he is a

      trustworthy person.     Taking advantage of the attractive

      character of the 1st accused, he made friendship with the

      complainant and made the complainant believe that he has

      sincere love upon the complainant.      The 1st accused had

      regularly used to contact the complainant through phone,

      which developed into a love affair. The 1st accused had also

      made the complainant believe that at any condition, he will

      marry her.



  2. The complainant being fascinated over the dream of having a

      happy married life with the 1st accused trusted him more than

B.A. NO. 1088 OF 2010

                                  :: 4 ::

      anything. The 1st accused had taken the complainant to his

      house at Harippad and had introduced her to the 2nd accused

      and his father as his would be wife.        The 2nd accused

      pretending as if she was supporting the 1st accused, had

      spoke to the complainant through calls on several occasions

      and had expressed her consent for the marriage. The 1st

      accused had also contacted the mother of the complainant

      and also made her believe that he was having serious love

      affair with the complainant and that he would marry her at any

      rate.



  3. Since the 1st accused could not avail leave to come to Kerala

      to meet the complainant, he requested the complainant to go

      to Chennai for a day. On 05-04-09, the complainant reached

      Chennai. There she was taken to the house of a friend of the

      1st accused Mr.Sajeev. R. @ Vyasan who was residing with

      his wife Madhu and family. The same reasonably created a

      family atmosphere and that the complainant would be safe

      and secure if she come to Chennai.



  4. On 07-06-09, again at the request of the 1st accused the

B.A. NO. 1088 OF 2010

                                   :: 5 ::

      complainant went to Chennai. The complainant was misled by

      the 1st accused that he had arranged her return ticket on the

      same day itself and till then she can stay with the same friend

      and his family till evening. On that day when the complainant

      along with the 1st accused to Mr.Vyasan's house, his door was

      locked. Thereafter the complainant was taken to the house of

      the accused which was absolutely a strange place for the

      complainant. There the complainant shockingly realized that

      the accused had arranged the return ticket only on the next

      day.    There the 1st accused, without the consent of the

      complainant had forcefully committed rape upon her.        The

      complainant could not do anything or withstand the physical

      power of the 1st accused. That place was strange and new to

      her and she could not protest much of being afraid that is she

      act against the wish of the 1st accused, she may lose her. She

      was literally committed rape by the complainant. On the next

      day, the 1st accused had apologized to the complainant for his

      mistake and had assured that he will marry her and such an

      incident will not happen again. There she realized that the

      entire drama was created by the 1st accused for trapping the

      complainant. At the same time due to the sincere love upon

B.A. NO. 1088 OF 2010

                                   :: 6 ::

      the 1st accused, the complainant suffered every thing as she

      does not want to lose him.



  5. Similarly the complainant was again called upon to Chennai in

      the month of June and July, 2009 by the 1st accused

      threatening her that if she does not go as directed, the 1st

      accused will not marry her. The complainant was again forced

      to go to Chennai on both the occasions where the complainant

      was subjected to cruel physical intercourse by the 1st accused.

      After the month of July, there was inordinate delay in the

      menstruation circle of the complainant. The same created a

      suspicion in the mind of the complainant that whether she was

      carrying.  The matter was immediately informed to the 1st

      accused and requested him to marry her. When there was no

      action on the part of the 1st accused, the complainant had

      informed the same to the 2nd accused. Since the marriage of

      the sister of the 1st accused was fixed on 27-08-09, the

      accused requested the complainant to wait for a few days till

      the marriage was over. On 28-08-09, at the request of the 2nd

      accused, the 1st accused took the complainant to the district

      hospital at Kottayam.       The doctor had examined the

B.A. NO. 1088 OF 2010

                                   :: 7 ::

      complainant. The 1st accused had discussions with the doctor

      and thereafter the doctor had prescribed a pill, which the 1st

      accused had told that was for correcting the menstruation and

      that she was not pregnant.



  6. Thereafter the 1st accused came to her house at Palarivattom

      on 30-08-09.      There the complainant requested the 1st

      accused to marry her. The 1st accused then informed the

      complainant that the 2nd accused has told him that without the

      dowry of Rupees ten lakhs and 100 sovereigns of gold she will

      not permit the marriage. There the complainant realized that

      the intention f the 1st accused was to ditch her. There again

      the 1st accused tried to make forcefully intercourse upon the

      complainant and rape her against her wish. The accused had

      physically attempted to rape the complainant.      When the

      complainant protested and threatened the 1st accused that she

      will shout, he had to retreat. After the complainant started to

      take the medicine given by the accused, she had severe

      bleeding for few days. There she shockingly realized that she

      had been carrying and the accused had caused miscarriage

      without her consent. She had also realized that the intention

B.A. NO. 1088 OF 2010

                                   :: 8 ::

      of the accused was to avoid her. The intention of the accused

      is not marry the complainant, instead the 1st and 2nd accused

      are continuously threatening the complainant that if she walk

      behind the 1st accused any more requesting him to marry her,

      they would kill the complainant."

  Relevant portions of the Bail Application:



  1. Petitioner is a native of Harippad and a member of the

      Schedule Caste Community.         Petitioner is a Graduate in

      Engineering and specialised in Animation and Multi Media and

      was serving at Chennai in a company by name "Prasad Colour

      Laboratory", where more than 200 persons are employed

      including many Malayalees.      The petitioner has a younger

      sister, whose marriage took place on 27-8-2009. Herself and

      her husband Mr. Liju V.M. are at present employed in Kochi.

      Liju is a native Thrissur, where his mother alone is residing in

      the Tharavad House. The petitioner's father is serving as Sub

      Postmaster at Kareelakulangara in Kayamkulam and his

      mother is employed in the State Service as Extension Officer

      Women      Welfare    in   the  Block    Development     Office,

      Bharanikkavu in Alapuzha District.

B.A. NO. 1088 OF 2010

                                   :: 9 ::




  2. In February 2009, while the petitioner was travelling from

      Mavelikkara to Chennai in a train, a lady by name Rosy

      Zachariah came near to the petitioner and introduced herself

      as a native of Pangod in Thiurvananthapuram District and

      working as Financial Advisor in Cholamandalam General

      Insurance Company at Kottayam. She also said that she is a

      Graduate in Commerce from Kerala University and belongs to

      Christian Community. She further informed the petitioner that

      her mother is a doctor serving in the Military Camp at Pangod

      and their residence is situated near the 7th Day School at

      Pangod. She further said her father is having a Super Market

      at New Delhi. Her attempt was to make it appear that she

      hails from a rich family with good reputation in the society.

      The petitioner did not feel any suspicion in her attitude at that

      time. Thereafter, the petitioner informed her that he is an

      Engineer working at Chennai at that time at "Prasad Colour

      Laboratory". During the journey, she sought for the help of the

      petitioner introducing the Malayalees serving in the Prasad

      Colour Laboratory, as and when she visits Chennai. The said

      Rosy Zachariah collected the mobile telephone number of the

B.A. NO. 1088 OF 2010

                                   :: 10 ::

      petitioner as well as his Office telephone number. Thereafter,

      she got down at Ernakulam on that day. During the journey,

      she also informed the petitioner that she travels extensively in

      connection with her business purposes. Thereafter, she used

      to contact the petitioner frequently and visited the petitioner at

      his office few days thereafter at Chennai.        Based on the

      request made by the said Rosy Zachariah, the petitioner

      introduced some of his colleagues to her and she requested

      them to help her by taking Insurance policies at her instance

      and obtained their telephone numbers as well. All these while,

      the petitioner did not feel any suspicion in her attitude. Thus it

      became a normal friendship and the petitioner has been

      treating her only as a friend with sisterly affection. The said

      Rosy Zachariah once informed the petitioner that her marriage

      is fixed with one Mr. Rajeev, working as a T.T.E in Southern

      Railways and on another occasion, she introduced the said

      Rajeev to the petitioner.      While so, the marriage of the

      petitioner's sister was arranged to be held on 27-8-2009. The

      petitioner had distributed the marriage invitation of his only

      sister to many of his friends including an invitation to the said

      Rosy Zachariah. The marriage was held at Harippad. The

B.A. NO. 1088 OF 2010

                                    :: 11 ::

      said Rosy Zachariah did not attend the marriage of the

      petitioner's sister on 27-8-2009. However, she came to the

      residence of the petitioner two days thereafter Viz. On 29-8-

      2009 quite unexpectedly. She had the lunch at the petitioner's

      house and left. The marriage reception on the side of the

      bridegroom was on 28-8-2009 from 5 P.M. to 7 P.M. at Asoka

      Inn near Sakthan Thampuram Private stand, Thrissur and

      therefore the petitioner, his parents, relatives and close family

      friends left to Thrissur by 9.30 A.M. from Harippad in a Tourist

      Bus "Variath Travels" and came back only after midnight on

      28-8-2009.



  3. Few days thereafter, the petitioner left to Chennai. After that,

      the petitioner could realise that there was a marked change in

      the attitude of Rosy Zachariah towards the petitioner. On

      29.8.2009 she mentioned to the petitioner that her marriage

      with Rajeev was broken and therefore she is totally upset and

      very much disappointed.        The petitioner reached Chennai

      subsequent to the marriage of his sister and the said Rosy

      Zachariah started requesting the petitioner to marry her. The

      petitioner immediately made it clear that he had no such

B.A. NO. 1088 OF 2010

                                  :: 12 ::

      feelings towards her, not only that he will not take any decision

      on such matters without the knowledge and consent of his

      parents and moreover, he is not interested and willing to

      marry her. Presumably, the reluctance/refusal on the part of

      the petitioner was taken as an insult by the petitioner.

      Thereafter, she started threatening the petitioner saying that

      she will not allow the petitioner to have a peaceful life or to

      marry anybody else as per the choice of the petitioner and his

      family. She also started spreading news among the friends of

      the petitioner that he was having physical relationship with her

      promising to marry her. The petitioner denied the allegations

      with his friends. The petitioner stopped contacting her and

      also refused to meet her. In the meanwhile, the petitioner

      came to know from reliable sources that the said Rosy

      Zachariah used to establish unreasonable friendships and

      contacts with persons to whom she used to establish

      professional contacts.    She vehemently started spreading

      baseless stories about the petitioner connecting with other

      ladies. She even went to the extent of sending three goondas

      from Salem to the office of the petitioner at Chennai. However

      when the petitioner explained the actual facts to them, they

B.A. NO. 1088 OF 2010

                                     :: 13 ::

      realised the innocence and felt sympathy towards the

      petitioner and left the office premises of the petitioner

      requesting to convey news through somebody to the said

      Rosy Zachariah that the goondas assaulted the petitioner

      severely so that they will get the entire consideration promised

      by the said Rosy Zachariah. In fact, one of them had given his

      Mobile telephone number to the petitioner. Subsequent to the

      above instance, the petitioner completely avoided all contacts

      with her and also declined to attend her calls over phones.

      Hence she vehemently started baseless allegations and

      cooked up stories for damaging the status and reputation of

      the petitioner in his office at Chennai at that time.



  4. Later Rosy Zachariah filed a frivolous complaint before the

      Circle Inspector of Police, Ernakulam Town North Police

      Station during the second week of November 2009. The then

      Circle Inspector, Sri. Raveendran who was in charge of the

      office pursuant to the arrangements of duties made in view of

      the then by-election at the Ernakulam Assembly Constituency,

      required the petitioner and his parents to meet him at the

      Station. Accordingly, the petitioner and his parents met the

B.A. NO. 1088 OF 2010

                                    :: 14 ::

       Circle Inspector at his office on Monday 16-11-2009 and

       explained the entire details in the presence of the said Rosy

       Zachariah. The Circle Inspector of Police fully convinced and

       found that the said complaint was frivolous and refused to take

       any action."



    7.   The petitioner has also made several other averments in the

Bail Application and stated that the de facto complaint is "living

according to her will and desire without having any control of the

family and without looking after the needs and requirements of the

family and she is a fraud and burden to the family."



    8.    I have carefully considered the allegations and counter

allegations. I have also perused the case diary. It cannot be said

that there are no materials to connect the petitioner with the offence.

It is not proper to arrive at any conclusion on facts, while disposing of

the application for anticipatory bail.           The matter requires

investigation.    Custodial interrogation of the petitioner may be

required in the case.        I do not think this is fit case where the

petitioner should be granted the discretionary relief under Section

438 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.            If anticipatory bail is

B.A. NO. 1088 OF 2010

                                  :: 15 ::

granted to the petitioner, it would adversely affect the proper

investigation of the case.



   For the aforesaid reasons, the Bail Application is dismissed.




                                                 (K.T.SANKARAN)
                                                         Judge
ahz/


