

 IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

Crl.MC.No. 2778 of 2008()


1. VRINDAKUMARI, P.K.MANA, MULAYAMKODE
                      ...  Petitioner

                        Vs



1. STATE OF KERALA, REP. BY ITS PUBLIC
                       ...       Respondent

2. G.CHRISTOPHER, S/O.GEORGE, ADVOCATE,

                For Petitioner  :SRI.RAM MOHAN.G.

                For Respondent  :SRI.ABRAHAM MATHEW (VETTOOR)

The Hon'ble MR. Justice M.SASIDHARAN NAMBIAR

 Dated :03/03/2010

 O R D E R
          M.SASIDHARAN NAMBIAR,J.

           ------------------------------------------
           CRL.M.C.NO.2778 OF 2008
           ------------------------------------------
             Dated       3rd March 2010


                         O R D E R


           Petitioner is the accused                         and

second  respondent,              the        complainant       in

C.C.610/2007 on the file of Judicial First

Class   Magistrate,                 Kattakada.            Second

respondent,   an        Advocate               practicing     at

Kattakada  lodged               Annexure-A             complaint

against the petitioner alleging that she

committed  offence          under          Section       420  of

Indian Penal Code, it was taken cognizance

by the learned Magistrate.                           Petition is

filed under Section 482 of of Code of

Criminal Procedure to quash the same.

       2. Learned            counsel            appearing    for

the   petitioner           and           learned         counsel

appearing for second respondent were heard.

Crmc 2778/08
                           2


            3. Allegation     in      Annexure-A

complaint is that while there were disputes

between       petitioner     and   her   husband

Livingston      Bright   petitioner   approached

second respondent advocate representing that

she had no money to contest the case and

promised that she will         pay 15% of the

amount      received   from  her   husband   and

believing        her    representation    second

respondent appeared for her before Judicial

First      Class  Magistrate-II,  Neyyattinkara,

wherein she had filed a complaint alleging

offences under Sections 323, 324, 307 and

498 A of Indian Penal Code against her

husband and when at the influence of the her

husband, police submitted a report deleting

offence under Section 307 of Indian Penal

Code, second      respondent raised a contention

Crmc 2778/08
                          3


that     further  investigation  for  the  said

offence     is  to  be  conducted  and  it was

further investigated and final report was

submitted alleging commission of an offence

under Section 307 of Indian Penal Code,

pending     before  Assistant  Sessions  court,

Neyyattinkara     as    S.C.749/2004.  It    is

contented     that second respondent appeared

for    the   petitioner  before  Family  court,

Thiruvananthapuram in O.P.1578/2002 filed by

her husband as well as O.P.387/2003 filed by

the petitioner for return of gold ornaments

and dowry and also in M.C.251/2003 filed by

her    claiming maintenance and when all these

cases were pending, at the intervention of

second respondent there was settlement of

the disputes and the case was settled on

receipt of Rs.3,00,000/-     by the petitioner

Crmc 2778/08
                          4


and though as per the       previous agreement

second respondent is entitled to get a fee

of Rs.45,000/-         without paying that fee

petitioner      changed   the   vakalath   and

entrusted     the case to another counsel and

thereby committed an offence under Section

420 of Indian Penal Code.

            4. An advocate is not entitled to

enter into a contract       with his client to

appear in the case for the client on an

agreement      that  client   shall  pay   any

percentage      of   the   amount  which   may

ultimately be received by the client. Even

if there is an agreement it is illegal and

against public policy. That exactly is the

case of the second respondent in Annexure-A

complaint. Petitioner is disputing any such

agreement.      There is no written agreement.

Crmc 2778/08
                           5


It    is    the  case  of  the petitioner  that

whatever fees was payable was paid by the

petitioner.

            5. On going through the allegations

in Annexure-A complaint, the only case       is

that, in spite of the agreement to pay 15%

of the amount, which the petitioner would

receive from her husband, she did not pay

the    same    and  entrusted the  vakalath  to

another counsel. Even if the allegations are

true, it will not constitute an offence

under Section 420 of Indian Penal Code. To

attract an offence under Section 420, there

should      be  inducement  or  representation.

There should be an intention to cheat, when

that inducement or representation was made.

Even as per Annexure-A complaint there is no

allegation that petitioner had an intention

Crmc 2778/08
                           6


to cheat at the inception when she allegedly

entered into an agreement with the second

respondent or when second respondent was

asked to appear for her and to contest the

case on her behalf. At best, the allegation

would only show that after receiving the

amount      under a settlement with the husband,

petitioner      changed  the  vakalath,  without

paying        the agreed fees. That will not

constitute an offence under Section 420 even

if,     allegations    are  accepted.  In   such

circumstances,        continuation    of     the

proceedings is only an abuse of      process of

the court and hence, the cognizance taken

can only be quashed.

            Petition is allowed. C.C.610/2007 on

the file of Judicial First Class Magistrate,

Kattakada is quashed. Before parting with

Crmc 2778/08
                          7


the     case   the   disturbing   has   to  be

deprecated.    From    Annexure-3 complaint it

is     clear that    the misconduct should be

treated     seriously  by  the   Bar  council.

Learned counsel appearing for the petitioner

submitted that a complaint was already filed

and is pending before the Bar council. It is

for     the  Bar   council  to  treat     such

complaints seriously and take appropriate

action in accordance with law.



                          M.SASIDHARAN NAMBIAR,
                                     JUDGE.
uj.


