

 IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

Crl.MC.No. 2001 of 2009()


1. ABDUL KHADER, AGED 56 YEARS,
                      ...  Petitioner

                        Vs



1. FOUSIYA
                       ...       Respondent

2. STATE OF KERALA, REPRESENTED BY

                For Petitioner  :SRI.M. ASOKAN

                For Respondent  :PUBLIC PROSECUTOR

The Hon'ble MR. Justice P.BHAVADASAN

 Dated :15/02/2010

 O R D E R
                        P. BHAVADASAN, J.
             - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                    Crl.M.C. No. 2001 of 2009
            - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
          Dated this the 15th day of February, 2010.

                                  ORDER


          This is a petition filed under Section 482 of the

Code of Criminal Procedure seeking to have all further

proceedings against the petitioner in C.C.241 of 2009 on

the file of the Chief             Judicial Magistrate, Kasaragod

quashed.

          2. Petitioner is the fourth accused in C.C.241

of 2009 pending before the Chief Judicial Magistrate

Court, Kasaragod.           The proceedings originated on a

private complaint filed by the first respondent, which was

taken on file by the Magistrate Court for the offences

punishable under Sections 403, 354, 498A read with

Section 34 Indian Penal Code.

          3. According to the complainant, on 19.9.2005

she married the first accused in the case namely Rafeeq

Koliyad. The second accused is the mother of the first

accused and the third accused is the married off sister of

Crl.M.C.2001/2009.             2

the first accused. The fourth accused is the husband of the

daughter of the sister of the mother of the first accused.

The allegation was that the complainant was being

harassed, tortured and treated cruelly demanding more

dowry. It is also claimed that she was driven out of the

house on 20.8.2008.        The allegation against the fourth

accused, who is the petitioner herein, is that he tried to

outrage her modesty.

             4. According to the petitioner, the allegations are

totally false and made without any basis. He would point

out that unable to put up with the attitude of the

complainant, the first accused in the case, who is her

husband, had moved the Family Court for restitution of

conjugal rights as O.P.266 of 2008. The complaint was laid

as a counter blast to the said case.         He denied all the

allegations against him. It is pointed out that there are no

grounds made out to continue the proceedings as against

him.

Crl.M.C.2001/2009.               3

             5. Learned counsel appearing for the petitioner

pointed out that in order to attract Section 498A of Cr.P.C..,

the person has to be a relative of the husband. According to

the petitioner, by no stretch of imagination, he could be

treated as a relative of the husband as understood in the

legal parlance. In support of his claim, he relied on the

decision reported in Suvetha v. Inspector of Police (2009

(2) KLT 686) and Bhaskar Lal Sharma v. Monica (ILR

2009 (3) Kerala 455). According to the learned counsel, may

be that the petitioner is distantly related to the husband of

the complainant. But that may not be sufficient in law to

bring him within the ambit of Section 498A.       Section 498A

contemplates close relatives and not any relative.        It is

therefore prayed that the proceedings may be quashed.

             6. It must be said that there is some substance in

the above contention.       In Suvetha's case, the decision

relied on by the learned counsel for the petitioner, it was

held as follows:

Crl.M.C.2001/2009.              4

                  "Relationship of the appellant with the

      husband of the first informant, is said to have

      been      existing  from   before  the    marriage.

      Indisputably they lived separately. For all intent

      and purport the husband was also living at a

      separate place. The purported torture is said to

      have been inflicted by the husband upon the first

      informant either at her in-law's place or at her

      parents' place.      There is no allegation that

      appellant had any role to play in that regard. By

      no stretch of imagination a girl friend or even a

      concubine in an etymological sense would be a

      'relative'.   The word 'relative' brings within its

      purview a status. Such a status must be conferred

      either by blood or marriage or adoption.      If no

      marriage has taken place, the question of one

      being relative of another would not arise."




             7.   In the decision reported in Bhaskar Lal

Sharma's case the question was not actually regarding the

relationship, but regarding the question whether the

particular act constitutes cruelty.

Crl.M.C.2001/2009.              5

             8.   Learned counsel    appearing for the first

respondent pointed out that even assuming that the

petitioner may not fall within the ambit of relative

contemplated under Section 498A, there are allegations

which show that he had committed the acts which would

attract Section 354. It was also pointed out that he has the

freedom to urge all these grounds before the court below

and seek appropriate orders.

             9. As rightly pointed out by the learned counsel

for the petitioner, even assuming that the petitioner could

be taken out of the ambit of the word 'relative' occurring in

Section 498A, that may not be of any help to him at this

stage. The complaint against him is that he had tried to

outrage her modesty and he had been actively conniving

and aiding others in harassing, humiliating and torturing her

demanding more dowry. Whether these allegations are true

or not is a matter to be determined at the time of trial of the

case. A reading of the complaint would show that all these

persons were hand in glove in harassing the complainant.

Crl.M.C.2001/2009.                6

Under these circumstances, merely because the petitioner

may not fall within the ambit of relative as occurring in

Section 498A of IPC, it may not be of much assistance to

him in this case.

             This petition is without merits and it is accordingly

dismissed.




                                             P. BHAVADASAN,
                                                  JUDGE




sb.


