

 IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

Bail Appl..No. 2613 of 2010()


1. JYOTHI KARANAVAR M.O,AGED 29,
                      ...  Petitioner
2. LETHA KARNAVAR,AGED 55,

                        Vs



1. STATE OF KERALA,REP.THE SUB INSPECTOR
                       ...       Respondent

                For Petitioner  :SRI.C.RAJENDRAN

                For Respondent  :SRI.PRATHEESH.P

The Hon'ble MRS. Justice K.HEMA

 Dated :19/08/2010

 O R D E R
                                 K.HEMA, J.
                              ------------------
                         B.A. No. 2613 of 2010
                         -----------------------------
                Dated this the 19th day of August, 2010

                                 O R D E R

       This petition is for anticipatory bail.

       2. The alleged offence is under Section 498 A of the Indian

Penal Code.      According to prosecution, first accused married de

facto complainant on 27.05.2007. At the time of the marriage, de

facto complainant was given 150 sovereigns of gold and a car. From

the second day of the marriage itself petitioners started demanding

more dowry. The gold ornaments were misappropriated by the

petitioners, who are the husband and mother-in-law. De facto

complainant was also assaulted by the first accused. She attempted

to commit suicide because of the torture. First accused is having

illicit relationship with a woman abroad and on this count also,

severe cruelty is inflicted on the de facto complainant.

       3. Learned counsel for petitioners submitted that anticipatory

bail in respect of the first accused is not pressed. But as far as the

second accused is concerned, there are only vague allegations in the

complaint and she is prepared to             abide by any condition as

imposed by this court, it is submitted.

       4. Learned counsel for the de facto complainant and learned

Public Prosecutor were also heard. Both of them submitted that in

B.A. No. 2613 / 2010               2



respect of the second accused, there is no objection in granting

anticipatory bail but the allegations made against first accused

are serious.

       5. On hearing both sides and on going through the records,

I am satisfied that second accused can be granted to anticipatory

bail on conditions. Hence, the following order is passed:

                1. Anticipatory bail application in so far as it

                    relates to the first accused is dismissed as

                    withdrawn.


                2.   Second accused shall, in the event of her

                    arrest    be   released on     bail  on her

                    executing a bond for Rs. 25,000/- with

                    two solvent sureties each for the like sum

                    to the satisfaction of the arresting officer

                    on the following conditions:

                       i). She shall report before the
                             investigating officer as and
                             when directed and co-operate
                             with the investigation.

                        ii). She shall not      influence or
                             intimidate   any    witness   or
                             tamper with the evidence.


        This petition is partly allowed.

                                            K. HEMA, JUDGE
ln


