

 IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

Death Sentence Ref..No. 3 of 2009()



1. STATE
                      ...  Petitioner

                        Vs

1. SHANU T,HAMEED
                       ...       Respondent

                For Petitioner  :PUBLIC PROSECUTOR

                For Respondent  :SRI.RAJA VIJAYARAGHAVAN

The Hon'ble MR. Justice PIUS C.KURIAKOSE
The Hon'ble MR. Justice P.S.GOPINATHAN

 Dated :08/10/2010

 O R D E R
                                                              'CR'
           PIUS C KURIAKOSE & P.S. GOPINATHAN, JJ.
           = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = =
                        D.S.R. 3 OF 2009 &
                  CRL. APPEAL NO. 1134 OF 2009
                   = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = =
        DATED THIS, THE 7TH DAY OF OCTOBER, 2010.

                  C O M M O N J U D G M E N T
P.S.Gopinathan, J.


     The Sessions judge, Kottayam in S. C. No.8 of 2009 (Old

No. 277 of 2006) on his file found the respondent in DSR 3 of

2009 guilty for offence under Section 302 of the Indian Penal

Code and sentenced him to death. Seeking confirmation of the

death sentence, reference was made by the Sessions Judge as

mandated under Section 366(1) of the Code of Criminal

Procedure. Assailing the conviction and sentence, the convict -

respondent in the DSR (hereinafter referred to as the appellant)

has preferred the appeal, Crl.A. 1134 of 2009.

     Prosecution case:

     2.    PW8 Sainulabdeen, who         retired from Army while

working in   the Rank of     Subedar Major,       had a son and a

daughter. The daughter was named Sareena. Sareena, while

pursuing her Post Graduate Degree in literature, was married to

the appellant on 25.10.2001. The appellant was stated to be

employed in Muscat and had immovable assets as well as

DSR 3/2009 & CRL.A. 1134/2009   2

business in vehicles. At the time of marriage, Sareena was given

150 sovereigns of gold ornaments, Rs. 1,00,000/- in cash and a

Delux Maruti car of which Ext.P17 is the Registration

particulars. After the marriage, the appellant did not go abroad;

but he continued some business in automobiles at Paippadu,

near Changanacherry. The business was not successful. The

matrimony was blessed with a daughter in the following year.

On the 40th day of the birth of the child, who was named

Amisha, ornaments weighing 20 sovereigns were obtained from

the relatives.    The appellant, who was a spendthrift , had

squandered all the gold ornaments and the money. Thereafter,

the appellant had been demanding money from PW.8.             On

25.8.2006, the appellant telephoned PW.8 and demanded

Rs.50,000/- and also to hand over a fixed deposit receipt for Rs.

10,000/- in the name of the child. But PW.8 was not amenable.

On the next day, at about 10 A.M., the appellant strangulated

Sareena with a shawl which was marked as MO6. When she

became unconscious, she was lifted to the store room attached

to the kitchen of the house.     Amisha, who had been to the

neighbourhood and playing with the daughters of PW.4, was

called back home and she was also strangulated with MO6.

DSR 3/2009 & CRL.A. 1134/2009   3

When she became unconscious she was also lifted to the store

room. He cut down the rubber tube connecting the gas cylinder

with the stove and took the gas cylinder to the store. Then it was

noticed that Sareena was moving. He took M.O.5, a wooden

model of a snake boat kept in the show case and inflicted severe

injuries at the head, face and neck of both Sareena and Amisha.

Then the appellant sprinkled kerosene, which was kept in

M.O.12 bottle, over the face of both. The regulator of the gas

cylinder was then opened and ignited. The gas caught fire with

explosion. Hearing the explosion, the neighbours ran to the

house which was found locked from inside. The tape recorder

and television were switched on in full swing. PW.3 Ratheesh,

an immediate neighbour and others asked the appellant to open

the door. The appellant did not heed. So,       they attempted to

kick open the door, but in vain. By the time, the appellant

opened the back door. PW.3 and others entered the house and

found that Sareena and Amisha, who were lying in the store

room, were on flames. Water was poured over and put off the

fire.   Amisha was taken out first and rushed to Pushpagiri

Hospital, Thiruvalla, where PW.11 was working as a medical

officer. PW11, after examining Amisha, declared her 'brought

DSR 3/2009 & CRL.A. 1134/2009   4

dead' with a history of burn injuries. Sareena was also lifted to

the very same hospital. She was also declared 'brought dead'.

The matter was informed to the police      by phone for which

Ext.P8 treatment report was prepared. Some of the gathered

telephoned the matter to the uncle of Sareena who was

examined as PW.1. PW.1, who was running a hotel at

Kollakadavu, rushed to the hospital and found Sareena and

Amisha dead with burns and other injuries.

     Law in motion:

     3.    PW.1 rushed to the Changanacherry Police Station

and gave Ext.P1 First Information Statement before PW.18, the

then Sub Inspector of Police. After recording Ext.P1, a case as

Crime No. 730 of 2006 for offence under Section 302 I.P.C. was

registered for which Ext.P1(a) First Information Report was

prepared. The matter was communicated to PW.20, the then

Circle Inspector of Police through express message. PW.20 took

over the investigation. He proceeded to the spot. PW.5, an

immediate neighbour, took the appellant to his house.      From

there, the appellant was arrested by PW.20. On interrogation,

the appellant disclosed that M.O. 5 and M.O.6 were kept by him

at his home and he would take it and hand over to PW.20 if he

DSR 3/2009 & CRL.A. 1134/2009   5

was taken to the house. In pursuance to the statement so made

by the appellant, PW. 20 took him to the house.       M.O.5 and

M.O.6 were taken out by the appellant from the store room and

handed over to PW.20. PW.20 seized M.O.5 and M.O.6. PW.20

prepared Ext.P5, the scene mahazar, wherein the seizure of MO5

and 6 is also stated. From the spot of occurrence, a gas cylinder

and singed clothes of Amisha and Sareena were also seized

while preparing the scene mahazar. PW.20 proceeded with the

investigation. On completing the investigation, having convinced

that the appellant had committed offence under Section 302

IPC, a charge sheet was submitted before the Judicial Magistrate

of the First Class, Changanacherry. The learned Magistrate took

cognizance and proceeded as C.P. 60/2006. On finding that the

offence alleged is triable by a Court of Session, by order dated

6.12.2006, the case was committed to the Court of Session,

Kottayam.     By the time, the appellant moved this Court and

obtained bail. The learned Sessions Judge, taking cognizance,

issued process to the appellant. He entered appearance and

engaged a lawyer to defend the case.

DSR 3/2009 & CRL.A. 1134/2009   6

      Procedure before the Trial court:

      4.   The learned Sessions Judge, after hearing the

prosecution and the appellant, found that there are materials to

send the appellant for trial  for offence under Section 302 IPC.

Hence, charge was framed.        When read and explained, he

pleaded not guilty. Therefore, the appellant was sent for trial.

On the side of the prosecution, PW.1 to PW.20 were examined.

Exts.P1 to P26(a) and M.Os 1 to 33 were marked. During the

course of the cross examination of PW.7, Exts.D1 and D2 were

marked. After closing the evidence for the prosecution, the case

was posted for recording the statement of the appellant. But the

appellant absconded. In spite of repeated coercive steps, he

could not be apprehended.         Consequently, the case was

transferred to L P Register and periodically arrest warrants

were repeated.      On 5.1.2009 the appellant was arrested and

produced. Thereupon, the case was re-numbered. Since it was

submitted that he was not engaging a counsel, the Sessions

Judge appointed Adv. Sri. R. Sudevkumar to defend            the

appellant.    The appellant was then questioned under Section

313 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.        He admitted the

relationship between himself and the      deceased and further

DSR 3/2009 & CRL.A. 1134/2009   7

stated that they were leading a harmonious life and he was very

affectionate to his wife and daughter.   He had some failure in

the business. He asked Sareena to demand back the amount

which he had lent to PW.8, but Sareena did not agree. Since he

could not find out any other source for money, he insisted to

demand back the amount.        Though he went to the sit out with

phone to call PW.8, he did not.   He returned back to the room.

While so, he heard a sound from the kitchen. He rushed to the

kitchen. He heard the cry of the daughter from the store room.

He kicked on the door. The door fell into the store room over

Sareena and the child. No sooner door fell down, than the fire

and glass pieces were flown out. He put off the fire with water.

Hearing his cry for help, the locals gathered. He lifted the child

to the kitchen and hugged her. The gathered people obstructed

him and thereafter he lost his sense and came to senses only

when police came to the house. The prosecution and the

appellant were then heard and on finding that the appellant is

not entitled to be acquitted under Section 232 of the Code of

Criminal Procedure, he was called upon to enter his defence.

No defence evidence was let in.         The appellant and the

prosecution were again heard.    The learned Sessions Judge, on

DSR 3/2009 & CRL.A. 1134/2009    8

appraisal of evidence entered a finding of guilt. Accordingly, the

appellant was convicted.        Again, the appellant and the

prosecution were heard regarding sentence.          The learned

Sessions Judge arrived at a conclusion that the case on hand falls

within the category of 'rarest of the rare' cases. Consequently,

the appellant was sentenced as above.

     Preliminary Objection:

     5.    Before arguing to the merits of the case, Sri. Raja

vijayaraghavan, the learned counsel appearing for the appellant,

argued that the appellant was very much prejudiced for the

reason that the learned counsel appearing before the trial court

got no time to prepare the case. Therefore, the witnesses could

not be effectively cross examined and there were serious

omissions in putting questions in cross examination. It was

further submitted that after the absconding of      the appellant

pending trial and the arrest thereafter, he was not defended by

a lawyer of his choice.      The lawyer engaged by the learned

Sessions Judge had no sufficient experience to defend a case of

this nature and due to lack of experience of the lawyer, the

appellant was not properly instructed before questioning him

under Section 313 of the Code of Criminal Procedure and that

DSR 3/2009 & CRL.A. 1134/2009   9

the counsel had not properly presented the case during the

argument.     With the above submission, the learned counsel

prayed for setting aside the conviction and sentence and to

remand the case for fresh disposal. In support of the argument,

the learned counsel relied upon the decisions reported in Mathai

Thommen v. State (AIR 1959 Kerala 241),              Kunnummal

Mohammed v. State of Kerala (AIR 1963 Kerala 54), Bashira v.

State of U.P. (AIR 1968 SC 1313), Panchu Gopal Das v. State

(AIR 1968 Calcutta 38) and the decision of this Court in Abdul

Razak v. State of Kerala, (2009KHC 1027). The learned counsel

further submitted that Adv.Smt. Ajitha Salam, along with a junior

Advocate Sri. Raji R. was earlier engaged by the appellant and

that Smt. Ajitha Salam got appointment in the State Service and

she had to give up the engagement and the case was entrusted

to Advocate Sri. Shibu George on 12.1.2008.        Stating these

reasons, accompanied by a memo dated 12.1.2008, the appellant

applied before the trial court for adjourning the trial which was

scheduled to 14.1.2008. But, without assigning any good reason,

the petition was dismissed.     In that circumstance, Advocate

Sri. Shibu George, without preparing the case had to defend

and cross examine the witnesses. The learned counsel for the

DSR 3/2009 & CRL.A. 1134/2009   10

appellant produced the photocopy of the affidavit, the petition

and the memo filed by Advocate Sri. Shibu George.

     6.    Assailing the above argument, the learned Public

Prosecutor submitted that the submission is devoid of merit. The

learned Public Prosecutor, after collecting datas, submitted that

Smt. Ajitha Salam surrendered her enrollment certificate         as

early as on 27.9.2007 and thereafter, on various occasions, the

case was taken before the Sessions Judge.     The appellant, who

was also present in court, was well aware in advance that Smt.

Ajitha Salam could not proceed with the trial and had got

sufficient opportunity to engage another lawyer.           Even on

23.11.2007, when the charge was framed and scheduled the case

for examination of the witnesses from 14.1.2008 onwards, the

appellant was aware that Smt. Ajitha Salam could not appear

for examining the witnesses and had got ample time to find out

another counsel and to engage him sufficiently in advance to get

ready on 14.1.2008. But Adv.Sri. Shibu George was engaged only

on 12.1.2008 for which the appellant alone can be found fault

with. However, the Sessions Judge gave sufficient opportunity to

the learned counsel to cross examine the witnesses             after

preparing the case. It was also submitted that Adv.Sri. Shibu George

DSR 3/2009 & CRL.A. 1134/2009    11

is a well experienced criminal lawyer and that no prejudice at all

was caused to the appellant. Originally, the relevant records

alone were forwarded to this Court from the trial court. The

petition for adjournment and order thereon were not sent to this

Court.    Persuaded by the repeated submissions of Advocate Sri.

Raja Vijayaraghavan, to ascertain as to what exactly happened,

we, over phone through Registry, collected the order on the

petition filed by the appellant.        We     notice from the

communication received from the Sessions Judge, Kottayam, that

the said petition was numbered as Crl. M.P. 93/2008 and it was

disposed    of   on    14.1.2008  before  proceeding   with  the

examination of the witnesses, with the following order:

                 "Examination of the witnesses can be
           deferred on payment of cost to the
           witnesses. But the counsel for the accused
           agreed to cross examine the witnesses and
           he later cross examined two witnesses
           today. Anyway, if the counsel wants time,
           cross examination can be adjourned. And
           the petition rejected".


Going by the Order Sheet, we notice that on 17.11.2007, the

appellant and the prosecution were heard regarding the charge

and on 23.11.2007, the charge was framed.         The case was

thereafter    scheduled      from 14.1.2008  to  18.1.2008    for

DSR 3/2009 & CRL.A. 1134/2009   12

examination of the witnesses. It was on 14.1.2008, when the case

was taken for the examination of the witnesses, the application

for adjournment was filed.



     7.    From the order, which we quoted above, it can be

seen that though, the Sessions Judge declined to adjourn the

trial as such,     he ordered to defer the examination of the

witnesses, provided the costs of the witnesses were paid. But

the learned defence counsel was not amenable for such a course

and volunteered to cross examine the witnesses and it was thus,

the witnesses were examined. In this view of the matter, we find

no merit in the submission of the appellant. In the decisions

cited by the learned counsel for the appellant, the circumstances

therein are entirely different. In Mathai Thommen's case (AIR

1959 Ker. 241), the accused had not engaged a lawyer. The

case was scheduled on 4.8.1958 for trial. The defence lawyer

was engaged by the Sessions Judge only on 2.8.2005.           The

counsel even did'nt get time to discuss with the accused or to get

instruction.     Even otherwise, the prosecution case was

disbelieved and the accused was acquitted.       In Mohammed's

case, (AIR 1963 Ker. 54)an inexperienced advocate was engaged.

DSR 3/2009 & CRL.A. 1134/2009     13

However, for want of evidence to sustain conviction the accused

was acquitted.      In Bashira's case (AIR 1968 SC 1313)       the

defence counsel was not given sufficient time to prepare the

defence since the examination started on the day on which the

counsel was engaged.         In  Panchu Gopaldas' case also the

position is identical. In Abdul Razak's case (2009 KHC 1027) it

was    noticed   that     despite  the specific   rule mandating

appointment of senior counsel for defending sessions case, a

junior lawyer with less experience was engaged by the trial

court.   It was a case disposed of by another Division Bench

consisting    one of us (Gopinathan, J.).   From the facts of the

case, we notice that in that case the witnesses were not at all

effectively cross examined by the defence counsel engaged from

the court.    In that circumstances, the case was remanded back

to the trial court for fresh trial. Here, such circumstance is not

available.    From the initial stage, the appellant engaged a

lawyer of his choice during the pre-trial postings. The counsel

engaged earlier left the Bar even before framing the charge.

Another counsel was engaged by the appellant. However,

accepting the argument that the counsel did not get time to

prepare, the trial court offered to give time to the defence

DSR 3/2009 & CRL.A. 1134/2009   14

counsel to cross examine the witnesses on conditions. But the

counsel did not avail and volunteered      to cross examine the

witnesses then and there. As regards the lack of experience of

the lawyer, no material was placed before us.       In the above

circumstances, we had gone through the oral evidence,

especially the cross examination.         Going by the cross

examination of the witnesses, we find little material to come to a

conclusion that the witnesses were not properly or effectively

cross examined. Sri. Raja Vijayaraghavan, the learned counsel,

submitted that going by the statement of the witnesses he

noticed that some questions which would have been put to the

prosecution witnesses in cross examination were not asked. He

even requested us to go through the case diary statements.

Since the case diary statements were not relevant, we did not do

so.

       8. In criminal cases,    lawyers are differently shaping

their defence. In cases where there are direct eye witnesses,

some times, the defence lawyers could not do much wonder

while cross examining a witness. In a criminal case, since the

trial proceeds without a specific pleading, what is more relevant

is as to what should not be asked in cross examination rather

DSR 3/2009 & CRL.A. 1134/2009     15

than what all could be asked in cross examination. We notice,

from our experience in several civil and criminal cases, that

some times many questions which would have been put to the

witness were seen not asked. Probably, that may be due to the

way in which the defence lawyer shaped his defence.

Sometimes, when the witnesses are cross examined at length

putting extraneous        or irrelevant questions, there may be

instances where certain material particulars would be omitted.

Such omissions cannot be taken as a reason to conclude that it

was because of the inability of the lawyer to prepare the case or

due to lack of experience or that because of that omission any

prejudice was caused to the accused. Sometimes, some criminal

lawyers may omit certain aspects to be put to the witnesses on

fear that adverse answers may come and that would go against

the party.   When viewed the cross examination of the witnesses

in this angle, we could not see anything to come to a conclusion

that the witnesses were not effectively cross examined. On the

other hand, very shrewd questions were seen put to material

witnesses and effectively cross examined at lenght. Going by the

nature of cross examination, it could not be said that Advocate

Sri. Shibu George was not experienced enough to defend a case

DSR 3/2009 & CRL.A. 1134/2009   16

in which the accused was facing trial for an offence under

Section 302 IPC.       Adding to that, it is admitted by Sri. Raja

Vijayaraghavan that Advocate       Shibu George was voluntarily

engaged by the appellant.       We cannot find fault with the

appellant engaging a lawyer of his own choice and it is not at all

justified to remand a case of this nature for the reason that some

questions also might have been put to the witnesses in cross

examination and those omissions might be due to the lack of

experience of the defence counsel.    In the cases referred to us,

the accused had not engaged a lawyer of their choice, but the

trial judge engaged a counsel under Section 304 Cr.P.C. just

before the trial. Here, the position is entirely different. So we

find,   as we mentioned earlier, that Smt. Ajitha Salam got

suspended her certificate of enrolment as early as in September,

2007.    In the normal course, a responsible defence counsel

would inform the client especially when the engagement is of

serious nature about the intention of the lawyer to stop practice

and would have asked to find out another lawyer of their own

choice.    It is submitted by Sri. Nazar, the learned Public

Prosecutor that the appellant would have been informed as early

as in September, 2007 to find out another lawyer. The memo

DSR 3/2009 & CRL.A. 1134/2009     17

filed by the then counsel along with the petition for adjournment

is dated 12.1.2008. In that memo, she had styled herself as 'the

formerly advocate' and then working as CTO Trainee (Reserve).

That means it was only a formal memo given by the lawyer and

the appellant might have been informed about the same long

back. So we find that the learned Sessions Judge had not at all

denied any opportunity to the defence counsel to prepare the

brief and to cross examine the witnesses. On the other hand,

though the request for         adjournment was not justified, the

learned Sessions Judge had offered to give sufficient time to

prepare the case, if so required and to cross examine the

witnesses, provided the cost of the witnesses were paid. Without

availing that opportunity, the defence counsel volunteered and

cross examined the witnesses.        No prejudice is caused to the

appellant so as to warrant a remand of the case for a fresh trial.

We notice that Rule 80 of the Criminal Rules of Practice

mandates that Sessions cases shall be given prejudice.       It is

accordingly the Sessions Judge gave preference. With sufficient

notice, the trial was scheduled day to day. It appears that the

attempt of the defence was to see whether schedule for

examination    of    the    witnesses could  be    adjourned  and

DSR 3/2009 & CRL.A. 1134/2009   18

rescheduled. When it was understood that the case would not be

adjourned to a longer date, the defence lawyer examined the

witnesses. There is no denial of opportunity or justice. The

method adopted by the learned Sessions Judge is perfectly

correct.

     9. As regards the counsel engaged by the Sessions Judge,

from the stage of recording the statement of the appellant under

Section 313 Cr.P.C., it was submitted by the learned Public

Prosecutor,    after collecting datas, that Advocate Sri. Sudev

Kumar, who was engaged to defend the appellant, was enrolled

on 5.5.1999 and he was attached to the office of Advocate Sri.

C.S..Ajayan, who is a leading criminal lawyer in Kottayam Bar

and as on the date of engagement, Sri. Sudev Kumar had more

than nine years experience in the Bar.

     10. Sri. Raja Vijayaraghavan, learned counsel appearing

for the appellant, could not point out any relevant material which

was not argued before the trial court. Having heard either side

and reading the impugned judgment, we find that every relevant

defence was presented before the trial court and it was duly

considered by the trial court.     Regarding the answers given

when questioned under Section 313 of the Code of Criminal

DSR 3/2009 & CRL.A. 1134/2009        19

Procedure, we notice that there isn't any embarrassing answer

given by the appellant.       It is true that he had admitted certain

material facts. In the light of the evidence on record, we find

that the facts which he had admitted during the questioning

under Section 313 Cr.P.C. are facts which he could not otherwise

deny. Therefore, it could not be said that the appellant was not properly

instructed.  No prejudice was caused to the appellant by the

engagement of Advocate Sri. Sudev Kumar by the Sessions Judge

under Section 304 Cr.P.C. as a defence lawyer.                 He is an

experienced lawyer in conducting criminal cases and the trial

was not vitiated. A lawyer, appearing in a case at the appellate

stage may find some loopholes here and there in the conduct of

cases by his counterpart in the trial court.           Sometimes, the

lawyer in the appellate court might have thought that if the trial

was conducted in the manner he thinks or witnesses were

examined or cross examined in the way he thinks, his client

would have won the case. Wishes have no bar. Remand of a case

on such argument may lead to uncertainty. The crucial question

is whether there was denial of opportunity to defend and thereby prejudice

was caused to the appellant. Sometimes, instances may occur where there is

failure to defend properly causing prejudice. With that possibility

DSR 3/2009 & CRL.A. 1134/2009     20

in mind we have gone through the judgment impugned, evidence

on record and the defence statement. We find that there is no

denial of opportunity and the case was properly and effectively

defended.    There is no merit in the objection raised by the

appellant.    In the above circumstances, we turn down the

request for a remand of the case and proceed to examine the

merits of the case.

     Evidence on record:

     11. PW.1        is the first informant. He is the uncle of

deceased Sareena. He would depose that the appellant is the

husband of Sareena and that Amisha is the daughter born to the

appellant and deceased Sareena and that he, who was running a

hotel at Kollakadavu, got information over phone on 26.8.2006

that Sareena and her daughter had some casualty and brought to

the Pushpagiri hospital. He rushed to the hospital and found the

dead bodies of Sareena and the child in the mortuary with burn

as well as bleeding injuries.      He rushed to Changanacherry

Police Station and gave Ext.P1 First Information Statement. He

would further depose that the marriage of the appellant and

Sareena was in 2001 and at the time of marriage, Sareena was

given a Maruti car, 150 sovereigns of gold ornaments and one

DSR 3/2009 & CRL.A. 1134/2009   21

lakh rupees. After the marriage, the couple were residing at

Paippad. Though the matrimony was happy during the early

days, later, it was strained and there were occasions of quarrel

and he had to intervene and settle.

     12. PW.2 would depose that he is an immediate neighbour

of the appellant and on 26.8.2006 by about 10 AM he, who was

studying in VIIth standard, was preparing to go for tuition and

that by the time he heard some sound from the house of the

appellant. Seeing other neighbours rushing to the house, he also

rushed to the house and found that the door of the house was

locked from inside.      PW.3 was knocking at the door to open .

When went to the back side of the house, he saw fire inside the

house through the window.      The appellant was standing inside.

Later the appellant opened the door. People rushed inside the

house and put off the fire.    The child was taken out by PW.3

from the store room. Then the appellant pressed the neck of the

child stating that she alone should not survive. The gathered

people prevented the appellant.     PW.3 later took the child to

the hospital. Sareena was also taken to the hospital and later, he

knew that both were dead.

DSR 3/2009 & CRL.A. 1134/2009   22




     13.     PW.3, a carpenter, would depose that he is the

immediate neighbour of the appellant. On 26.8.2006 while he

was preparing to go for his routine work he heard a sound from

the house of the appellant. He rushed to and found that the

house was bolted from inside. Television and Tape recorder were

in full swing. He attempted to brake open the door by kicking.

By the time the mother of the appellant told that the appellant

was inside the house. Despite repeated requests, the appellant

did not open the door. Again he attempted to kick open the door.

By that time somebody from the backside told that the appellant

opened the door. He rushed inside the house through the back

door opened by the appellant. The appellant was standing inside

the house. He saw fire from the store room. He along with others

poured water and put off the fire. The gas cylinder, which was

on fire, was removed to the kitchen. Sareena and Amisha were

lying inside the store room. He took the child first and handed

over to PW.6. The child was then taken to the hospital in an auto

rickshaw. Sareena was also taken to the hospital. The doctor,

after examining them declared both dead. He would further

depose that the appellant and the Sareena were leading          a

DSR 3/2009 & CRL.A. 1134/2009     23

normal life after marriage and later, there were quarrels. He

identified the gas cylinder which was marked as M.O.1. He had

also identified the singed clothes found on the body of both

victims. The clothes identified were marked as M.Os.2 to 4.

     14. PW.4 would depose that she is an immediate neighbour

of the appellant. She had two children. Amisha, who was aged

31/2 years used to go       over to her house and play with her

children and on 26.8.2006, Amisha was with her children. While

she was planning to give some food to Amisha, the appellant

called her home and later, by about 10 A.M., she heard a sound

from the house of the appellant. She rushed to the house and

found that the front and back doors were locked from inside.

After some time, the appellant opened the back door. She along

with others rushed inside the house and found Sareena and the

child lying in the store room. Being got shocked she came out.

She had further deposed that      there were broken pieces of the

door inside the store and that M.O.5 is the model of a snake boat

kept in the showcase of the appellant and M.O.6 is the shawl

used by deceased Sareena.

DSR 3/2009 & CRL.A. 1134/2009        24

     15. PW.5, yet another neighbour of the appellant would

depose that he is an electrician and that at 10A.M. on 26.82006

while he was returning from Paippad junction to his home, he

saw some people gathered around the house of the appellant.

He went there and found that the doors of the house were

opened. The appellant was inside the kitchen. He saw Sareena

lying in the store room. The child was removed to the hospital.

His paternal uncle told him that in case the appellant was left

alone at his home there was possibility for              the appellant

committing suicide. At his request the appellant put up pants

and shirt. PW5 took home the appellant. When enquired, the

appellant told that he had murdered his wife and child by

beating with the model of the canoe and             that he thought of

committing suicide. He would further depose that the appellant

was arrested by the police.

     16. According to the prosecution, the appellant had also confessed

to PW5 that he had strangulated Sareena and the child. When became

unconscious, they were taken to the store room to set them ablaze. Just

before putting on fire, they were found moving. Then he beat them at their

head with the model of the canoe and then put on fire. However, PW.5 did

not support the prosecution on that aspect.           Though the case

DSR 3/2009 & CRL.A. 1134/2009   25

dairy statements, which were marked as Exts.P2 and P3, were

put to the witness with permission of the court and cross

examined, no material was         disclosed in support of the

prosecution in that regard.

     17. PW.6 would depose that he is a head load worker at

Paippad junction and that the appellant is known to him and that

on 26.8.2006 he had been to the father of PW.2 who is residing

in front of the house of the appellant and while he was talking

with the father of PW.2 he heard the sound of an explosion. He

rushed to the house of the appellant along with PW.2 and his

father. The house was found closed from inside. Though they

attempted to open the door by kicking, it was not opened. When

failed to open the door he went to the side of the kitchen and

opened the shutters of the window on the eastern side of the

kitchen and found the appellant standing inside the kitchen. He

uttered the appellant to open the door and      threatened that

unless it was opened they would break open the door. Hearing

that, the appellant opened the door of the kitchen. When he

rushed inside the house the appellant stated that he had finished

both.   Sareena and the child were found lying inside the store

room. They were on flames.      PW.3 put off the fire by pouring

DSR 3/2009 & CRL.A. 1134/2009    26

water and the gas cylinder was removed.       PW.3 took out the

child from the store room and handed over to him, but he could

not hold the child as it was burnt.   PW.3 then took the child to

the hospital and 20 minutes later, Sareena was also taken to the

hospital.

     18. PW.7 is the wife of PW.5. She would depose that by

about 10' clock on 26.8.2006 she heard an explosion from the

house of the appellant. She along with the neighbours rushed to

the house. The doors were found closed from inside.        People

gathered asked the appellant to open the door.         Later the

appellant opened the back door. She entered the house and

found the legs of Sareena in the store room. She felt fainted and

came out.     She would further depose that PW.3 took the child

to the hospital and that the appellant was later brought to her

home by her husband.         From there, the appellant was taken

custody by the police.

     19.     PW.8, the father of the deceased Sareena would

depose about the marriage, the ornaments and the dowry given

at the time of marriage and further deposed that the ornaments

and the dowry given were squandered by the appellant. He was

told by Sareena that the appellant was intimidating           and

DSR 3/2009 & CRL.A. 1134/2009    27

assaulting her for money.      He was told by the father of the

appellant that the ornaments were in the lockers. Sareena told

him that all the ornaments were sold and squandered.           He

would further depose that on the 40th day of the birth of the

child, about    20 sovereigns were obtained as gift and those

ornaments were also appropriated by the appellant.           The

appellant had on various occasions, over phone demanded

money and that at 8 p.m. on 25.8.2006, the appellant demanded

a sum of Rs. 50,000/- and to hand over a fixed deposit receipt for

Rs. 10,000/-, (copy of which is marked as Ext.P4). When PW.8

declined to heed the demand he was told that he would face the

consequences. On the next day, he knew that Sareena and the

child met with an accident by bursting of the gas cylinder and

they were taken to the Pushpagiri Hospital. He, along with wife,

rushed to the hospital and understood from the gathered that

Sareena and the child were murdered by the appellant who was

not found there.

      20. PW.9 is an attestor to Ext.P5 scene mahazar. He had

also identified M.Os. 5, 6 and 7.

      21. PW.10 would depose that on 26.8.2006, while he was

working    as    Assistant   Surgeon at   the   Taluk   Hospital,

DSR 3/2009 & CRL.A. 1134/2009   28

Changanacherry, the police brought the appellant who had burns

on both elbows and shins and that Ext.P6 is the case sheet

prepared.    He would further depose that the burns on the

appellant could be sustained in the process of escaping from the

fire and that if the burns were sustained during the process of

saving persons from fire, the burns should have been at the tip

of fingers and that the hands also would have been burnt.

      22. PW.11 would depose that he was the Medical Officer at

Pushpagiri Medical College, Thiruvalla on 26.8.2006.     On that

day at 10.40 a.m. Amisha aged four years was brought dead to

the hospital with the history of burn injuries and that Ext.P7 is

the record maintained in the hospital. He would further depose

that Sareena aged 25 years was also brought dead with the

history of burns and Ext.P8 is the record maintained in the

hospital and that the matter was informed to the police over

phone.

      23.    PW.12 would depose that he was         Lecturer in

Forensic Medicine and Asst. Police Surgeon attached to the

Medical College Hospital, Kottayam. On 27.8.2006, he conducted

autopsy on the body of Sareena alias Lovely, aged 25 years,

involved in Crime No. 30/2006 of Changanacherry Police Station.

DSR 3/2009 & CRL.A. 1134/2009   29

He noticed the following ante mortem injuries on the body of

Sareena:



      1.   Contusion 3x2x0.5 cm. on the left side of
           forehead 4 cm. to the left of midline and 4
           cm. above the eyebrow.

      2.   Lacerated wound 4x1x0.5 cm.. vertical on
           the back of head just behind right ear.

      3.   Contusion of right frontal, temporal and
           parietal regions of scalp over an area 16 x
           10 x0.5 cm. underneath there was a
           depressed fracture over an area 10x8x0.3
           cm. involving the right frontal and parietal
           bones. The base of right side of anterior
           cranial fossa was fractured into fragments.
           Brain showed thick film of subdural and
           diffuse subarachnoid bleeding on both
           sides. The gyri were flat and sulci were
           narrow.

      4.   Contusion 0.5x0.5x0.2cm involving the root
           of nose.

      5.   Lacerated wound 3 x 1.5 cm. through and
           through oblique involving the right side of
           upper lip and adjoining part of face, the
           upper outer end being 1 cm. outer to the
           ala of nose. Fracture dislocation of right
           upper central incisor tooth at its lower end.

      6.   Lacerated wound 4x2.5x0.5 cm. horizontal
           on the right side of forehead 4 cm. to the
           right of midline and overlying the eyebrow.
           The right eye ball was contused.

      7.   Lacerated wound 3x1x0.5cm. vertical on

DSR 3/2009 & CRL.A. 1134/2009    30

           the right side of face just in front of the
           lobule of ear.

      8.   Lacerated wound 3x1x0.5cm. oblique on
           the right side of neck the upper inner end
           being 2 cm. to the right midline and 3 cm.
           below the lower end of jaw bone.

      9.   Contusion of right strenomastoid muscle
           3x1cm. involving whole thickness       at a
           point 4 cm. above its sternal end.

      10. Superficial burns involving the face upper
           part of front of neck, whole of right upper
           limb up to wrist front and sides of trunk up
           to a site just below umbilicus. Upper 1/3 of
           both thighs and upper 10 cm. of front of
           both legs.

      11. Linear abrasion 9x0.2 cm. vertical on the
           back of left forearm 3cm. below the elbow."


He would further depose that he had also conducted postmortem

examination on the body of a female child by name Amisha aged

four years, involved in the same crime and noted the following

ante-mortem injuries.



     1.    Contusion 3x3x0.2cm. involving the tip of
           adjoining part of right side of nose.

     2.    Contusion 2x2x0.2 cm. involving the middle
           of right upper eyelid.

     3.    Contusion 1x1x0.3 cm. involving the right
           lower eyelid being     3cm. to the right of

DSR 3/2009 & CRL.A. 1134/2009     31

           midline.

     4.    Contusion 1.5 x1.5x0.3cm. on the right side
           of face just outer to the outer end of eye.

     5.    Abrasion 2.5x1cm. on the back of lobe of
           right ear.

     6.    Lacerated wound 2x1x0.3 cm. oblique on
           the left side of face the inner upper end
           being 2 cm. to the left of midline.

     7.    Lacerated wound 1x0.5x0.5cm. involving
           the inner aspect of left angle of mouth.

     8.    Contusion of frontal region of scalp in the
           midline over an area 6x4x0.5 cm. (seen on
           dissection).    Brain showed thick subdural
           and diffuse subarachnoid bleeding on both
           sides.    The gyri were flat and sulci were
           narrow.

     9.    Fracture of alveolar part of maxilla on left
           side.

     10. Fracture of left upper central and lateral
           incisor tooth.
     11.    Contusion of right sternomastoid muscle
           2x1x0.5 cm., 3 cm., above its sternal end.

     12. Fracture of body of mandible between left
           central and lateral incisors.

     13. First degree burns involving face, front of
           trunk, front of both upper limbs and front of
           both lower limbs.

     14. 3rd decree burns involving an area 10x4cm
           on the back of left arm and 10x5cm. on the
           back of left wrist."

DSR 3/2009 & CRL.A. 1134/2009   32

He would also depose that Ext.P9 and P10 are the postmortem

certificates relating to Sareena and Amisha and that the death

was due to the combined effect of burns and blunt injuries

sustained to the head and neck and that injury Nos. 1 to 8 found

on Amisha could be caused by a weapon like M.O.5 and injury

No. 9 was possible only by strangulation or throttling and that it

could be caused by strangulation with a ligature like M.O.6

shawl.     The soot articles in the air passage is a sure sign of

ante-mortem burns. According to him, Sareena was alive when

she suffered burn injuries.    As regards the injuries noted in

Ext.P9, it was deposed that injury No.1 to 10 and 12 could be

caused by a weapon like M.O.5 and injury No. 11 could be

caused by strangulation or throttling and it is possible to have

that injury by strangulating with a ligature like M.O.6. There

was presence of kerosene in small quantity and there is every

likelihood of pouring kerosene      over face and being licked/

swallowed and that the head injury, contusion on the neck and

burns found on Sareena were independently sufficient in the

ordinary course to cause death and that the head injury, blunt

injury to neck and the burns found on Amisha were

independently sufficient in the ordinary course to cause death.

DSR 3/2009 & CRL.A. 1134/2009   33

      24.    PW.13, the then Village Officer, Paippad    would

depose that he had prepared Ext.P11 plan        of the scene of

occurrence. PW.14 had deposed that he, who is a photographer,

as requested by the police, took the photographs of the dead

bodies lying at the Pushpagiri Hospital and that Ext.P12 series

are the photos and Ext.P13 series are the negatives. PW15, a

photographer in Police Department, would depose that he took

the photographs of the scene of occurrence and that Exts.P14

and P15 series are the photographs and the negatives.

      25. PW.16 would depose that he was working as Scientific

Assistant in the Police Department and on 26.8.2006, as

requested by the investigating officer he went to the spot and

collected thirteen items of material objects from the spot of

occurrence. M.Os 8 to 19 were identified by him. Ext.P16 is the

list given by him. PW.17 was examined to prove Ext.P17, the

extract of the registration certificate in respect of maruti car

bearing No.      KL-4K/1287 registered in the name of Sareena.

PW. 18 had given evidence regarding the recording of Ext.P1

and registration of the case thereon. PW.19 would depose that

he, who was the Tahsildar, Changanacherry, had conducted

inquest on the body of Sareena and Amisha and that Exts.P18

DSR 3/2009 & CRL.A. 1134/2009   34

and P19 are the inquest reports.

     26.      PW.20       would depose about the process of

investigation. According to PW20, on the basis of the statement

given by the appellant he seized M.Os. 5 to 7 and that Ext.P5 is

the scene mahazar prepared by him. He had seized imitation

studs as well as an imitation chain from the store room. He

seized a plank         (  ), which was marked as M.O.22, gas

cylinder which was marked as M.O.1. Pieces of a door, a match

box and glass pieces, which were identified as M.Os. 20 to 27

were also seized. He would also depose that he obtained a print

of the palm of the appellant on a cellophane tape and that the

material objects were forwarded to the Chemical Examiner and

to Forensic Science Laboratory. He had also seized the clothes

worn by the appellant and singed clothes       of the child and

Sareena. The clothes and the waist chain seized by the Tahsildar

at the time of inquest were identified as M.Os. 28 to 33.

     Submissions:

     27. The learned counsel for the appellant conceded that

Sareena and Amisha had unnatural death. While the prosecution

argues that it is a case of homicide, the learned counsel for the

DSR 3/2009 & CRL.A. 1134/2009    35

appellant argues that it is a case of suicide. According to the

learned Public Prosecutor, the nature of injuries found on the

deceased would convincingly establish that it is a case of

homicide. The statement of the appellant also would show that

he had advanced a defence of suicide.          In support of the

statement given by the appellant, it was argued by the learned

counsel for the appellant that Sareena along with the child might

have entered the store room after taking the gas cylinder inside

the store room and after opening the regulator, they might have

set ablaze and the appellant who was in the front room, hearing

the sound of bursting while igniting the gas, rushed to the store

and found that the door of the store room was locked from

inside. The appellant was forced to kick at the door which fell

inside the store with its fittings. It was further argued that the

injuries found on the neck and head of the victims might be due

to the fall of the wooden planks and there is nothing even to

suspect that the injuries found on the victims might have been

inflicted by the appellant in the attempt to murder them.

      Evaluation

      28. The defence has in fact no case that the injuries other

DSR 3/2009 & CRL.A. 1134/2009    36

than burn injuries, found on both the victims were self inflicted

injuries. A look at the nature of injuries would show that there

were very severe injuries including contusion and lacerated

wound on the head and face of both the victims. If it is a case of

suicide and they had self inflicted injuries in that attempt, after

sustaining such injuries, they might not be able to ignite gas and

to have the fire. It is also not possible to cause such bodily

injuries after igniting fire. Even the defence theory stated by the

appellant and the one argued by the appellant's counsel is not

consistent. According to the appellant, the door of the store room

broke and fell on the victims when he kicked on the same. On the

other hand, appellant's counsel would contend that the door was

broken due to the explosion and the wooden planks fell on the

victims with force of explosion and sustained injuries. Very

consistent case of the prosecution as well as the defence is that

the gas was ignited at the closed store room and it is because of

the pressure of sudden fire the explosion took place. If it is so,

normally the wooden planks of the store room would have been

thrown out to the kitchen and not to the store room. So, if the

door was broken due to the explosion there is least possibility of

the same being fallen over the victims. Even if the theory

DSR 3/2009 & CRL.A. 1134/2009    37

advanced by the appellant and the counsel is true, there is

possibility for only one impact on the body of the deceased. The

nature of the injuries found on both the victims would show that

all the lacerated wounds and contusions were independent. None

of the injuries found on the victims corresponds with any other

injury. For example, injury No.5 on Sareena is a lacerated wound

3 x 1.5 c.m. through and through oblique involving the right side

of upper lip and adjoining part of face, the upper outer end being

1 cm outer to the ala of nose. There was fracture dislocation of

right upper central incisor tooth at its lower end. Whereas injury

No.3 would show that there was contusion involving frontal,

temporal and parietal regions of scalp over an area of 16 x 10 x

0.5 cm. underneath there was a depressed fracture over an area

of 10 x 8 x 0.3 c.m. involving the right frontal and parietal

bones. If a wooden plank is thrown at Sareena either by kicking

on the door or by explosion and she sustained injury No.5, it is

very unlikely for having injury No.3 also sustained in the same

impact. It is pertinent to note that gyri of Sareena were found

flat. It indicates that there was a heavy hit at the head covering

the frontal temporal and parietal regions. The same wooden

plank would not cause injury No.5 in the very same hit.

DSR 3/2009 & CRL.A. 1134/2009    38

      29. Yet another thing we notice is that the burns found on

the body of Sareena were on the front side and there was no

burn on her back side. The very case of the prosecution is that

the gas was ignited while both the victims were lying

unconscious. The probabilities are much in favour of the

prosecution because the burns found on front side suggest that

the victim sustained while she was supine and not in any other

positions. If the fire was ignited either in the sitting or standing

position in an attempt to commit suicide, there would have been

burns on the back as well. The burns found on Amisha are also

on the front side except some burns on the back of the left arm

and left wrist. It appears that Amisha also sustained burns while

she was supine with hands bent. If that is so, the wooden plank

thrown from the door either by kicking or by explosion may not

hit at the head and neck simultaneously causing injuries of the

manner described in the post-mortem certificate. So also the

various injuries found on Amisha are also suggestive that those

injuries are differently or separately inflicted and those injuries

are not due to one impact caused by falling or flying of the

wooden planks on explosion. It is also pertinent to note that to

PW12 it was suggested in cross examination that the injuries

DSR 3/2009 & CRL.A. 1134/2009     39

were possible by explosion. It was flatly denied by PW12.

According to PW12, if the injuries were sustained as a result of

the explosion the injuries would be of high velocity wounds. No

high velocity wound was seen on the body of either of the

victims. It is also pertinent to note that there is no suggestion to

PW12 that any of the injuries noted in Exts.P9 and P10 is a

corresponding injury. In the above circumstances, we have to

find that the contusion, lacerated wounds, fractures etc. were

caused by independent and separate actions and not by a single

blow by falling down of door pieces due to kick or impact with a

flying piece of wooden plank from the door due to explosion. So

the nature of injury is consistent with the theory of homicide and

inconsistent with the theory of suicide.

      30. It appears that, taking clue from Exts.P2 and P3,

prosecution alleged in the charge sheet that the first attempt

was to commit murder by strangulation and then to burn and

while attempting to put on fire, symptoms of life were noticed

and it was then the other injuries were inflicted with MO5 to

make sure the death. Having due regard to the nature of the

injuries sustained, though we are not relying upon Exts.P2 and

P3, the story suggested by the prosecution appears to be

DSR 3/2009 & CRL.A. 1134/2009   40

convincing and rule out the defence suggestion. As we

mentioned earlier, the burn injuries found on the victims were on

the front side and not on the back side. Since the gas was leaked

out only through the regulator there was no much gas to burn

wide for a long time. So the burns caused only superficial

injuries on the front side while the victims were supine on the

floor in an unconscious condition. Unless they were made

unconscious by strangulation or assault it is rather impossible to

make them lie so as to enable the assailant to ignite fire after

releasing the gas from the cylinder. So also, the injury Nos.1 to 8

found on Sareena and injury Nos.1 to 13 found on Amisha might

have been caused only in an unconscious condition one after

another on each of them. If the victims were in a conscious

condition normally there would have been cry for help. If the

child was assaulted first in the presence of Sareena, she would

have cried aloud and also would have been intervened. No

mother would remain mute or without response when the child is

assaulted. Then there would have been signs of violence in the

scene of occurrence. So also, if Sareena was assaulted first, the

child would have cried aloud. Likewise, if Sareena was assaulted

in the conscious condition, there would have defence and

DSR 3/2009 & CRL.A. 1134/2009      41

consequent violence. At least, she would have tried to fly away

from the scene. But no such attempt was seen made. Visualizing

materials in this manner, in every possibility, Sareena should

have been first strangulated and after she became unconscious,

the child should have been strangulated and made unconscious

and then both of them were taken to the kitchen and brutally

assaulted in the unconscious condition and thereafter they might

have been set ablaze. Probably they might have screamed in the

unconscious condition. But to avoid identifying the cries of the

victims the television and the tape recorder were switched on in

full swing. It is also indicative that the gas was ignited while the

victims were in a breathing condition, though not conscious,

because the air passages were blood stained with froth and soot.

PW12 had deposed that the presence of soot in the air passages

is an indication that though unconscious, the victims were

breathing while setting ablaze. It is also worthy to note that the

death was not due to the burns alone. So the nature of the

injuries found on the victims, in fact, suggest only the

prosecution theory of homicide.

      31. Now the oral evidence can be looked into. According

to PW2, on hearing the sound of explosion, he and others rushed

DSR 3/2009 & CRL.A. 1134/2009   42

to the house of the appellant. At that time, the doors on the front

side as well as on the back side were closed and the appellant

opened the back door only after repeated requests and after the

gathered people kicking at the door to open. The appellant had

not even made a cry for help. Learned counsel for the appellant

commented about the reliability of evidence of PW2. It is alleged

that PW2 is a child witness. His evidence would show that the

Sessions Judge, without ascertaining the competency of the

witness to give evidence, was given oath and was examined as if

a witness competent to give evidence. Relying on the decisions

reported in Aravindakshan Pilla v. State of Kerala (1988(2) KLT

990) and Chandran v. State of Kerala (2005 KHC 1091) it was

submitted by the learned counsel that since the competency of

PW2 to testify was not examined by the trial judge, the evidence

of PW2, as such, is to be rejected. As against the said argument,

the learned Public Prosecutor canvassed our attention to the

decision reported in Kabiraj Tudu v. State of Assam (1994 Crl. L.

J. 432) wherein at para 9, after referring to Section 118 of the

Evidence Act and Section 4(1) of the Oaths Act, it is held as

follows; :-

DSR 3/2009 & CRL.A. 1134/2009     43

           "Oath or affirmation shall be made by all
      witnesses, the only exception being the case of a child
      under 12 years of age where the Court is of the
      opinion that though he understands the duty of
      speaking the truth he does not understand oath or
      affirmation. If the Court is so satisfied, oath will not
      be administered to the witness. The evidence will
      nevertheless be admissible."


Again at para 10 it is held as follows:-

           "Even in the absence of specific record of
      preliminary questions or the satisfaction the appellate
      Court could examine the nature and tenor of the
      evidence recorded, the manner in which the witness
      faced in cross-examination and satisfy itself about the
      competency under both the provisions."

      32. We have made an anxious and critical scrutiny of the

evidence of PW2. It is true that the competency of PW2 to testify

or whether he is competent to take oath was not tested by the

trial court. Then what is probable and possible is only to go

through the evidence and see whether the witness is giving

reasonable answers or whether the evidence of PW2 can be

believed or not. The learned counsel for the appellant took us

through the evidence of PW2, at certain portions, more than

once. He was cross examined at length. None of the answers

given by him suggest that he is not at all a competent witness.

There is nothing to suggest that his answers lacks prudence or

DSR 3/2009 & CRL.A. 1134/2009   44

that answers are not reasonable. Neither there is anything to

suggest that the witness was subjected to any tuitoring. What is

suggested at the end of the cross examination is that the witness

had not seen anything and that he is giving evidence as

instructed by the Investigating Officer. Crucially we notice that

there is no such suggestion to PW20 that he had tutored PW2.

Going by the evidence of PW20, the Investigating Officer, there

is little material to conclude that the Investigating Officer had

taken any undue interest in the prosecution of this case or that

he had even made any attempt to influence or tutor any of the

witnesses. In the above circumstances though we find that the

trial court omitted to test competency of the witness to take oath

and give evidence his evidence as such cannot be thrown out as

he had given prudent and reasonable answers in the chief

examination as well as in the cross examination. PW2 withstood

cross examination.

      33. Going by Section 118 of the Evidence Act and Section

4(1) of the Oaths Act, we find that it is always desirable for a

trial Judge to test the competency of a child witness to take

oath and give evidence on oath. On such testing if it is found that

such witness is not competent to take oath and give evidence on

DSR 3/2009 & CRL.A. 1134/2009      45

oath, such witness shall not be examined. But, if a child witness

was examined on oath without testing the competency, that

alone shall not be a reason to reject the evidences of that

witness. Once evidence is recorded, the consideration shall be

whether the evidence is trustworthy or not. The competency of

the witness can be tested by careful scrutiny of the evidence. On

a careful scrutiny if it is found that evidence given by the witness

is prudent and reasonable and is not subjected to tutoring, the

evidence of a child witness can be relied upon.

      34. Yet another thing that we notice is that PW2 cannot

be called as a child witness because as on the date of

examination he was 13 years old, though he may be a child

witness as on the date of occurrence. Section 118 of the

Evidence Act stipulates that all persons shall be competent to

testify unless the court considers that they are prevented from

understanding the questions put to them or giving rational

answers to those questions, by tender years, extreme old age,

disease of the mind or body or any other cause of the same kind.

It does not specify any age limit. But the proviso to Section 4(1)

of the Oaths Act, 1969 stipulates a cut of age for administering

oath. We find that a reading of Section 4 of the Oaths Act would

DSR 3/2009 & CRL.A. 1134/2009   46

be relevant.

           "Sec.4:- Oaths or affirmation to be made by
     witnesses, interpreters and jurors.-(1) Oaths or
     affirmations shall be made by the following persons,
     namely:-

           (a) all witnesses, that is to say, all persons who
     may lawfully be examined or give, or be required to
     give, evidence by or before any court or person having
     by law or consent of parties authority to examine such
     persons or to receive evidence;

           (b) interpreters of questions put to, and evidence
     given by, witnesses; and

           (c) jurors:

           Provided that where the witness is a child under
     twelve years of age, and the court or person having
     authority to examine such witness is of opinion that,
     though the witness understands the duty of speaking
     the truth, he does not understand the nature of an
     oath or affirmation, the foregoing provisions of this
     section and the provisions of section 5 shall not apply
     to such witness; but in any such case the absence of
     an oath or affirmation shall not render inadmissible
     any evidence given by such witness nor affect the
     obligation of the witness to state the truth.

     Sub section (2):- Omitted as not relevant. "


     35. The proviso to Section 4(1) casts a duty on court to

decide whether the witness below 12 years of age understands

the nature of an oath or affirmation. It is for that purpose

preliminary examination has to be made. In this case, PW2 being

DSR 3/2009 & CRL.A. 1134/2009    47

13 years old as on the date of examination, such preliminary

examination was not warranted. We notice that the cut of age

stipulated in the proviso to Section 4(1) is as on the date of

examination and not as on the date of occurrence. In this view of

the matter PW2 cannot be styled as a child witness who shall be

subject to preliminary examination. Therefore, the omission of

the Sessions Judge to have a preliminary examination is of no

consequence.

     36. We also notice that even if there is any such omission

or any irregularity, by that reason the evidence would not be

invalidated because of Section 7 of the Oaths Act, which we

quote for correct appraisal.

           "Sec.7:-      Proceedings   and     evidence    not
     invalidated by omission of oath or irregularity. - No
     omission to take any oath or make any affirmation, no
     substitution of any one for any other of them, and no
     irregularity whatever in the administration of any oath
     or affirmation or in the form in which it is
     administered, shall invalidate any proceeding or
     render inadmissible any evidence whatever, in or in
     respect of which such omission, substitution or
     irregularity took place, or shall affect the obligation of
     a witness to state the truth."

In view of the above provision, even omission to take oath, or

irregularity in the administration of oath, whatever may be,

would not affect the validity of the evidence. So, the objection of

DSR 3/2009 & CRL.A. 1134/2009   48

the learned counsel for the appellant regarding the admissibility

of  the    evidence    of    PW2 is overruled.  What    deserves

consideration is whether the evidence of PW2 is trustworthy or

not. We had a careful scrutiny of the evidence of PW2. His

evidence appears reasonable and reliable. He withstood cross

examination. We could not find out any material to conclude that

his evidence is anyway artificial. On the other hand, he appears

to be a natural witness with good prudence. The most important

factor we notice is that his evidence corroborates with PWs.3 to

7 in material particulars.

     37. The evidence of PW3 also would show that while he

rushed to the house of the appellant on hearing the explosion the

doors on the front and back were closed from inside and the

appellant was inside the house. The appellant did not care to

open the door even after repeated requests. Neither there was

any cry for help. The appellant was constrained to open the door

only after repeated threats to break open the door by kicking.

The evidence of PW4 also would corroborate with the evidence

of PW2 and PW3 that both the doors were bolted from inside

when they rushed to the house on hearing the explosion. The

evidence of PWs.2, 3 and 4 were corroborated by the evidence of

DSR 3/2009 & CRL.A. 1134/2009   49

PW6 also as regards the fact that when the people gathered

around the house on hearing the explosion both the doors were

closed from inside and the appellant was inside the house. If it is

a case of suicide by the victims there is every possibility for the

appellant crying for help. The statement of the appellant would

show that he came into the sit-out and tried to phone his father-

in-law and then went back into the house. There is no case for

him that either of the victims had bolted the door from inside. If

that is so, the doors of the house might have been bolted from

inside by the appellant alone. That is a circumstance consistent

with the prosecution case regarding homicide and totally

inconsistent with the defence theory of suicide. If it is assumed

that the doors were locked from inside by the victims, the doors

would have been opened by the appellant before the gathered

neighbours asking or kicking at the door to open it. On the other

hand, it is only after repeated kickings and threats by the

gathered, the door was opened, that too not the front door, but

the back door. The hesitation of the appellant to open the front

door is an indication of the deliberate action and guilty

conscience of the appellant which speak volumes.

DSR 3/2009 & CRL.A. 1134/2009     50

      38. The conduct of the appellant simply standing inside

the house after finding his wife and daughter on flames without

crying for help also is consistent with the prosecution case of

homicide and totally inconsistent with the defence theory of

suicide. If it was a case of suicide, definitely the appellant would

have cried aloud and he would have been in the forefront in

rescue operation. Here, he not only not cried for help and didn't

do any rescue operation but also had been preventing the

neighbours who gathered there from rescue operations by

keeping the doors closed. That conduct of the appellant is also

against the defence theory of suicide and consistent with the

case of homicide.

      39. The evidence of PW4 would show that just before the

incident Amisha was playing at the house of PW4. She was called

back by the appellant. In fact, if Sareena planned to commit

suicide along with the child, Sareena would have called the child

and then would have attempted to commit suicide. The fact that

the appellant called the child back home from the house of PW4

is also a circumstance in favour of the prosecution and against

the defence theory.

DSR 3/2009 & CRL.A. 1134/2009    51

     40. Yet another circumstance inconsistent with the theory

of suicide is the presence of the match box in the kitchen and

absence of any igniting material in the store room. The evidence

of Pw3 would show that soon after he putting off the fire, he took

out the gas cylinder from the store. Ext.P5 scene mahazar would

show that a match box with name 'WE TWO' with a few match

sticks was found inside the kitchen. If it is a case of suicide by

Sareena by setting ablaze herself, normally the match box should

have   been    inside     the store where    the   fire occurred.

But nothing in Ext.P5 would suggest that there was any charged

match stick or box in the store room.     On the other hand, the

presence of the match box in the kitchen would suggest that the

fire might have been ignited at the store from the kitchen by

another.    Now it is pertinent to note that the evidence of Pw10

would show that there were some burns on the right and left

elbow and shins of the appellant. It was suggested to PW10 that

the burns might have been sustained in attempt to rescue the

victims.   As we stated earlier, PW10 had flatly denied that

suggestion and further stated that       in   case the burn was

sustained in the process of rescuing persons from fire, the

fingers would have been burnt. Admittedly appellant sustained

DSR 3/2009 & CRL.A. 1134/2009     52

no burn on his finger or hands. There is nothing to disbelieve

Pw10 on that aspect. The burns found on the appellant are

suggestive that he might have ignited fire by standing inside the

kitchen and he might have sustained burn on elbow and shins

while running away and that there was no attempt at all from the

side of the appellant to rescue the victims from the fire.

     41. The appellant in his statement under Section 313

Crl.PC had stated that he attempted to put off the fire by pouring

water and he had lifted the daughter from the store room to the

kitchen. The evidence of Pw3 would show that while he entered

the house after the door opened by the appellant, the victims

were on flames and that he put off the flame by pouring water

and the gas cylinder was taken out. There is no suggestion to

Pw3 that before Pw3 put off the flame, the appellant put off the

flame or even attempted to put off the flame or that Pw3 didn't

put off the fire. So, it is indicative that there was no attempt by

the appellant to rescue the victims.          That conduct of the

appellant in not putting off the fire also speaks volumes against

the theory of suicide and in favour of the theory of homicide.

     42. According to the appellant, when he lifted the child

from the store room he was prevented by the gathered people

DSR 3/2009 & CRL.A. 1134/2009    53

and soon he fell unconscious and gained senses only when the

police party came to the scene of occurrence. He had not at all

sustained any such severe injury so as to remain unconscious

from 10 am. till the police reached the spot of occurrence at 3.30

pm.    His statement on that aspect is totally not believable.

According to Pw20, the appellant was arrested only at 3.30 pm.

The evidence of Pws.5 and 7 would show that the appellant was

almost detained at the house of Pw5 on the request of others

who gathered there.          They kept him under detention on

apprehension that if the appellant was left alone there was

likelihood to commit suicide. The statement of the appellant that

he became unconscious is belied by the evidence of Pws.2 to 7.

There is not even any suggestion to those witnesses that the

appellant lost senses. But, all along he was conscious and almost

calm. It is also pertinent to note that during the period of stay at

the house of Pw5 he had not cared to enquire as to what

happened to the victims. That conduct of the appellant also is

inconsistent with the defence theory of suicide and consistent

with homicide.

      43. The evidence of Pw3 would show that after he putting

off the fire, he first removed the gas cylinder from the store and

DSR 3/2009 & CRL.A. 1134/2009    54

then he took out the child and handed over to Pw6. But Pw6

couldn't carry the child. Hence the child was handed over back

to Pw3, who later lifted the child to the hospital. The evidence of

Pws.3 and 6 on this aspect was not challenged in cross

examination. Neither is there any suggestion to Pws.3 and 6

that the child was taken out by the appellant. This being the

evidence on record, the defence of the appellant that he took out

the child is only to be disbelieved. The conduct of the appellant

in this regard is also against the theory of suicide and consistent

with the theory of homicide.

      44. To     Pw8,     it was  suggested    during   the  cross

examination that there were many earlier attempts by Sareena

to commit suicide. But the appellant has no such case during the

time when he was questioned under Section 313 Crl.PC. Pw8

denied the suggestion.       There is no material to come to the

conclusion that deceased Sareena had suicide mania. We are

persuaded to conclude so, especially since the appellant has no

case that Sareena had at any time made any quarrel with him

either on the day of the incident or any day earlier or that there

was earlier attempt of suicide. It is crucial to note that the very

case of Pws.1 and 8 is that in 2001, while Sareena was married,

DSR 3/2009 & CRL.A. 1134/2009   55

she was given a Maruti Delux car, 150 sovereigns of gold and

one lakh rupees. The evidence of Pw8 would show that on the

40th day of birth of Amisha there was a function and in the

function, Amisha got 20 sovereigns of gold. According to Pw8,

all the ornaments and money given at the time of marriage and

celebration of birth of Amisha were squandered by the appellant.

Despite squandering all the ornaments and money Sareena had

not even quarreled with the appellant. The evidence of Pw8

persuade us to come to a conclusion that she was well groomed

and she had been attempting to manage some how or other

despite the squandering habit of the appellant. The evidence of

Pw8 that the appellant had squandered the ornaments and

money is corroborated by the circumstance revealed out in this

case. The inquest report would show that there was not even a

gram of gold either on the body of Sareena or Amisha. The

appellant has no case that at any time deceased Sareena was

intolerant with the appellant regarding the disposal of the

ornaments and spending of money.           So, in the above

circumstance, we find that the attempt to commit suicide

suggested to Pw8 is only an experimental suggestion made by

the counsel for the appellant during the course of cross

DSR 3/2009 & CRL.A. 1134/2009   56

examination and it is without any supporting material.

      45. If the evidence of Pw12 and Exts.P9 and P10 are

analyzed in the background of the above circumstance, we are

justified to arrive at a conclusion that it is a clear case of

homicide. There were repeated attacks with dangerous weapon

at the head and neck of the victims.      There was attempt to

strangulate also. As we mentioned earlier, the very case of the

prosecution is that at first, the victims were strangulated and

then they were lifted to the store room. The evidence of Pw12

coupled with Exts.P9 and P10 would show that the death was not

due to the strangulation. It appears that as suggested by the

prosecution and we mentioned earlier, due to the strangulation

the victims might have become unconscious and thereafter they

might have been lifted to the store room by the appellant. The

very case of the prosecution, sometimes, as we stated earlier,

getting clue from Exts.P2 and P3 that when the appellant

attempted to put the victims on flame there were signs of

movement indicating that they might come to senses. It is to

make sure that they might not survive, assault was made with

MO5. Repeated blows with much force were given at the head

and neck of the victims. We had earlier mentioned that the

DSR 3/2009 & CRL.A. 1134/2009   57

injuries found on the victims are inconsistent with the theory of

the plank felling on the victims at the time of explosion. The

above case of the prosecution regarding assault with MO5, is

supported by the presence of blood stain on MO5. Pw7 had

deposed that she had seen MO5 in the showcase of the appellant.

According to Pw20, when he reached the spot of occurrence

MO5 was found in the store. Ext.P5 would show that MO5 was

found with blood stains. So, MO5 which was kept in the show

case, as suggested by the prosecution might have been taken by

the appellant to the store room and injuries were inflicted with

it.

      46. The learned counsel for the appellant submitted that

MO5 was made with light or soft wood and it is very unlikely to

cause the injuries found on the victims with MO5. We notice

from Ext.P5 that MO5 is a deadly weapon having a length of 81

cms. and a width of 6 cms. with certain metal fittings. Pw12 had

specifically deposed that injuries 1 to 8 found on Amisha could

be caused with a weapon like MO5. So also injuries 1 to 10 and

12 found on Sareena could be caused with a weapon like MO5.

The evidence of Pw12 on that aspect remains unimpeached. If it

is a case of suicide by Sareena, there is little chance of Sareena

DSR 3/2009 & CRL.A. 1134/2009    58

self inflicting such injuries. If in attempt to commit suicide by

Sareena, she had inflicted injuries on Amisha, Amisha should

have cried alound. The appellant has no case that before he

hearing the explosion, he heard the cries of Amisha. So, that

possibility can be ruled out. So also, if Sareena had self inflicted

injuries with MO5, she couldn't ignite the fire. If fire was first

ignited, there is no possibility of inflicting injuries thereafter. It

appears, as suggested by prosecution that the victims had

sustained injuries after becoming unconscious by strangulation.

Having due regard to the nature and location of the injury and

the evidence of Pw12, we find little merit in the submission made

by the learned counsel for the appellant that the injuries found

on the victims could not be caused with a weapon like MO5 in

the manner stated by the prosecution or that the injuries were

self inflicted.

      47. The evidence of Pws.2 to 7, in fact, is not helpful to

the prosecution to arrive at a conclusion as to how exactly the

homicide was committed.       Their evidence is harmonious that

they heard the sound of explosion and they rushed to the house

of the appellant and at the time when they reached the house of

the appellant it was bolted from inside. On a careful reading of

DSR 3/2009 & CRL.A. 1134/2009   59

the evidence of Pws.2, 3, 4, 6 and 7, which was discussed earlier

in detail, we find that their evidence on that aspect inspires

confidence and there is nothing to disbelieve them. The learned

Public Prosecutor giving reliance to Section 106 of the Evidence

Act argued that in the peculiar facts and circumstances of the

case, by the evidence of Pws.2 to 4, 6 and 7 it was revealed that

at the time when the victims had a homicidal death the appellant

alone was inside the house and it is for the appellant to explain

as to how the victims had sustained a homicidal death. It is

further argued that in the absence of good explanation the

defence theory is to be ruled out and the prosecution case is to

be believed. According to the learned Public Prosecutor, victims

sustained injuries and burns, that led to their death at the closed

house where the appellant alone was present and it is for the

appellant to explain, and the prosecution is not in a position to

prove as to what had happened inside the closed house.

Therefore, according to the Public Prosecutor, the burden to

prove otherwise is shifted to the appellant and in the absence of

at least probable explanation, it is to be held that the appellant

alone is the assailant. We find merit in the submission. In the

absence of a probable explanation, it has to be concluded that

DSR 3/2009 & CRL.A. 1134/2009    60

the appellant alone inside the house is the assailant. In support

of the argument the learned Public Prosecutor had relied upon

the decision reported in Trimukh Maroti Kirkan v. State of

Maharashtra [2006(4) KLT 638 (SC)]. That decision is almost in

an identical case. Referring to various earlier precedents, at

para.17, the Apex Court held,

           "Where an accused is alleged to have committed
     the murder of his wife and the prosecution succeeds
     in leading evidence to show that shortly before the
     commission of crime they were seen together or the
     offence takes place in the dwelling home where the
     husband     also     normally resided,  it  has    been
     consistently held that if the accused does not offer any
     explanation how the wife received injuries or offers an
     explanation which is found to be false, it is a strong
     circumstance which indicates that he is responsible
     for commission of the crime."

The dictum laid down is squarely applicable to the case on hand.

The explanation given by the appellant is inconsistent with the

evidence on record. Neither it is probable.

     48. The learned counsel for the appellant on the other

hand submitted that the evidence of Pws.2 to 4, 6 and 7 that the

door was locked from inside is not believable. He also submitted

that the possibility of a third person committing the homicide

cannot be ruled out. In the light of the evidence of Pws.2 to 4, 6

and 7 we find no merit in the submission made by the learned

DSR 3/2009 & CRL.A. 1134/2009   61

counsel for the appellant.     Regarding that aspect, in cross

examination, there was no suggestion at all.      The appellant,

when questioned under Sec.313 Crl.PC stated that the people

gathered at the spot on hearing the cry of his mother. If it is a

case of homicide by any stranger the mother of the appellant

would have been a good defence witness. The presence of the

mother of the appellant at the courtyard of the house is even

admitted by Pws.2, 3, 4 and 6. If there is any element of truth in

the defence version, the appellant would have examined his

mother. In the above circumstance we rule out the possibility of

the crime being committed by any stranger.



     49. Regarding the reliability of evidence of Pws.2 to 4, 6

and 7, the learned counsel had pointed out some discrepancies

or variations here and there in their evidence. We notice that

the place of occurrence is a village area. Pw2 was a student.

Pw3 is a carpenter. Pws.4 and 6 are house wives. Pw5 is an

electrician and Pw7 is a head load worker. When evidence in a

case is analyzed the standard of the witness is very relevant.

When witnesses are subjected to a lengthy cross examination

DSR 3/2009 & CRL.A. 1134/2009         62

there    is     very   likelihood      of   having      minor    variations,

embellishments and some minor inconsistencies in their

evidence. In our opinion, those minor variations, embellishments

and discrepancies etc are discrepancies of truth and there is

nothing to suggest that the witnesses were telling lie or that

those discrepancies are so significant enough to affect the core of the

prosecution case. Power of observation, retention and representation may

vary from person to person. There is, therefore, every natural chance for

minor variation.    On a critical scrutiny of the evidence of the above

witnesses, we find that those minor discrepancies are discrepancies of

truth and there is no reason to disbelieve them. Sometimes, witnesses may

add their own embellishments and exaggerations. The duty of the court is

to find out the nuggets of truth and not to discard the evidence as such. It is

pertinent to note that their evidence is only to the effect that when they

reached the house of the appellant on hearing explosion, the appellant was

inside the house which was bolted from inside and that when the appellant

opened the door after some time that too under threat of kick opening the

door, the victims were found injured and burnt and was in an unconscious

state. In fact, those witnesses had not implicated the appellant, except that

the appellant alone was inside the house.            The appellant has not

challenged     his   presence     inside   the   house     spoken   by    the

DSR 3/2009 & CRL.A. 1134/2009    63

witnesses. There is no case that the witnesses were anyway

motivated to depose about the presence of the appellant inside

the house.       Of course, as we discussed earlier, some

circumstances favourable to the prosecution regarding homicide

were    also   revealed     out from their  evidence.      Those

circumstances revealed out are quite natural. The finding of

homicide alone is inferable from the circumstances.

     50. The motive suggested by the prosecution is that the

appellant was badly in need of money and he had been insisting

deceased Sareena to ask more money from her father. But she

was not amenable. That is the only fault on her side that led to

the murder of Sareena and child. It is neither a sin nor anything

to provoke the appellant to commit the crime. In our opinion

Sareena was absolutely justified and correct in refusing to ask

for more money from her father. Pw8 would depose that on the

previous night at about 8 O'clock the appellant telephoned and

demanded for handing over the Fixed Deposit receipt of

Rs.10,000/- in favour of Amisha and also demanded Rs.50,000/-.

Pw8 declined the demand. Then Pw8 was threatened that he

would suffer the consequence. That conduct of the appellant

would show that he had been demanding money from Pw8, but

DSR 3/2009 & CRL.A. 1134/2009    64

Pw8 didn't heed the demand.          Thereby the appellant was

frustrated and got antagonized. The statement of the appellant

when questioned under Sec.313 Crl.PC also would show that he

had some financial difficulties and his business was a failure. On

the other hand, the evidence of Pw8 would show that after the

marriage the appellant had not gone for any good job at all.

According to the appellant, he had advanced some money to Pw8

and when he requested for return of the money advanced, Pw8

refused the same.        There is no suggestion to Pw8 in cross

examination that there was any such borrowal. The evidence of

Pw8 on the other hand would show that he was otherwise not in

need of borrowing money from the appellant. Such being the

evidence on record, the case of the prosecution that the

appellant was motivated because of the failure Sareena to get

money demanded from Pw8 is very convincing. The prosecution

had succeeded to establish the motive.

     51. The prosecution also would rely upon an extra judicial

confession of the appellant before Pw5.      We notice that the

learned Sessions Judge had not given reliance to that confession

to come to a finding of guilt. Hence we are not looking into the

merits of that confession.

DSR 3/2009 & CRL.A. 1134/2009          65

      52. For the foregoing discussions, we find that the

prosecution had succeeded to establish that it is a clear case of

homicide by the appellant. The signs of strangulation, burns and

assault which we discussed earlier would support the

prosecution case that the appellant first strangulated the victims.

When they became unconscious, they were lifted to the store

room.     Having seen signs of movement on the body of the

victims, the appellant took MO5 from the showcase and inflicted

serious blows on the head and neck of the victims. Then MO1

gas cylinder was taken to the store room, opened the regulator

and poured some kerosene, which was available in MO12 bottle, on

the face of the victims and set ablaze. As a result of the burn injuries as

well as due to the injuries inflicted with MO5, the victims had a homicidal

death. The appellant sustained superficial burning while setting ablaze the

victims. The complicity of the appellant is established beyond the shadow

of reasonable doubt. It is a clear case of murder. The learned Sessions

Judge was right in arriving at a conclusion that the appellant is guilty for

murdering Sareena and Amisha. There is nothing to interfere with the

finding of guilt and the conviction thereunder.

      53. Regarding sentence, the learned Public Prosecutor

submitted that the case on hand had heavy impact on social

DSR 3/2009 & CRL.A. 1134/2009   66

order and public interest and is a rarest of the rare case and as

awarded by the trial Court the appellant is entitled to capital

punishment.     In support of the argument the learned Public

Prosecutor had also given reliance to the decision reported in

Shivaji @ Dadya Shankar Alhat v. State of Maharashtra (AIR

2009 SC 56) which was also relied upon by the trial Court. On

the other hand, the learned counsel for the appellant submitted

that the facts of the above decision is totally different and that

the case on hand cannot be equated with that case. He also

submitted that absence of direct evidence is a mitigating

circumstance. He had relied upon the decision of the Apex Court

in Jagmohan Singh v. State of U.P. (1973 (1) SCC 20), Bachan

Singh v. State of Punjab [(1980) 2 SCC 684], Machhi Singh v.

State of Punjab [(1983) 3 SCC 470], Subash Chander v. Krishnan

Lal [(2001) 4 SCC 458], Shri Bhagwan v. State of Rajasthan

[(2001) 6 SCC 296], Ram Anup Singh v. State of Bihar [(2002) 6

SCC 686], Jayawant Dattatraya Suryarao v. State of Maharashtra

[(2001) 10 SCC 109] and Swamy Shraddananda (2) v. State of

Karnataka [(2008) 13 SCC 767] and submitted that if this Court

takes guidelines from the above decisions, the case on hand

would not come under the category of rarest of the rare case and

DSR 3/2009 & CRL.A. 1134/2009     67

submitted for converting the capital punishment to one of life

imprisonment.

     54. Facts of the case would show that it can no way be

compared with Bachan Singh's case where seventeen people

were murdered.        We notice that in Machhi Singh's case after

referring to Bachan Singh's case, the Apex Court had mentioned

about five criteria to decide the rarest of the rare case. (i)

manner of commission of murder, (ii) motive for commission of

murder, (iii) anti-social or socially abhorrent nature of the crime,

(iv) magnitude of crime, and (v) personality of victim of murder.

Going by the facts of the case we find that the first three criteria

were established by the prosecution. The other two criteria are

not established.

     55. Subash Chander's case (supra) was one of multiple

murder.     The Apex Court converted the capital sentence to life

imprisonment with a rider that the accused had to undergo

imprisonment for the rest of the life. In Shri Bhagwan's case,

five members of a family were mercilessly battered to death. In

that case the capital sentence awarded by the trial court

confirmed by the High Court was converted to imprisonment for

life with condition that he would not be released for 20 years.

DSR 3/2009 & CRL.A. 1134/2009    68

In Ram Anup Singh's case, father's brother, brother's wife, his

daughter and his son-in-law were murdered. In that case capital

sentence was reduced to imprisonment for 20 years.

     56. In Jayawant Dattatraya Suryarao's case the assailants

rushed to the J.J. Hospital in Mumbai and started indiscriminate

firing killing not only their targets but also two policemen who

were on guard duty and injuring several others. In that case

death penalty was modified to imprisonment till the rest of life.

In Swamy Shraddananda's case also the capital sentence was

reduced to imprisonment for the rest of life. We also notice that

in a recent case ie. in State of U.P. v. Krishna Master (AIR 2010

SC 3071) where six persons of a family, wiping out almost all the

members of a family were murdered on ground of saving honour

of the family.    In that case, taking note that the crime was

committed 20 years back, the capital sentence was reduced to

imprisonment for the rest of life.

     57. If we take guidance from the above decisions, though

we find that the murder alleged in this case is a heinous one, it

would not come under the category of rarest of the rare case to

confirm the sentence of death.      But we don't think that the

sentence can be reduced to the minimum because the crime was

DSR 3/2009 & CRL.A. 1134/2009        69

very brutal. There is only aggravating circumstances and no

mitigating    circumstance.          Well   groomed     Sareena    while

undergoing postgraduate degree was given in marriage to the

appellant with much ornaments, money and a car. Matrimony

was blessed with Amisha.           Though appellant squandered all

ornaments and money, Sareena remained silent and suffered.

Only fault that she had committed is that she declined to ask for

more money from her father. She was throttled first and when

she became unconscious she was brutally assaulted with MO5.

Though the injuries caused by assault with MO5 were very fatal,

before she breathing last, she was burnt.            Amisha, who was

playing with neighbouring children were called home and she

was treated alike.        Protector had become destructor.          Very

merciless murders. Even if it is assumed that Sareena might

have caused any provocation, Amisha had no way provocated.

While Amisha was playing in the neighbourhood, she was called by

the appellant. She with infantine innocence went to the beloved

father. She was too little to sense the deception. She was also subjected

to brutal murder, by three modes ie. strangulation, battering and burning.

He did all these against his wife and daughter for failure of Pw8 to pay

more dowry and Sareena declined to demand from PW8. No doubt, it is a

DSR 3/2009 & CRL.A. 1134/2009   70

rare case. According to the learned Public Prosecutor dowry

death and domestic violence in demand of dowry are alarmingly

increasing and that lighter sentence in such cases may give

wrong signal. It is also submitted that a helpless woman and

child were murdered in inhuman manner, all for dowry, probably

in order to remarry for the sake of extracting dowry once again

and in such circumstances, it is for the court to award

appropriate sentence so that it may have deterring effect upon

intended criminals. Taking into account of the heinous nature of

the crime and the brutality and also taking guidance from the

decisions referred earlier, and for reasons stated above, we find

that it would be just and appropriate to convert the capital

punishment to one for imprisonment till the rest of the life

without granting commutation or parole and also a fine of

Rs.20,00,000/- (Rupees twenty lakhs only).

     58. Though not argued, we notice a serious omission in

the Judgment as to how the sentence is to be executed. Section

354(5) Cr.P.C mandates that in the case of awarding capital

sentence the judgment shall mention that accused shall be

hanged by the neck till he is dead. That is conspicuously omitted

in the judgment.      The judgment should have been strictly in

DSR 3/2009 & CRL.A. 1134/2009   71

compliance with Section 354(5) Cr.P.C.       However, in view of

what is stated above, that omission is not relevant.

     59. Canvassing our attention to para.69 of the decision in

Swamy Shraddananda's case, it was argued by the learned

counsel for the appellant that         awarding a sentence of

imprisonment barring the right of the executive to commute

under Sec.433 Crl.PC is not permissible.        According to the

learned counsel, a writ petition (Criminal) No.36/2008 is pending

before the Apex Court. We make it clear that the above sentence

would be subject to the ruling of the Apex Court in the above

writ petition.

     60. In the result, while confirming the conviction, we

decline the confirmation of sentence of death and alter the

sentence to one of imprisonment till the rest of his life and a fine

of rupees twenty lakhs without granting commutation or parole.

In the event of default of payment of fine, the appellant shall

undergo imprisonment for a further period of five years. The

fine amount, if realised, shall be paid to Pw8 as compensation

under Section 357(1) Cr.P.C. The District Collector, Kottayam is

directed to confiscate all the movable and immovable properties

in the name of the appellant, except the car and be

DSR 3/2009 & CRL.A. 1134/2009   72

sold in public auction with notice to Pw8. The sale proceeds

shall be adjusted towards the fine amount.      The Maruti car

bearing registration No.KL 4K/1287 shall be seized and handed

over to Pw8. The sentence shall be subject to the result of the

Writ Petition No.36/2008 pending before the Supreme Court. We

also direct the State to take into account of the nature of the

crime, in the event commutation is thought of.




                                      PIUS C.KURIAKOSE,

                                             (Judge)



                                       P.S.GOPINATHAN,

                                             (Judge)

knc, kns & kvs/-


