

 IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

RPFC.No. 407 of 2007()


1. SUMITHRA.K., AGED 27 YEARS,
                      ...  Petitioner

                        Vs



1. CHANDRAN, AGED 30 YEARS,
                       ...       Respondent

                For Petitioner  :SRI.M.SASINDRAN

                For Respondent  :SRI.T.B.SHAJIMON

The Hon'ble MR. Justice M.N.KRISHNAN

 Dated :25/03/2010

 O R D E R
                     M.N. KRISHNAN, J.
                 ...........................................
                   R.P.(F.C).No.407 OF 2007
                 .............................................
            Dated this the 25th day of March, 2010.

                              O R D E R


     This revision is preferred against the order of the Family

Court, Kasaragod in M.C.No.181/2006. The family court

rejected the claim for maintenance by the wife. It is against

that decision, the revision is preferred.

     2. Heard the learned counsel for both sides. Both the

counsel had taken me through the pleadings and evidence

in the case. The unfortunate couple got married on 5.2.2004

and a child was born to them, but it died at the infancy in

2005.   The wife     would         contend that the husband       and

members of his family namely the mother-in-law and sister-

in-law were not treating her properly and they also accused

that   death of the         child occurred on account of her

negligence. It can be seen from the materials that there had

been bickering between the parties and the wife had gone

to her house.   The husband in May, 2006 issued a legal

notice asking the wife to come back and according to him,

they were living together in a rented house and without

                            : 2 :
R.P.(F.C).No.407 OF 2007

any reason,   she had   left the rented house.    The wife

promptly replied stating that they had never lived in a

rented house and the money and gold given had been

misappropriated at the instigation of the mother and sister

of the husband. It is also submitted that she had to spend

large amount for the treatment of the child. It is further

stated that the demand for dowry could not be met on

account of the poor financial circumstances.

     3. The evidence available is oath against oath.  In a

family court matter, the court has to       adopt realistic

approach    and cannot decide the question solely on

technical consideration. A young lady who had given birth

to a child and who had lost the child is now before the

court. She would depose that the child was born as a sickly

baby and survived only for nine months and died for

which large amount had to be spent for treatment.      The

husband would state in his notice that they were in a

rented house which the wife had denied. The wife would

submit that they      never reside     in a rented house.

Admittedly the mother and divorced sister are living with

                               : 3 :
R.P.(F.C).No.407 OF 2007

the husband. It is also     a common knowledge that under

such    circumstance       there    used  to     be      lot  of

misunderstandings in the family. Why should a young lady,

who had lost the child even be away from the husband, if

there are no reasons.      The husband has never attributed

any bad quality or habits on the wife which indicates that she

is not a lady of quarrelsome nature.            But she would

contend     that the life    in the    matrimonial home was

uncomfortable and there was demand for dowry.               The

husband has no case anywhere          in the evidence that the

wife is refusing to look after his mother and others. So, an

over all analysis of the evidence      would   reveal that   the

evidence    of the    wife  appears to be more probable and

reliable. Therefore accepting the same , I find that the wife

is entitled to live separately as there are sufficient reasons.

     4. Now turning to the quantum. It is submitted by the

husband that the wife is having the work of beedi rolling but

it stands not proved.     She     admits that the husband is a

labourer by profession. It is true that he has to maintain his

mother and the divorced sister. Considering the present

                             : 4 :
R.P.(F.C).No.407 OF 2007

wage set up in Kerala, a reasonable income of Rs.150-200

per day even for a manual labourer cannot be ruled out. So

taking into consideration that aspect and also the necessity

of the wife, at least a minimum amount of Rs.1,000/= has

been awarded which I grant.

     5. Therefore the revision petition is allowed. The order

of the family court rejecting maintenance is set aside and

the husband is directed to pay maintenance at the rate of

Rs.1,000/= per month to the wife payable from the date of

order.

     Disposed of accordingly.



                                  M.N. KRISHNAN, JUDGE


cl

                          : 5 :
R.P.(F.C).No.407 OF 2007


