

 IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

Tr.P(C).No. 92 of 2009()


1. SINDHU.S.,AGED 30 YEARS,
                      ...  Petitioner

                        Vs



1. BIJOY.R.NAIR,R.K.NIVAS,
                       ...       Respondent

                For Petitioner  :SRI.SANTHEEP ANKARATH

                For Respondent  :SRI.A.K.HARIDAS

The Hon'ble MR. Justice P.BHAVADASAN

 Dated :03/03/2010

 O R D E R
                        P.BHAVADASAN, J.
                   -------------------------------------
                       Tr.P.C. No.92 of 2009
                   -------------------------------------
                     Dated 3rd February 2010

                                 Order


            This is a petition filed under S.24 CPC, seeking

to have the OP pending before the Family Court, Kottayam

transferred to Family Court, Palakkad at Ottappalam.

            2. The petitioner is the respondent in OP No.124

of 2009 pending before the Family Court, Kottayam. The

said OP has been filed by the respondent herein. The

marriage between the petitioner and the respondent was

solemnized on 01.02.2004. The couple has got a four year

old child. After the marriage, they were residing at New

Delhi, which is the place of employment of the respondent.

            3. The petitioner submits, soon after the

marriage, she was treated cruelly by her husband,

demanding more dowry. Suffice to say that they began to

reside separately.      The petitioner says that she finds it

difficult to travel to Kottayam for contesting the case filed

TRPC 92/09                       2

by her husband. She submits that she is a permanent

resident of Ottappalam and presently she is doing M.Tech.

course in Coimbatore. So, it is extremely difficult for her to

come over to Kottayam along with her child, to contest the

case. She also pointed out that since the respondent is

employed outside Kerala, it does not make any difference

to him whether the matter is taken up in the Family Court,

Kottayam or Palakkad.           She therefore, prays for

transferring OP No.124 of 2009 pending before the Family

Court, Kottayam to Family Court, Palakkad at Ottappalam.

           4. The prayer of the petitioner is opposed by the

respondent.    He points out that the relatives of the

petitioner have threatened him on an earlier occasion and

therefore, he fears that he may not be able to go to

Palakkad to attend the Court. So, he prays that the OP

may be transferred to any other Family Court. In fact, the

question of jurisdiction was also raised at the time of

hearing this Petition. But, that point has to be urged before

the concerned Family Court and this Court need not

TRPC 92/09                       3

consider the said question.

            5. Since the respondent has expressed his

apprehension that it may not be possible for him to attend

the Court due to the threat meted out by the relatives of his

wife, it is only appropriate that the case may not be

transferred to Family Court, Palakkad.      But, one has to

notice the inconvenience pointed out by the petitioner also,

more so because she has got a child of four years.

            6. Considering the above aspects, it will be

convenient to both parties if the OP is transferred to Family

Court, Thrissur. In the result, this Petition is allowed and

OP No.124 of 2009 pending before the Family Court,

Kottayam shall stand transferred to Family Court, Thrissur

for trial and disposal.




                                 P.BHAVADASAN, JUDGE

sta

TRPC 92/09    4

TRPC 92/09    5


