

 IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

Crl.MC.No. 761 of 2011()


1. ALEX THOOPHINE, AGED 34 YEARS,
                      ...  Petitioner
2. ALBY, S/O. FRANCIS,
3. ANIE FRANCIS, W/O. FRANCIS,

                        Vs



1. THE SUB INSPECTOR OF POLICE,
                       ...       Respondent

2. THE STATE OF KERALA, REPRESENTED BY THE

                For Petitioner  :SMT.A.P.LALY @ LALY VINCENT

                For Respondent  : No Appearance

The Hon'ble MR. Justice THOMAS P.JOSEPH

 Dated :10/03/2011

 O R D E R
                   THOMAS P JOSEPH, J.

                  ----------------------------------------

                     Crl.M.C.No.761 of 2011

                  ---------------------------------------

                Dated this 10th day of March, 2011

                                ORDER

      Petitioners are accused in Crime No.63 of 2011 of

Varapuzha Police Station for offences punishable under Secs.323,

324, 406, 506(ii) and 498A r/w Sec.34 of the Penal Code. That

case was registered on the complaint preferred by one Jancy,

wife of first petitioner before the learned Magistrate and which

was forwarded to the police for investigation under sec.156(3) of

the Code of Criminal Procedure. Petitioners seek to quash

proceedings against them on the ground that allegations are

false. Learned counsel submitted that the whole incident arose

from mutual distrust between first petitioner and his wife and

following that there was some altercation between them on

16.10.2010 consequent to which the wife withdrew from the

company of first petitioner and later she preferred the complaint.

Learned counsel also submitted that when the first petitioner

moved this Court for anticipatory bail it was represented by the

learned Public Prosecutor that there was no intention to arrest

first petitioner. I have heard learned Public Prosecutor also.

Crl.M.C.No.761 of 2011
                                 -: 2 :-


      2.    It is seen from Annexure-D, FIR that there is an

allegation that demanding more dowry petitioners subjected the

de facto complainant to mental and physical cruelty. On

16.10.2010 the first petitioner is said to have assaulted the de

facto complainant while the second petitioner is alleged to have

threatened to stab her with knife. The third petitioner is said to

have pushed her out of the house and closed the door. There is a

further allegation that her ornaments were misappropriated and

she was criminally intimidated. Learned Public Prosecutor

submits that the matter is under investigation.

      3.    Having regard to the allegations made in the

complaint I am not inclined to think that this is a case where this

Court should quash Annexure-D, FIR. The investigation is

proceeding. It is for the investigating officer to find initially

whether allegations against petitioners or any of them are made

out. I do not find reason to interfere.

      4.    Learned counsel submitted that in view of the

submission made by learned Public Prosecutor when the

application for anticipatory bail was moved that there is no

intention to arrest the first petitioner, he did not so far move the

trial court for regular bail and he is under threat of arrest. I make

Crl.M.C.No.761 of 2011
                                 -: 3 :-


it clear that it is open to the petitioner to move the trial court and

seek regular bail and if any such application is preferred learned

Magistrate shall pass appropriate orders having regard to the

nature of allegations made.

      Resultantly without prejudice to the right if any of

petitioners to challenge the final report this petition is closed.




                                (THOMAS P JOSEPH, JUDGE)

Sbna/-


