

 IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

WP(C).No. 4148 of 2011(P)


1. K.P.AHAMMEDKUTTY, KONDOTTYPARAMBAN HOUSE
                      ...  Petitioner

                        Vs



1. STATE OF KERALA, REPRESENTED BY THE
                       ...       Respondent

2. MIDLAJ K., KAPPIL HOUSE, WANDOOR AMSOM

3. MUHAMMED ABDULLA, KAPPIL HOUSE,

4. SUB INSPECTOR OF POLICE, WANDOOR

5. DEPUTY SUPERINTENDENT OF POLICE,

6. CENTRAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION,

                For Petitioner  :SRI.T.R.RAVI

                For Respondent  :GOVERNMENT PLEADER

The Hon'ble MR. Justice THOMAS P.JOSEPH

 Dated :23/03/2011

 O R D E R
                   THOMAS P JOSEPH, J.

                  ----------------------------------------

                    W.P(C).No.4148 of 2011

                  ---------------------------------------

               Dated this 23rd day of March, 2011

                            JUDGMENT

      Petitioner's daughter, Amina Mumtaz married to the second

respondent, according to the prosecution attempted to commit

suicide on 03.08.2007 between 8-8.45a.m at the matrimonial

home and while undergoing treatment at MIMS Hospital,

Kozhikode she succumbed to the injuries after about two months.

It is said, she remained unconscious throughout. Wandoor police

registered Crime No.223 of 2007 for offence punishable under

Sec.498A r/w Sec.34 of the Indian Penal Code against respondent

Nos.2 and 3, husband and his father and the wife of the third

respondent alleging that they ill-treated the deceased demanding

gold and money, third respondent misbehaved with the deceased

and on account of that she committed suicide. On the police

submitting final report learned Judicial First Class Magistrate-II,

Perinthalmanna took cognizance for the said offence and issued

process to respondent Nos.2 and 3 and wife of respondent No.3

in C.C.No.914 of 2008. While so, prosecution prayed to the

learned Magistrate that offence under Sec.304B of the Penal

Code also may be incorporated in the charge to be framed

W.P(C).No.4148 of 2011
                                 -: 2 :-


against respondent Nos.2 and 3 and wife of the third respondent.

Learned Magistrate rejected that prayer by Ext.P8, order

observing that there is no material to show that there was any

demand for dowry as defined in the Dowry Prohibition Act

immediately before death. Petitioner has filed this writ petition

seeking direction to respondent Nos.1 and 5 to conduct fresh

investigation into the case or to entrust the case to the Central

Bureau of Investigation (for short, "the CBI") for investigation.

Learned counsel submits that there are telling circumstances

which require a further investigation in the matter. One Mammad

Master whom the deceased (is said to have) called over telephone

immediately before the incident to state that she was assaulted

by respondent Nos.2 and 3 was not questioned. Though, in the

final report it is stated that petitioner, his brother Hamza, Ramla

and the said Mammad Master were questioned by the police and

their statements recorded, those persons were not questioned.

The elder child of the deceased and second respondent when

interviewed by a local TV channel immediately after the incident

had stated that he had seen respondent Nos.2 and 3 hanging the

deceased using a rope used to tie cradle, but that aspect of the

matter was not investigated. The ligature was not subjected to

forensic examination to find whether there were more stretch

W.P(C).No.4148 of 2011
                                 -: 3 :-


marks on the said ligature as would be seen if the ligature was

used by persons other than the deceased in the course of

committing suicide. It is also pointed out by learned counsel that

though pointing out these aspects petitioner had preferred a

petition to the Dy.S.P, Perinthalmanna on 13.05.2008 nothing

was done on that petition. Learned Public Prosecutor has

opposed the application contending that the case is posted for

evidence. My attention is also drawn to the statement filed by the

Sub Inspector, Wandoor who conducted the investigation where

he has stated about the steps taken in the investigation. In that

statement it is stated that on receipt of Ext.P4, the Dy.S.P,

Perinthalmanna verified progress of investigation and was

satisfied that investigation was conducted in the proper manner.

It is thereafter that final report was submitted to the learned

Magistrate, Pathanamthitta on 21.01.2008. It is claimed that

investigation has been conducted in a proper and fair manner.

      2.    I have gone through the relevant records in the CD

file given to me for perusal by the learned Public Prosecutor. I

find   that  the     investigating    officer has questioned  one

Santhakumar, a Psychiatrist who stated that the deceased had

been brought to him for treatment for some time back for

depression. The witness gave the opinion that such persons will

W.P(C).No.4148 of 2011
                                -: 4 :-


have a tendency to commit suicide.

      3.    Immediately after the incident, the deceased was

taken to NIMS Hospital, Wandoor and the medical officer there

referred the deceased to Korambayil Hospital where a wound

certificate of the deceased was prepared. Therefrom the

deceased was taken to MIMS hospital, Kozhikode where she lay

unconscious for about two months and died. The Senior Lecturer

in Forensic Medicine who conducted postmortem examination

opined that death was due to the delayed effects of hanging. I

have gone through the statement of the medical officer who

conducted the postmortem examination. I have also gone through

the statement of the medical officer who attended the deceased

at Korambayil Hospital. He referred to the injuries found on the

body of the deceased but was not able to say (then) whether it is

a case of suicide or homicide.

      4.    On going through the statement of the Senior

Lecturer in Forensic Medicine who conducted postmortem

examination it does not appear that he was interrogated to rule

out possibility of a homicide. Nothing is seen stated by the

medical officer who conducted the postmortem examination as to

whether it is a case of suicide or homicide. He merely stated that

death was due to the delayed effects of hanging. How the

W.P(C).No.4148 of 2011
                                 -: 5 :-


hanging occurred, is the question.

      5.    I must also take note of the contention of petitioner

that himself, Mammad Master and others were not questioned

but, I am not going into the question whether the said allegation

is correct or not. It is seen that on 13.05.2008 petitioner, airing

his suspicion regarding cause of death made a representation to

the Dy.S.P, Perinthalmanna. In such a situation it was only

appropriate that the investigation was conducted by an officer

senior in rank to the Sub Inspector so that the suspicious

circumstances if any could have been cleared. Having regard to

the circumstances which I have stated above, I am inclined to

think that investigation has to be conducted by a senior officer

than the Sub Inspector.

      6.    I have not issued notice to respondent Nos.2 and 3

since in the matter of ordering further investigation it is not

necessary to hear them.

      Resultantly this petition is allowed in the following lines:

                (i)   It   is   directed    that    further

         investigation of the case shall be conducted by a

         police officer senior to the rank of Sub Inspector

         having jurisdiction of the area were the alleged

         incident occurred.

W.P(C).No.4148 of 2011
                                  -: 6 :-


                (ii)  That officer shall conduct further

         investigation taking into account the grievance

         of petitioner and the circumstances stated above

         and untrammelled by the observation if any his

         predecessor-in-office or superior officer has

         drawn from the investigation already conducted

         by the Sub Inspector.

                (iii)   The Superintendent of Police,

         Malappuram shall issue necessary orders in the

         above lines within a week from the date of

         receipt of a copy of this judgment.

                (iv)  Petitioner shall make available a

         copy of the judgment to the Superintendent of

         Police, Malappuram.

                (v)   It follows that trial of C.C.No.914 of

         2008 before the learned Judicial First Class

         Magistrate-II,    Perinthalamanna       will stand

         adjourned until submission of further report

         under Sec.173(8) of the Code of Criminal

         Procedure.



                               (THOMAS P JOSEPH, JUDGE)

Sbna/-


