

 IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

Bail Appl..No. 5171 of 2011()


1. MOIDU,55 YEARS,ARUNGODAN HOUSE,
                      ...  Petitioner

                        Vs



1. STATE OF KERALA,
                       ...       Respondent

2. SUB INSPECTOR OF POLICE,

                For Petitioner  :SRI.K.ABDUL JAWAD

                For Respondent  : No Appearance

The Hon'ble MR. Justice K.T.SANKARAN

 Dated :05/07/2011

 O R D E R
                          K.T.SANKARAN, J.
              ---------------------------------------------------
                      B.A. NO. 5171 OF 2011
              ---------------------------------------------------
              Dated this the 5th day of July, 2011


                             O R D E R


      This is an application for anticipatory bail under Section 438 of

the Code of Criminal Procedure. The petitioner is the accused in

Crime No.110 of 2011 of Vellamunda Police Station, Kannur District.



      2.   The offences alleged against the petitioner are under

Sections 498A and 308 of the Indian Penal Code. The defacto

complainant is the wife of the petitioner.



      3. The prosecution case is that on 23.4.2011, the petitioner

assaulted the defacto complainant with an iron rod. It is also alleged

in the First Information Statement given by the daughter of the

defacto complainant that the accused used to harass the defacto

complainant demanding more dowry.                   The First Information

Statement was given by the daughter of the defacto complainant

stating that the defacto complainant was lying unconscious. The

First Information Statement was recorded on 24.4.2011.              In the

accident register-cum-wound certificate, the            defacto complainant

B.A. NO. 5171 OF 2011

                                      :: 2 ::

stated that she was assaulted by her husband with a torch. The police

recorded the statement of the defacto complainant later, which, to a

great extent, differs from the statements in the First Information

Statement.



      4. The learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the

brother of the defacto complainant, namely, Ibrahim Moulavi, was

arrested by the National Investigating Agency on the allegation that he

had connection with Lashkar-e-Toiba, a terrorist organisation. It is

stated that Ibrahim Moulavi is in judicial custody. In connection with

that case, the petitioner was also questioned by the police. He stated

about the activities of his brother-in-law, Ibrahim Moulavi, and that of

Ayoob, the son-in-law of the petitioner. Ayoob is a co-accused in that

case. It is stated that Ayoob is absconding. Ayoob is the husband of

Fousiya, who gave the First Information Statement in the present

case. The counsel for the petitioner submitted that on the ground that

the petitioner disclosed the complicity of his brother-in-law and son-in-

law in anti national activities, the present case is foisted against him.



      5. Taking into account the facts and circumstances of the case,

the nature of the offence, the injury sustained and other

B.A. NO. 5171 OF 2011

                                      :: 3 ::

circumstances, I am of the view that anticipatory bail can be granted to

the petitioner. There will be a direction that in the event of the arrest

of the petitioner, the officer in charge of the police station shall release

him on bail for a period of one month on his executing bond for

Rupees Ten thousand with two solvent sureties for the like amount to

the satisfaction of the officer concerned, subject to the following

conditions:


       a)     The petitioner shall appear before the investigating officer
              for interrogation as and when required;

       b)     The petitioner shall not try to influence the prosecution
              witnesses or tamper with the evidence;

       c)     The petitioner shall not commit any offence or indulge in
              any prejudicial activity while on bail;

       d)     Before the expiry of the period mentioned above, the
              petitioner    shall  surrender    before    the   Magistrate
              concerned and seek regular bail.

       e)     In case of breach of any of the conditions mentioned
              above, the bail shall be liable to be cancelled.


      The Bail Application is allowed to the extent indicated above.




                                                       (K.T.SANKARAN)
                                                               Judge
ahz/


