
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                   PRESENT :

       THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE R.BASANT
                     &
       THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE K.SURENDRA MOHAN

   TUESDAY, THE 6TH SEPTEMBER 2011 / 15TH BHADRA 1933

               WP(C).No. 28433 of 2010(R)
               --------------------------
OP.1603/2009 of FAMILY COURT,THRISSUR
               ....................


PETITIONER(S):
---------------

      ISMAYIL,
      AGED 59 YEARS, S/O.KUNJALI,
      PUTHIYAVEETTIL HOUSE, P.O.THRITHALLUR,
      POKKANCHERRY, THRISSUR DISTRICT.

   BY ADV. SRI.T.H.ABDUL AZEEZ


RESPONDENT(S):
---------------

   1. FATHIMA, W/O.ISMAYIL,
      PUTHIYAVEETTIL, VADANAPPILLY P.O.,
      VADANAPPILLY BEACH, CHAVAKKAD TALUK,
      THRISSUR DISTRICT.

   2. SHAFNA, D/O.ISMAYIL,
      PUTHIYAVEETTIL, VADANAPPILLY P.O.,
      VADANAPPILLY BEACH, CHAVAKKAD TALUK,
      THRISSUR DISTRICT.

    ADV. SRI.P.RAMAKRISHNAN FOR R1,2
       SRI.M.P.M.ASLAM,AMI.CURIAE

THIS WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD
ON 06/09/2011, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY DELIVERED THE
FOLLOWING:

PETITIONER'S EXHIBITS:


EXT.P1 - TRUE COPY OF THE O.P. FILED BY THE RESPONDENTS BEFORE THE FAMILY
COURT, THRISSUR.

EXT.P2 - TRUE COPY OF THE I.A. BEFORE THE FAMILY COURT, THRISSUR FILED BY THE
PETITIONERS.

EXT.P3 - TRUE COPY OF THE OBJECTION IN I.A.2124/10 IN O.P.1603/09.

EXT.P4 - TRUE COPY OF THE ORDER DATED 3/7/2010 IN I.A.NO.2124/10 IN O.P. NO.1603/09
PASSED BY THE FAMILY COURT, THRISSUR.




                                   //true copy//     P.S. to Judge


                           R. BASANT &
                   K. SURENDRA MOHAN, JJ.
             -------------------------------------------------
                 W.P.(c) No.28433 of 2010-R
             -------------------------------------------------
          Dated this the 6th day of September, 2011

                            JUDGMENT

Basant,J.


      How is the concept of maintenance to an unmarried adult

daughter to be understood?        Does that conceptually include the

obligation to meet the marriage expenses of an adult daughter?

Is the concept of maintenance payable by a Muslim father to his

adult daughter to be understood differently?               These are the

questions that arise for consideration in this writ petition.

     2.    Reference to the essential factual matrix may be

relevant.   The husband/father is the petitioner.             His wife and

daughter had filed O.P.No.1603/09 before the                Family Court,

Thrissur, claiming past and future maintenance to them as also

the prospective marriage expenses of the daughter. This petition

was filed under Sec.7 of the Family Courts Act.             An amount of

`1,20,000/- towards past maintenance and maintenance at the

rate of `3,000/- per mensem for each towards future maintenance

as also an amount of `10,00,000/- as prospective marriage

expenses of the adult major daughter aged 21 years were

claimed.

W.P.(c) No.28433 of 2010 -: 2 :-

      3.  Along with the said O.P. an application was filed for

attachment of 50 cents of property belonging to the writ

petitioner.    That petition was allowed and attachment was

effected. An application was filed by the petitioner for lifting the

attachment. By the impugned order, the learned Judge rejected

the application for lifting the attachment.

      4. The petitioner claims to be aggrieved by the impugned

order.    Various contentions are raised.     Inter alia, the crucial

contention is raised that the Muslim father has no obligation to

meet the marriage expenses of his adult daughter.        The liability

to maintain her does not include the liability to meet the marriage

expenses.    Whatever may be the liability of fathers similarly

situated belonging to other religious denominations, the Muslim

father has no such legal liability, contends the learned counsel for

the petitioner.  It is hence prayed that the impugned order may

be set aside and the application for attachment may be rejected.

      5. We found the question raised to be interesting.         We

requested the counsel to advance detailed arguments.          We felt

persuaded to seek the assistance of Sri.M.P.M. Aslam as amicus

curiae.  We must acknowledge the able services rendered by

Sri.M.P.M. Aslam as amicus curiae to this Court.

W.P.(c) No.28433 of 2010 -: 3 :-

      6. The learned amicus curiae first of all submits that it is not

necessary to consider the claim for marriage expenses of the

daughter as an incident of the right of maintenance. The learned

counsel accepts that the Muslim father in the Indian context

undoubtedly has the moral obligation to ensure that his daughter

is married and to meet expenses for such marriage. Sri. Aslam

argues that it is not necessary to treat this as an incident of the

right of maintenance of the daughter. It is enough if the same is

considered as an obligation imposed by custom or usage.           Sri.

Aslam argues that if such an approach is made, it will be

unnecessary to refer to the provisions of the Muslim Personal Law

(Shariat) Application Act 1937, to justify such a direction for

payment of marriage expenses.      According to Sri. Aslam, under

Sec.2 of the Muslim Personal Law (Shariat) Application Act , the

Personal Law of Muslims is made applicable only in respect of

certain specified matters.   Maintenance is one such matter.        If

the right to claim marriage expenses is reckoned as an incident of

the right to maintenance, the direction to pay the same will have

to be justified under the Muslim Personal Law.     Otherwise, if the

claim is reckoned as one based on custom or usage, there shall

be no obligation to justify the direction for payment of marriage

W.P.(c) No.28433 of 2010 -: 4 :-

expenses under the Muslim Personal Law (Shariat) .

     7.   We extract Sec.2 of the Muslim Personal Law (Shariat)

Application Act below:

                "2. Application of Personal Law to

           Muslims.-- Notwithstanding any customs or

           usage to the contrary, in all questions (save

           questions relating to agricultural land)

           regarding   intestate  succession,    special

           property of females, including personal

           property   inherited  or   obtained    under

           contract or gift or any other provision of

           Peraonal Law, marriage, dissolution of

           marriage, including   talaq, ila zihar, lian,

           khula and mubaraat, maintenance, dower,

           guardianship,   gifts,  trusts   and    trust

           properties, and wakfs (other than charities

           and charitable institutions and charitable

           and religious endowments) the rule of

           decision in cases where the parties are

           Muslims shall be the Muslim Personal Law

           (Shariat)."

                                 (emphasis supplied)



     8. There is no plea founded on custom or usage in the facts

and circumstances of this case. We are hence of the opinion that

W.P.(c) No.28433 of 2010 -: 5 :-

our burden to tackle the issue squarely under the personal law

relating to maintenance cannot be skirted or avoided by resort to

the course suggested by Sri. Aslam. Whether a direction to pay

the marriage expenses of the daughter can be justified on the

basis of the custom or usage does not hence fall             for

consideration before us in this petition. Moreover, if payment of

such expenses would fall within the sweep of the expression

'maintenance' for other communities, for the Muslim community

alone a different meaning cannot be assigned.    We shall hence

try to ascertain whether such marriage expenses is included in

the concept of maintenance under the personal law.

      9. There is no semblance of doubt on the question that the

Muslim father has the obligation to pay maintenance to his

unmarried adult daughter. The text by Mulla under the heading

"Maintenance" in paragraphs-369 and 370 which we extract

below makes the position crystal clear:

                "369.      Maintenance      defined.--

           "Maintenance" in this Chapter includes

           food, raiment and lodging.

                370.     Maintenane of children and

           grandchildren.-- (1)  A father is bound to

           maintain his sons until they have attained

W.P.(c) No.28433 of 2010 -: 6 :-

          the age of puberty.      He is also bound to

          maintain his daughters until they are

          married.    But he is not bound to maintain

          his adult sons unless they are disabled by

          infirmity or disease.      The fact that the

          children are in the custody of their mother

          during their infancy (s.352) does not relieve

          the   father    from    the    obligation   of

          maintaining them (a). But the father is not

          bound to maintain a child who is capable of

          being maintained out of his or her own

          property.


               (2) If the father is poor, and incapable

          of earning by his own labour, the mother, if

          she is in easy circumstances, is bound to

          maintain her children as the father would

          be.


               (3) If the father is poor and infirm, and

          the mother also is poor, the obligation to

          maintain     the   children    lies  on    the

          grandfather,    provided    he   is  in  easy

          circumstances."

                                 (emphasis supplied)



A Muslim father is hence undoubtedly liable under his personal

W.P.(c) No.28433 of 2010 -: 7 :-

law to pay maintenance to his unmarried daughter - whether

major or minor.

      10.   The    crucial question     is  whether    the  right  for

maintenance includes the right to claim marriage expenses. That

is the question which we will have to squarely tackle now.

      11. 'Maintenance', it has repeatedly been held, includes

food, raiment and lodging.      Mulla in Sec.369 accepts the same.

It is an inclusive explanation of the concept. It is not exhaustive.

It is only indicative.  Other liabilities are also included within the

sweep of the concept of maintenance. Courts had occasion to

consider whether medical expenses, educational expenses etc.,

can also go into and constitute the concept of maintenance.         In

this context three decisions of the Gauhati, Sind and Calcutta

High Courts appear to be relevant.       In Ahmadellah v. Mafizuddin

Ahmad       (AIR 1973 Gauhati          56); Tekchand Partabrai v.

Kalavantibai [(28) AIR 1941 Sind 214] and Purnasashi Devi v.

Nagendra Nath (AIR (37) 1950 Calcutta 465) the courts have

realised the need to take within the wings of the right of

maintenance not only food, raiment and lodging but also all other

necessary expenses for the mental and physical wellbeing of the

recipient. In this is included all expenses for complete discharge

W.P.(c) No.28433 of 2010 -: 8 :-

of the duty of the obligee to the claimant. That duty arises from

the responsibility of the obligee as father and the need of the

person claiming the right.

      12. What we intend to emphasise is only that the obligation

of the Muslim father to maintain his unmarried daughter whether

major or minor must be understood realistically. It must include

all expenses for the complete discharge of the duty of the father

to the daughter. It must and does include all necessary expenses

for the physical and mental well being of the child.

      13. The question is whether such obligation would include

the obligation to meet the marriage expenses of the daughter.

So far as the Hindu father is concerned, there can be not a trace

of doubt as Sec.3(b) of the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act,

1956 which obliges the father to maintain his unmarried daughter

specifically includes the right of the claimant for marriage

expenses. We extract Sec.3(b) below:

                 "3. Definitions.-- In this Act, unless

           the context otherwise requires,--


                 (a)  x x x x x


                 (b)  "Maintenance" includes--

W.P.(c) No.28433 of 2010 -: 9 :-

                (i) in all cases, provision for food,

           clothing, residence, education and medical

           attendance and treatment.

                (ii) in the case of an unmarried

           daughter, also the reasonable expenses of

           an incident to her marriage."



     14. A Bench of five Judges of this Court in Mathew Varghese

v. Rosamma Varghese (2003 (3) KLT 6) had occasion to consider

whether even in the absence of a contract, principle of personal

law or a specific statutory stipulation, the parent/father has the

duty to maintain his child. Drawing inspiration from Art.21 of the

Constitution, it has been held in paragraph-86 of the said

judgment    that   every   father  whatever    be    his  religious

denomination and faith has the indisputable liability to maintain

his child.   That question was considered in the light of the

duty/obligation of a Christian father to maintain his minor child.

That decision does not specifically consider whether the

obligation to maintain would include the obligation to give the

daughter in marriage and to meet the consequent marriage

expenses. We have referred to the said decision only to point out

that if the concept of maintenance would include the marriage

W.P.(c) No.28433 of 2010 -: 10 :-

expenses of the daughter then absence of a stipulation in the

Personal Law obliging payment of such expenses (maintenance) is

no reason for a father to avoid the liability to meet expenses in

connection with the marriage of his daughter.          If there is no

contract,  legal principle, personal law stipulation or statutory

prescription the right to maintenance of the daughter can be held

to flow from the fountain stream of the all encompassing

fundamental right to life guaranteed under Art.21 of the

Constitution, the mother law.    Mathew Varghese (supra) makes

the position crystal clear.

      15. Law cannot be far removed from life and therefore it

will be necessary to understand the right/obligation to maintain a

daughter in the light of the existing situation in the Indian society.

We may hasten to observe that we are only trying to find out

whether expenses relating to marriage are necessary expenses

for the mental and physical well being of the claimant/unmarried

daughter.    In the present level of emancipation of the Indian

woman it is impossible to accept that an unmarried daughter can

fend for herself and enter into matrimony without the support and

patronage of her father/parent. Even if she is able to choose a

bridegroom for herself, it is common knowledge that marriage

W.P.(c) No.28433 of 2010 -: 11 :-

expenses are met by the father.       All fathers  to whichsoever

religious denomination he may belong, does certainly perceive

the responsibility in the Indian society of the present day to give

his daughter in marriage when she attains the age of marriage.

What we intend to note is that consistent with the mandate of

Art.21 of the Constitution as accepted by the Full Bench in

Mathew Varghese (supra), maintenance is the right of the child.

Such maintenance does and must include all expenses for the

mental and physical well being of the child and so far as the

unmarried daughter is concerned her marriage is also something

essential and necessary for the mental and physical well being of

the child.  Therefore, we feel that the right to marriage expenses

can certainly be included in the concept of maintenance which a

father is liable to provide for his unmarried daughter.     We do

promptly note that the entitlement is only for reasonable amount

and is available to only an unmarried daughter who does not have

means of her own to meet the marriage expenses. Such right is

only against the father who has the requisite means.

      16. This right/obligation to maintenance has to be

understood in the Indian context today.      Law must resonate to

the frequency and wave length of the times.        The concept of

W.P.(c) No.28433 of 2010 -: 12 :-

maintenance has to be understood in the Indian context of today.

The practice of a bygone age when girls were never sent to

school cannot persuade the court to hold that girls are not

entitled to educational expenses as part of maintenance.

Similarly, the concept of the right to maintenance in the present

day in the Indian society cannot be attempted to be understood

and interpreted under conditions that prevailed in medieval

Arabia.     Islam's is a merrage to the whole universe.       The

revelations made by the Lord though the prophet must have

relevance at all times and in every part of the universe. Whether

the father in Saudi Arabia during ancient periods had the

obligation to meet the marriage expenses of his daughter is

irrelevant.   Maintain his unmarried daughter, the Muslim father

must, in response to his duty under the personal law. As to what

would be the constituents of maintenance payable - at a given

point of time in history and at a given geographical point, has to

be understood realistically consistent with the norms and

moorings of the society in the given situation.

      17.   There is not one precedent under Sec.125 of the Code

of Criminal Procedure or its predecessor provisions which lays

down that marriage expenses are included in the right of

W.P.(c) No.28433 of 2010 -: 13 :-

maintenance under that provision, it is argued.      We find no

merit in this argument at all. Maintenance under Sec.125 Cr.P.C.

is available only for minor children. Ordinarily (unless they are

disabled/debilitated) only a minor child         is entitled for

maintenance. Under Sec.125(c) Cr.P.C., only such adult children

who, by reason of any physical or mental abnormality or injury,

are unable to maintain themselves are entitled for maintenance

under Sec.125 Cr.P.C.

     18. Under the Child Marriage Restraint Act, a minor child

cannot    get   married  in   accordance  with  law.   Therefore,

maintenance under Sec.125 Cr.P.C. cannot and should not include

the marriage expenses as the right can arise only after a person

attains marriageable age by which time the child would have

walked out    of the province of Sec.125 Cr.P.C.     Absence of

precedents under Sec.125 cannot, in these circumstances, afford

any help. No specific precedent contra is brought to our notice

also.

     19. The above discussions lead us to the conclusion that it

would be absolutely safe to include marriage expenses also within

the sweep of the concept of maintenance of an adult unmarried

daughter.

W.P.(c) No.28433 of 2010 -: 14 :-

      20.    We are further of the opinion that the concept of

maintenance though claimed under the respective Personal Law

must yield to an uniform and common understanding of the

concept. Conceptually maintenance cannot mean different things

to the followers of different religions. In the secular republic of

India unless there are compelling reasons the concept of

maintenance has to be understood identically in its operation in

relation to all communities and religions. The concept of equality

and equal protection before law must also persuade us to give

uniform and common meaning and interpretation to the

expression maintenance under different Personal Laws.      This is

the mandate to us under Art.44 of the Constitution.

      21.   It would be idle to assume that Chapter IV of the

Constitution speaks only to the executive and the legislature. Its

command is addressed to all functionaries of the State.        The

judiciary is not an exception to that command.    When attempts

are made by courts to understand concepts by resort to the

power of interpretation/adjudication, it is essential that the

mandate under Article 44 - of uniform Personal Law for all

sections of the community, is borne in mind and given effect to

by the interpreter/adjudicator. Wherever there is elbow room

W.P.(c) No.28433 of 2010 -: 15 :-

available to a court, the court must and can only interpret the law

in such a manner that the concept shall carry identical meaning

and content to all sections of persons in the secular republic.

     22. Sec.3(b) of the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act

which we have already extracted above clearly indicates the

Parliament's understanding of the concept of maintenance, in its

application to the Hindus.      The Hindu father and the Muslim

father do both live in the same society with identical duties and

obligations in the moral plane to his children. Under Art.21 of the

Constitution as explained by Mathew Varghese (supra), they have

identical  constitutional  obligations    to  their  children  also.

Personal law obliges all fathers to maintain their unmarried

daughters. We deem it unnecessary to interpretationally exempt

the Muslim father from his responsibility to maintain his

unmarried daughters. We deem it only proper and appropriate to

include in that obligation, the obligation to meet the marriage

expenses of his unmarried daughter.

     23. We requested Advocate Sri.M.P.M. Aslam to enlighten us

as to whether there is any text, commentary or precedents which

can throw light on this specific aspect.      The learned counsel

Sri.M.P.M. Aslam submits that in this context it will only be proper

W.P.(c) No.28433 of 2010 -: 16 :-

and necessary to understand the distinction in the moral/legal

obligation of a Muslim father in contra distinction to that of a

Hindu father.    The learned counsel contends that there is no

concept of dowry/sthreedhana in a Muslim marriage. There is no

obligation for the father to pay any dowry or sthreedhana to his

daughter.    Under the Muslim law dower is to be paid by the

bridegroom to the bride.   Even the marriage feast (walima) is to

be performed by the bridegroom and not by the bride's father. In

these circumstances, there is no specific assistance available

from the Quran, other subsidiary sources of Muslim law or from

texts or precedents throwing specific light on this aspect, submits

the learned counsel.

     24. Dowry is an abuse which has been inherited by the

Indian society for various historical reasons.   The Hindu father

also does not have the obligation to pay dowry.      The prevalent

abuse of payment of dowry is not certainly the foundation of the

legal obligation to meet the marriage expenses of the daughter

under Sec.2(b) of the Hindu Adoption and Maintenance Act. The

abuse of dowry is prevalent both in the Hindu and in the Muslim

communities.    The fact that the Muslim father has no obligation

to pay any dowry/sthreedhana under law and he (ie. his daughter)

W.P.(c) No.28433 of 2010 -: 17 :-

is entitled to receive dower from the bridegroom cannot,

according to us, make any difference in our approach to the

concept of maintenance for the Hindus and Muslims.      They both

live in the same society with identical abuses and advantages.

The mere fact that the marriage conceptually is an indissoluble

sacrament under the Hindu Law; whereas it is only a solemn

contract under the Muslim law cannot in any way affect the

obligation for maintenance of the unmarried daughter so far as

the Muslim father is concerned.

      25.   The learned counsel Sri.M.P.M. Aslam submits that

indirectly the Quran in two places makes declarations which may

be helpful to us in the resolution of the controversy. The learned

counsel, after elaborate reference to the relevant verses of the

holy Quran, submits that there is no specific stipulation in the

Quran either way about the obligation of the father to meet the

marriage expenses of his unmarried daughter.          The learned

counsel draws our attention to Sura xxiv Ayat 32 of the Quran

and submits that the responsibility is imposed on every religious

Muslim to ensure that those who are single are married. There is

a declaration that those who are single must get married. This is

the command not only to the ones who are to get married; it is a

W.P.(c) No.28433 of 2010 -: 18 :-

declaration of a moral principle that    all those who are single

should be given in marriage. We extract Sura xxiv Ayat 32 below

as translated by Yusuf Ali.    This verse indirectly declares the

obligation of all to ensure that persons who are single are

married.   This can be reckoned as a command to the father to

ensure that his unmarried daughter enters matrimony, points out

the counsel:

                     "32. Marry those among you

                     Who are single, or

                     The virtuous ones among

                     Your slaves, male or female:

                     If they are in poverty,

                     God will give them

                     Means out of His grace:

                     For God encompasseth all,

                     And He knoweth all things."

     26. The learned counsel Sri.M.P.M. Aslam then points out

that Sura iv Ayat 34 which also, according to the learned counsel,

though only indirectly, declares the obligation of men to maintain

women. Men who are protectors and maintainers of woman are

bound to ensure that all acts for the physical, mental and moral

requirements of women under their charge are discharged. That

is the conduct expected from a Muslim under the holy Quran,

W.P.(c) No.28433 of 2010 -: 19 :-

submits counsel. We extract below Sura iv Ayat 34 (first part):

                      "34. Men are the protectors

                      And maintainers of women,

                      Because God has given

                      The one more (strength)

                      Than the other, and because

                      They support them

                      From their means.

                      Therefore the righteous women

                      Are devoutly obedient, and guard

                      In (the husband's) absence

                      What God would have them guard."



All counsel accept and we ourselves are unable to trace any

specific relevant verses in the Quran which throw light on this

aspect.

     27. Sri. M.P.M. Aslam relying on the various texts and

commentaries points out, and there is no dispute on that, that it is

the responsibility/duty/obligation of the Muslim father to act as

Wilayat (guardian in marriage) of his unmarried daughter.

Even when a woman has attained puberty/majority she needs the

help and assistance of her father to formally enter matrimony.

The father must function as guardian      on her behalf in such

W.P.(c) No.28433 of 2010 -: 20 :-

marriage to enable his daughter to enter into the contract of

marriage. This paramount responsibility of the father as guardian

at the time of marriage of his daughter must necessarily bring

with it the corresponding obligation to ensure that all necessary

expenses in connection with the marriage are met by him, points

out the counsel.

      28. We are of the opinion that the above stipulations in the

Personal Law, though they do not afford direct assistance to us on

this controversy, can also be relied on to reach the conclusion that

the Muslim father has the indisputable obligation to maintain his

unmarried daughter.     We find it safe to proceed to further hold

that he has the obligation to ensure that the unmarried daughter

under his charge is given away in marriage properly. He hence

has, we hold, the legal obligation to meet the reasonable

marriage expenses of his daughter, as part of his obligation to pay

maintenance to her.

      29.  Though not assisted by any specific precedent on this

aspect, Sri. Aslam has traced a decision of the Kerala High Court

in which the court recognizes the responsibility of the father to

give his daughter in marriage and to claim necessary exemption

from the provisions of the Gift Tax Act for the amounts so spent

W.P.(c) No.28433 of 2010 -: 21 :-

by him. A Division Bench of this Court headed by Mr. Justice C.N.

Ramachandran Nair has taken the view in Meeran v. Dy.

Commissioner of Income Tax (2010 (1) KLT 553) that the Muslim

father is also entitled to claim exemption from the gift tax for gifts

made by him on the occasion of the marriage of his daughter.

The crucially relevant observations though only of indirect

assistance appear in paragraph-3 of the said judgment which we

extract below:

            "In our view, it is the desire of every father,

            whether he is member of the Hindu

            community or Muslim community, to have

            his daughter married in the best manner

            possible and naturally people look persons

            for marrying their daughters who hold the

            same status, position etc., in the society as

            they have.    Even though under Muslim law

            marriage is a contract, no one can expect a

            grown up girl to go and negotiate and enter

            into contract for marriage by herself.     It is

            common knowledge that like member of

            any other community it is the father and the

            family members who arrange the marriage

            for the girl, no matter the Muslim marriage

            is treated as a contract. We are, therefore,

            unable to agree with the view expressed by

W.P.(c) No.28433 of 2010 -: 22 :-

           the Madras High Court that since Muslim

           marriage is a contract, father is not obliged

           to give any gift at the time of marriage and

           so much so, gift given by Muslim father at

           the time of marriage of his daughter is not

           comparable with the gift given by a Hindu

           father because under Hindu law, it is the

           obligation of the father to maintain his

           daughter which includes giving her in

           marriage."



      28. The above discussions lead us to the conclusion that the

right/obligation to maintain the unmarried daughter includes the

right/obligation to meet the marriage expenses of the unmarried

daughters. This is so for all fathers - be they Hindus, Muslims,

Christians or others. We adopt the following process of reasoning

to reach that conclusion.    They all have the duty under their

personal   law to maintain their children.     Even ignoring the

personal law, as declared in Mathew Varghese (supra), such a

right/duty can be spelt out from Article 21 of the Constitution.

Duty to maintain is not limited to provide for food, raiment and

lodging. It includes the duty of the obligee to do all acts for the

physical, mental and moral well being of the child. That duty has

W.P.(c) No.28433 of 2010 -: 23 :-

to be understood in the context of the Indian society in the

modern constitutional republic. The concept has to be understood

identically for persons belonging to all religious faiths in the

secular polity. Where the interpretor has elbow room, he must

invoke the power of interpretation as a functionary of the State

consistent with the mandate of Article 44 of the Constitution. The

interpretor need not wait for the Parliament to enact a uniform

civil code. Till that is done by the Parliament, the interpretor as a

functionary of the State must draw inspiration from Article 44 of

the Constitution in performing the duty/power of interpretation. So

reckoned the duty to maintain the unmarried daughters under the

personal law must in the present day Indian context include the

obligation to meet the marriage expenses of the unmarried

daughters. For all members of the Indian polity, this has to apply.

The Muslim father also, we hence hold, has the obligation to

pay/meet the marriage expenses of his unmarried daughter. We

must hasten to observe that the right/duty is only to meet the

reasonable expenses, that too only when the daughter is

dependent on the father.

      29. Having held so, we do not find any reason to interfere

with the impugned order.         The petitioner certainly has the

W.P.(c) No.28433 of 2010 -: 24 :-

intention to dispose of the property under attachment.     Even

according to him, the value of the property, notwithstanding the

disputes about its value, is only meagre and the attachment

cannot be said to be excessive considering the magnitude and

reasonableness of the claim.

     30. This Writ Petition is accordingly dismissed.



                                                Sd/-

                                             R. BASANT
                                              (Judge)


                                                Sd/-
                                       K. SURENDRA MOHAN
                                                (Judge)

Nan/

                   //true copy//         P.S. to Judge



