

 IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

Bail Appl..No. 2870 of 2011()


1. GOPINATHAN,
                      ...  Petitioner
2. SAVITHRI, W/O.GOPINATHAN,

                        Vs



1. STATE OF KERALA,
                       ...       Respondent

2. THE SUB INSPECTOR OF POLICE,

                For Petitioner  :SRI.MANOJ RAMASWAMY

                For Respondent  : No Appearance

The Hon'ble MR. Justice N.K.BALAKRISHNAN

 Dated :17/05/2011

 O R D E R
                    N.K.BALAKRISHNAN, J.
                 -----------------------------------
                      B.A. No.2870 OF 2011
              ---------------------------------------
              Dated this the 17th day of May, 2011

                              ORDER


      Petitioners are accused Nos.2 and 3 in Crime No.376/2011

of Punalur Police Station.    It was registered under Section 498

(A) of IPC. This application is for pre-arrest bail. It is alleged that

the petitoners had demanded more money as dowry and thereby

caused mental torture to the defacto complainant.

      2.   I have heard the learned counsel appearing for the

petitioners and the learned Public Prosecutor and also gone

through the available records. Considering all the aspects the

following directions are issued.

       3.    The petitioners shall surrender before the learned

Magistrate within one week from today and will apply for regular

bail. The learned Magistrate will dispose of the bail applications

in accordance with law. In the meanwhile if the petitioners are

arrested they shall be released on bail on their executing a bond

for Rs25,000/- with two solvent sureties for the like sum. If in

B.A.No.2870/11                    2

case the Magistrate has doubt about the genuineness or

correctness of the tax receipts produced by the sureties, the

learned Magistrate can insist for production of the attested

photo copies of the original title deeds of the sureties and on

the following further conditions:

     i.     The accused shall make themselves available for

            interrogation by the investigating officer and that

            they should appear before the investigating officer

            on all Mondays and Fridays between 9.30 AM to

            11.30 AM until further orders.

     ii.    The accused shall produce their original passports

            before the learned Magistrate. If they are not

            having any valid passport, they should file an

            affidavit regarding the same before the Magistrate.

     iii.   The accused will also file an affidavit that hey will

            abide by all the conditions as mentioned above and

            that they will not commit any offence similar to the

            offence involved in this case and that they shall not

            directly or indirectly make any inducement, threat

            or promise to any person acquainted with the facts

            of the case so as to dissuade him from disclosing

            such facts to the court or to any police officer or

            tamper with the evidence.

     iv. The accused and the sureties shall not leave the

            jurisdiction  of  that   Court  without   the  prior

            permission of the learned Magistrate.

B.A.No.2870/11                   3

     v.     The learned Magistrate will also ensure the identity

            of the accused and the sureties by insisting

            production of electoral photo identity cards/Driving

            licence etc.

     vi.    Petitioners will furnish the correct residential

            address and should also make available land phone

            number/mobile number or contact number.         The

            petitioners shall not shift the residence without

            intimating the Investigating Officer and the learned

            Magistrate.




                            N.K. BALAKRISHNAN, JUDGE



acd

B.A.No.2870/11    4

B.A.No.2870/11    5


