

 IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

SA.No. 879 of 2000(D)



1. NALLATHAMPI LAWRENCE
                      ...  Petitioner

                        Vs

1. AMMUKUTTY KOMALAM
                       ...       Respondent

                For Petitioner  :SRI.P.S.VASAVAN PILLAI

                For Respondent  :SRI.D.SAJEEV

The Hon'ble MR. Justice P.BHAVADASAN

 Dated :19/07/2011

 O R D E R
                      P.BHAVADASAN, J.
                    ----------------------------
                      S.A.No. 879 of 2000
                  ---------------------------------
                Dated this the 19th day of July, 2011

                           JUDGMENT


      The suit was one for partition. The plaintiff and defendant

are wife and husband. The marriage took place in 1979. The wife

instituted O.S.No.1684/1985 seeking partition of the property

covered by Ext.A1 dated 26.07.1979. She claimed that even

though acquisition was using her exclusive funds since the

property stood in their joint names she was constrained to lay the

suit for partition.

      2. The defendant resisted the suit. The matrimonial dispute

which is highlighted in the written statement is not relevant in the

present context. It is contended that the plaint schedule property

was acquired with the exclusive funds of the defendant and

property belonged     exclusively to him. He also filed a counter

claim, claiming half share over 33= cents, which is scheduled to

the written statement. He prayed for a dismissal of the suit and

for a decree on the counter claim.

      3. The plaintiff replied to the counter claim by pointing out

that 33= cents of property covered by Ext.B1 was obtained her as

S.A.No. 879 of 2000             2




Sreedhana property and it exclusively belonged to her though

contains that the name of the defendant also. Her contention is

that that property is not partible.

       4.    On the above pleadings, issues were raised. The

evidence consists of the testimony of PWs 1 and 2 and Exts.A1 to

A3 marked from the side of the plaintiff.            The defendant

examined himself as DW1 and had Exts.B1 and B2 series

marked. The trial court found that the claim of the plaintiff that

the acquisition of the plaint schedule property was utilising the

funds of      her father was not true.    But there was no contra

evidence on the side of the defendant          to show that it was

utilising his exclusive funds, that acquisition was made under

Ext.A1. The trial court found that since the property stands in

the joint names, the plaintiff is entitled to half share and granted

a preliminary decree for partition to that extent.

       5.   As regards the property covered by Ext.B1, the trial

court was of the view that it was given in lieu of marriage and the

property exclusively belonged to the plaintiff, though the name of

the defendant is included in the document. Therefore, relief was

S.A.No. 879 of 2000                3




declined to the defendant on the counter claim.

      6. The aggrieved defendant took up the matter in appeal as

A.S.No.102/1991 before the District Court, Thiruvananthapuram.

The District Court on re-appreciation of the evidence concurred

with the trial court and dismissed the appeal. Hence the second

appeal.

      7. Notice is seen issued on the following substantial

questions of law:

            i. Whether the suit was to be tried by the family

            Court or a civil Court.

            ii. While the     plaintiff claimed a share in the

            property was not the burden to prove the right on

            the plaintiff herself ?

                Was it the burden of the defendant to prove that

            the plaintiff had no right ?

            iii. Was the concept of 'Sthreedhanam' and Section

            2 to 6 of the Dowry Prohibition Act 1961 involved in

            the suit ?

      8.      The learned counsel appearing for the appellant

contended that the judgment and decree passed by the lower

S.A.No. 879 of 2000            4




court is without jurisdiction and is null and void. It is contended

that while the appeal was pending, the Family Court had started

functioning at Thiruvananthapuram and going by Sections 7 and

8 of the Families Courts Act     the appeal      should have been

transferred to the Family court.      The decision by the lower

appellate court is therefore without jurisdiction. As regards the

merits of the case, it is contended that the rejection of the

counter claim was improper and illegal. The courts below omitted

to note that Ext.B1 had come into existence long prior to the

marriage and therefore, the transaction could not have been in

lieu of the marriage. There was no reason to reject the claim for

partition of 33= cents.

      9. The learned counsel appearing for the respondent on the

other hand contended that what is contemplated under Sections

7 and 8 of the Family Court Act, is not transfer of appellate

proceedings. The suit was instituted in 1985 and the judgment

and decree of the suit was passed on 28.06.1990. The appeal

was filed in 1991.    The Family Court in Trivandrum        started

functioning only from since 6.6.1992.       There is no provision

S.A.No. 879 of 2000             5




under the Family Courts Act to transfer an appeal to the Family

Court. As regards the merits of the case, the learned counsel

pointed out that Ext.B1 document having been acted upon by

the defendant,     he cannot now turn round and       say that the

recitals contained therein are not binding on him. The courts

below have considered these aspects in considerable detail and

have come to the conclusion that the defendant is not entitled to

any relief in respect of the property scheduled to the counter

claim. That is a finding of fact and no substantial question of law

arises for consideration.

      10.     The appellant laid considerable stress on the view

expressed by the       lower appellate court that going by the

definition of Shrithanam in Travancore Cochin Succession Act ,the

transaction covered by Ext.B1 is a Sreedhana property. The

contention is that in 1992, Travancore Cochin Succession Act

was not in force and therefore, the definition in the said Act could

not have been relied on. That according to the appellant vitiates

the whole proceedings.

S.A.No. 879 of 2000            6




      11. Though, there is some substance in the above

contention it does not mean that the finding as regards property

is to be set aside. The lower court only borrowed the definition

of Sridhanam contained in Travancore Cochin Succession Act, in

the context of the case. Even without the aid of that definition,

the said transaction comes within the definition of dowry in the

dowry prohibition Act, 1961 which has been extracted by the

lower appellate court. If one goes through Ext.B1, its recitals are

very clear and explicit.    It leaves one in no doubt that the

settlement was made in lieu of marriage and it was intended to

benefit the plaintiff in the suit. True, the evidence on record

shows that Ext.B1 was        executed long prior to the actual

marriage between the parties. The evidence also discloses that

they were residing together     even before the marriage.      The

defendant takes objection only to the recital in Ext.B1 but does

not    disown the document as such. The finding of the courts

below cannot be found fault with.     On going through Ext.B1,

settlement deed it is evident that it was executed to the benefit

of the plaintiff.

S.A.No. 879 of 2000            7




      12.       As regards the property covered by Ext.A1 is

concerned, even though the defendant had a case that the

acquisition was using     his exclusive funds, he was unable   to

establish the said fact by adducing cogent and convincing

reasons. True, the plaintiff had a case that she had purchased

the property by utilising funds provided by her father. She also

failed to establish the said fact. Both the courts below have

noticed that in the light of the fact that the document stands in

the joint name of the defendants it is presumed that they have

equal share in the property. The lower courts rightly granted a

decree for preliminary partition in respect of the      property

covered by Ext.A1.      No substantial question of law arises for

consideration in the second appeal.

         The Second appeal is without any merits and it is

accordingly dismissed. No order as to costs.




                                   P.BHAVADASAN, JUDGE.

ln


