
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                     PRESENT:


              THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE V.K.MOHANAN

      THURSDAY, THE 15TH DAY OF DECEMBER 2011/ 24TH AGRAHAYANA 1933

                            CRA.No. 138 of 2011

        (SC.553/2005 of ADDITIONAL DISTRICT COURT (ADHOC), PATHANAMTHITTA)


    ACCUSED/APPELLANT(S):

     MATHEW SCARIA, C.NO.4936,
     CENTRAL PRISON.
     THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

     BY ADV.SRI.ARUNKUMAR.P (STATE BRIEF)


    COMPLAINANT(S)/RESPONDENT :

     STATE OF KERALA, REPRESENTED BY
     PUBLIC PROSECUTOR
     HIGH COURT OF KERALA
     ERNAKULAM.

     BY ADV.SMT.LOWSY A., PUBLIC PROSECUTOR

   THIS CRIMINAL APPEAL HAVING FINALLY HEARD ON 15-12-2011,
   THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY DELIVERED THE FOLLOWING:

ami/


                    V.K.MOHANAN, J.
                 -------------------------------
                  Crl.A.No.138 of 2011
                 -------------------------------
      Dated this the 15th day of December, 2011.

                     J U D G M E N T


     The appellant herein is the sole accused in S.C.No.

533/2005 of the Court of the Additional District & Sessions

Judge   (Ad-hoc)   Fast     Track-I,     Pathanamthitta, who

challenges his conviction and sentence for the offence

under section 498(A) and 307 of IPC, vide judgment dated

27-03-2010 in the above Sessions case.

     2.   The prosecution case in brief is as follows :- The

appellant/accused is the husband of PW1 and according to

the accused,   as the dowry given was too meagre, the

accused demanded an additional amount of Rs.1,00,000/-

from her parents and with the above demand PW1 was

subjected to harassment of both mental and physical and

she was threatened frequently that she would be finished

off. Thus according to the prosecution, at about 3.30p.m on

                               2
Crl.A.No.138 of 2011


17-07-2002, the accused with an intention to commit

murder and with the knowledge that by his act, death will

be caused, taken kerosene in his mouth and lightened

cigarette lighter and spit the kerosene on the body of PW1

and set fire with cigarette lighter, causing burns on the face

and maxi of PW1 caught fire and also caused burn injuries

on the chest, either shoulder, right palm, left thumb and

index winner causing serious injuries and the accused

thereby committed the offence, on the step leading to the

western courtyard from the kitchen of the house bearing

door No.397 in Ward No.V at Ayatthil in Mazhuveli

Panchayat and thereby committed offence punishable under

Section 498(A) and 307 of IPC.

       3. With the above allegation, Crime No.255/2002 was

registered in Pandalam police station and on completion of

investigation, report was filed in the court of Judicial First

Class Magistrate-Adoor, wherein the same was received and

instituted CP 54/2005 and finally the learned Magistrate by

his order dated 27-04-2005 in the above proceedings,

                              3
Crl.A.No.138 of 2011


committed the case to the Sessions Court, where the same

is received as S.C.No.553/2005. On the appearance of the

accused in the trial court, after hearing the prosecution as

well as the defence, a formal charge was framed against the

accused for the offence punishable under Section 498(A)

and 307 of IPC and when the said charge read over and

explained to the accused, he denied the same and pleaded

not guilty, which resulted in the further trial. During the

trial, the prosecution had examined Pws.1 to 12 and

documentary evidences were produced as Ext.P1 to P16 and

P1 (a) and M.Os. 1 and 2 were marked as material objects.

Finally, the learned Judge of the Trial Court found that the

accused spit kerosene and set fire using a cigarette lighter

with an intention and knowledge to commit murder of PW1

and in that process the accused caused burn injuries on the

face, neck and dis-figuration on the face of PW1 and

accordingly found that the accused has committed the

offence punishable under Section 307 of IPC.      It is also

found by the learned Judge that the remaining amount of

                               4
Crl.A.No.138 of 2011


Rs.1 lakh, out of the dowry amount agreed to be paid, was

not paid and the accused was a drunkard and hence there

was frequent quarrel between the accused and PW1 and

PW1 was assaulted demanding for the balance money and

according to the learned Judge, the above act of spitting of

kerosene and setting fire, is a clear incident of cruelty

committed by the accused and therefore Section 498(A) is

attracted and accordingly the accused is found guilty of the

offence under Section 307 and 498(A) of IPC and thus the

appellant convicted thereunder. On such conviction, the

appellant is sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment

for 5 years and to pay a fine of Rs.15,000/- and in default to

undergo rigorous imprisonment for one year for the offence

under Section 307 of IPC and also sentenced to undergo

rigorous imprisonment for 2 years and to pay a fine of

Rs.5,000/- and in default rigorous imprisonment for 6

months for the offence under Section 498(A) of IPC. It is

ordered         that the substantive sentence    would    run

concurrently and the period from 19-07-2002 to 20-01-2003,

                                  5
Crl.A.No.138 of 2011


the period during which the appellant was in custody would

be set off against the period of sentences. It is also ordered

that the fine amount if realised will be given to PW1 as

compensation under section 357 Cr.P.C. It is the above final

order of conviction and sentence that are challenged in this

appeal.

       4.      As the appellant is under going imprisonment in

pursuance to the impugned judgment, he preferred this

appeal from the jail and on receiving the above appeal, as

ordered by this court, advocate Sri.Arun Kumar P. is

appointed from the panel of State Brief, for defending the

case of the appellant. Thus, I have heard advocate Sri.Arun

Kumar P., learned counsel for the appellant and Smt.Lowsy

A., learned public prosecutor for the State.

       5.         As I indicated earlier, the prosecution has

examined Pws.1 to 11 to prove the case against the

appellant, out of which, PW1 is the injured and Pws.2 to 4

are the occurrence witnesses. As the occurrence witnesses

turned hostile, to establish the prosecution case, the

                              6
Crl.A.No.138 of 2011


prosecution is constrained to depend upon the deposition of

PW1, the injured. When PW1 was examined she had

deposed that appellant is the husband and they were

residing at Mullanamkuzhiputhen Veedu at Ayathil in

Muzhuveli Panchayat. The mother of the appellant is also

residing there. According to PW1, her marriage was on

11-11-1998 and at the time of marriage, Rs.2 lakh and gold

ornaments was given as her share, which was handed over

to the hands of the brother-in-law of the accused at the time

of betrothal.        They have no issues in the wedlock.

According to PW1, with the share given to her, a house was

constructed in the property of the appellant and the amount

was insufficient to construct the house. According to PW1,

her gold ornaments was sold but the construction was not

completed, and the appellant spent the whole amount so

raised for drinking. According to PW1 the accused

demanded one lakh rupees more and threatened her that

she will be done away with. It is the further deposition of

PW1 that on 17-07-2002 the appellant went for receiving a

                              7
Crl.A.No.138 of 2011


new ration card from Mezhuveli panchayat and he had

returned by 3 p.m. after taking drinks. At that time her

mother-in-law was alone in the house and the appellant took

quarrel with her and with his mother and attempted to slap

her and she ran to the kitchen. According to PW1 the

accused came to the kitchen and threatened that she will be

done away with, taking kerosene and he poured the

kerosene on her body. According to PW1 she ran to the

backside of the house and waited there for half and hour. It

is the further case of PW1 that while she was passing urine,

accused taken kerosene in his mouth and spit on her legs

and thereafter the accused went outside the house.

According to PW1, after about half an hour, she came to the

side of the well and the accused again taken kerosene in his

mouth and lighted lamp and spit the kerosene which caught

fire, and the maxi worn by her caught fire. According to

PW1 the kerosene fell on the side of her neck and the maxi

caught fire which resulted in disfiguration. According to

PW1, the accused/appellant uttered that let she die there,

                                  8
Crl.A.No.138 of 2011


and thereafter he ran away from the spot and when she

cried, the neighbours gathered there and she was taken to

the room and informed her family members. By about 6.30

p.m., her family members arrived there and she was taken

to Kozhencherry Government Hospital. On the next day she

was taken to Thiruvalla Medical Mission Hospital. Thus

according to PW1, the appellant frequently tortured her

demanding one lakh rupees. When PW1 was examined, she

deposed          that the   statement    was    recorded   from

Kozhencherry Government Hospital where she was under

treatment. PW1 has also identified M.O.1 partly burned

maxi and M.O.2 plastic bottle of kerosene.

       6.     As I indicated earlier, Pws. 2, 3 and 4 were cited

and examined by the prosecution as the occurrence

witnesses but they turned hostile. Ext.P2 is a portion of 161

statement of PW2 and Exts.P3 and P4 are the marked

portion of statement of PW3 and that of PW4.

       7.       PW5 is a stranger to PW1 who was examined to

prove that it was she who took PW1 to the hospital and

                              9
Crl.A.No.138 of 2011


when PW5 was examined, she had also deposed in terms of

prosecution allegation but she is not an occurrence witness.

The defence had marked Ext.D1, which is contradictory to

the deposition of PW5.      Ext.P6 is the attested copy of

marriage mahazar. PW7 is the Doctor who examined PW1

on the date of the incident and who issued Ext.P7 wound

certificate. When PW7 was examined she had deposed that

he had noted burn injuries in Ext.P7 that seen on the face,

neck, anterior aspect of utter chest wall. According to PW7,

the percentage of injury was 25%, deep looking burns. She

was conscious and oriented and her general conditions

were good. She had also spoken to about the history of the

alleged assault as recorded in Ext.P7 document. PW8 is the

priest of church where the marriage of the accused and

PW1 was conducted and who issued Ext.P8. Prosecution

has got marked marriage certificate as evidence of the

marriage between the appellant and PW1. PW9 is the

village officer who prepared Ext.P9 scene plan. PW10, the

then Sub Inspector of Police recorded Ext.P1 F.I. statement

                             10
Crl.A.No.138 of 2011


of PW1 from the Hospital. PW11 is the then C.I of police

who registered Ext.P10 F.I.R on the basis of Ext.P1 F.I

statement. According to the prosecution the further

investigation was undertaken by CW18 who was the then

C.I of police but he is no more and therefore all the

documents prepared by CW14 were got marked through

PW11, who got acquaintance with the signature and

handwriting of CW14. Thus, while examining PW11 the

prosecution has marked Ext.P11 scene mahazar under

which Mos 1 and 2 were seized, and Exts.P10 property list,

P13 arrest memo, P14 inspection memo and P15 remand

application. PW12 is the then C.I. of police who conducted

further investigation and eventuality laid the charge. These

are the evidences and materials formed basis for the finding

and conviction recorded by the trial court.

       8. Learned counsel for the appellant vehemently

submitted that the findings of the court below that the

appellant has committed the offence under Section 498A

and 307 are absolutely incorrect and contrary to the

                              11
Crl.A.No.138 of 2011


evidence and material before the court. On the strength of

the decision of the Hon'ble Apex Court reported in

Chimanbhai Jagabhai Patel V. State of Gujarat and

Anr. (2009 (2) KLT Suppl. 461 [SC]) the learned counsel

submitted that in the present case the prosecution has

miserably failed to establish the ingredients of Section 307

of Indian Penal Code. After going through the deposition of

PW1 and the medical evidence that consists of the oral

evidence of PW7 and Ext.P7, the learned counsel submitted

that at no stretch of imagination it can be inferred that the

appellant had an intention to commit the murder of PW1. It

is the further submission of learned counsel that absolutely

there is no evidence in the prosecution that the appellant

had demanded money for part payment towards dowry and

the prosecution has miserably failed to show that the

alleged incident was taken place connected with demand of

dowry or property. It is contended by the learned counsel

for the appellant that there is a serious lapse and fault on

the part of investigation agency and thus prosecution has

                                12
Crl.A.No.138 of 2011


miserably failed to prove the allegation against the

appellant beyond reasonable doubt and in support of the

above submission, the learned counsel has pointed out that

during the investigation, the Investigating agency has failed

to show MO1 and other to PW1 or any other witness and

there is no guarantee that Mos 1 and 2 are the materials

involved in the crime. It is also pointed out by the learned

counsel that the Investigating agency has miserably failed

to trace out the cigarette lighter which allegedly used by

the appellant to set fire, though the appellant was arrested

within two days from the date occurrence. The above fault

on the part of the prosecution is a serious one since the

crucial material object is not recovered by the prosecution.

It is the further case of the learned counsel for the appellant

that the only evidence is the deposition of PW1 but her

evidence is not free from doubt as the same were full of

contradictions and infirmities. Thus according to the

learned counsel, the findings and the conviction entered

into by the learned Judge is illegal and arbitrary and liable

                                 13
Crl.A.No.138 of 2011


to be interfered and the appellant is entitled to get a clear

acquittal.

       9. The learned Public Prosecutor submitted that the

prosecution has succeeded in proving its allegation against

the appellant, especially through the evidence of Pws.1 and

6, among which PW1 is the injured.         According to the

learned Public Prosecutor, the contradictions pointed out by

the counsel for the appellant are minor in nature and the

same are not sufficient to disbelieve the prosecution case

as such.          According to the learned Public Prosecutor,

absolutely there is no serious contradiction in the evidence

of PW1 when compare with Ext.P1 FI statement.           It is

pointed out that on a close perusal of evidence of PW1, it

can be seen that she had disclosed the harassment met by

her at the instance of the appellant and therefore, the

incident that took pace on 17.7.2002 was the continuation

of the harassment which she was suffering after her

marriage with the appellant. Thus according to the learned

Public Prosecutor, the trial court's findings are based upon

                                  14
Crl.A.No.138 of 2011


the materials and evidence and as such no interference is

warranted.

       10. I have carefully considered the arguments

advanced by the learned counsel for the appellant and the

learned Public Prosecutor.           I have also perused the

judgment of the trial court and the evidence and materials

on record.

       11.       In the light of the rival contentions and the

evidence and materials on record, the question to be

considered is whether the findings of the court below that

the prosecution has proved the offence under Section 307

and 498(A) of IPC is correct and legal and whether such

findings are supported by the evidence and materials on

record.         The specific case of the prosecution is that,

because of the animosity of the appellant towards his wife,

as the dowry given was very meagre and since an additional

amount of Rs.1 lakh was not brought from the parents of

PW1 by the injured-his wife, the accused harassed her both

mentally and physically and frequently threatened her that

                             15
Crl.A.No.138 of 2011


she will be done away and thus on 17.7.2002 at 3.30 p.m.,

the accused with an intention to commit murder and with

the knowledge that by his act, death will be caused, taken

kerosene in his mouth and lighted cigarette lighter and spit

the kerosene on the body and set fire with the cigarette

lighter, causing burns on the face and maxi caught fire and

also caused burn injuries on the chest and other part of the

body and thus the accused has committed the offence

punishable under Section 498(A) and 307 of IPC.        As I

indicated earlier, as the ocular witnesses cited and

examined as Pws.2, 3 and 4 were turned hostile, the

prosecution has heavily depends upon the evidence of PW1

to prove its case. It is true that, when PW5, the sister of

PW1 was examined, she had spoken to in favour of the

prosecution. But PW5 is not an eye witness to the incident.

It is true that PW5 had deposed in tune with the deposition

of PW1 regarding the prosecution case with respect to the

demand of more money from PW1.         PW5 is expected to

depose in such a fashion, since she is the sister of PW1.

                              16
Crl.A.No.138 of 2011


Therefore, the question to be considered is whether the

evidence of PW1, who is the injured, is sufficient to prove

prosecution allegation against the appellant. To find out an

answer to the above question, I have repeatedly gone

through the deposition of PW1. Even according to PW1, at

the time of the marriage, the parents of PW1 offered to pay

a sum of Rs.2 lakhs and gold ornaments as the share of PW1

and accordingly the same were handed over to one

Pappachan, the brother-in-law of the appellant on the date

of the betrothal.     Thus, as per the evidence of PW1, the

amount offered as dowry has already been paid.          The

further case of PW1 is that, by spending her share amount,

a house was constructed in the property of the appellant

and when there was paucity of funds to complete the

construction, her gold ornaments were sold. But the money

was mis-utilised by the appellant for taking liquor. PW1

now says that, thereafter the appellant harassed her

demanding the balance amount of Rs.1 lakh and frequently

threatened her to kill. In the chief examination, PW1 has

                             17
Crl.A.No.138 of 2011


never said any previous incident of any altercation or any

particular incident of harassment connected with the

demand for more dowry.       During the chief examination,

PW1 has stated that on 17.7.2002 when the appellant

returned in the afternoon, who went to the Mezhuveli

panchayat office, for getting new ration card on 17.7.2002

in the morning, he was drunken and at that time herself and

her mother in law were alone in the house.    PW1 further

deposed that "                                

             

                           ." PW1 further says that, the

appellant followed her and at the kitchen, he told her that

she will be killed and thereafter he took kerosene.

According to PW1, "                          

                ."          She had further deposed that,

"  1/2                                           .  

                                    

                                   .            

                              18
Crl.A.No.138 of 2011


     . 1/2                                         

   2-3                                               side-

                                                          .

                                             

      .                                          

               .                      .

     .                                              

    ."                     Thereafter, the Prosecutor put a

question to the mouth of PW1 that, "              


                     (Q). 1                         

                            .        

(Q).                                              ." During

the cross examination, PW1 has admitted that her brother

Monsy was a gulf returnee. During cross examination she

had further deposed that, "    operation-

                                                       

               (Q),             

     .                          . 

                               19
Crl.A.No.138 of 2011


                                                     ."  She

had also deposed that, "                                

                                       

                                                  (Q).  

  ..                                                    

                                   (Q).     ."

During the further cross examination of PW1 she deposed

that, "                      .                           

   .                                             (Q).

                                              

  ." Thus on a close reading of the deposition of PW1, it

can be seen that even according to PW1, she has no case

except a general statement that - the appellant had

subjected her to many kind of cruelty or harassment

connected with the demand of dowry or demand of money.

No previous incident of overtact or harassment are pointed

out by PW1.          With respect to the alleged incident on

17.7.2002 also, PW1 has no case that, the incident was

                                  20
Crl.A.No.138 of 2011


taken       place connected with any demand of money or

dowry. Chapter XXA of IPC deals with cruelty by husband

or relatives of husband. Section 498(A) of IPC reads as

follows :

             " 498A. Husband or relative of husband of a
             woman subjecting her to cruelty. - Whoever,
             being the husband or the relative of the husband of
             a woman, subjects such woman to cruelty shall be
             punished with imprisonment for a term which may
             extend to three years and shall also be liable to
             fine.
                  Explanation.-For the purpose of this section,
             "cruelty" means-

                   (a) any wilful conduct which is of such a
                       nature as is likely to drive the woman to
                       commit suicide or to cause grave injury
                       or danger to life, limb or health (whether
                       mental or physical) of the woman; or

                   (b) harassment of the woman where such
                       harassment is with a view to coercing her
                       or any person related to her to meet any
                       unlawful demand for any property or
                       valuable security or is on account of
                       failure by her or any person related to
                       her to meet such demand."

       12. As per the prosecution allegation, Explanation (a)

is not applicable since the alleged injury was not inflicted by

the victim- PW1 herself.           Therefore, the first limb of

                              21
Crl.A.No.138 of 2011


'cruelty' as per the Explanation is not attracted. Therefore,

the next question to be considered is, whether the case set

up by the prosecution through the evidence of PW1 is

sufficient to attract Explanation (b) of S.498(A).    I have

already found that, on 17.7.2002 when the alleged incident

was taken place, PW1 has no case that, the incident was in

pursuance to a demand of money or more dowry. In view of

the Explanation (b) to S.498(A), the prosecution has to

establish that the harassment of PW1 was with a view to

coerce her or any person relating to her to meet any

unlawful demand for any property or valuable security or is

on account of failure by her or any person relating to her to

meet such demand. Here PW1 in her chief examination

itself deposed that, "               '3'        

                      .                         

                          .                              

               

                                   ". From the above words

of PW1, it is crystal clear that the reason for the incident

                               22
Crl.A.No.138 of 2011


was not on the basis of any demand for money or dowry and

the exact reason for the incident is lying in her own

deposition, that the husband was drunken.           Thus on

examination of the evidence of PW1, according to me, the

same is not sufficient to prove the essential ingredients of

S.498(A) of IPC and I am of the firm view that, the

prosecution has miserably failed in establishing the offence

under Section 498(A) of IPC against the appellant.

Therefore, the findings of the court below that the appellant

has committed the offence under Section 498(A) is set

aside.

       13. In the light of the evidence of PW1 coupled with

the medical evidence that consists of the testimony of PW7

and Ext.P7 wound certificate, it is crystal clear that PW1

sustained the injuries noted in Ext.P7 at the hands of the

appellant. If that be so, the next question to be considered

is whether those evidences of Pws.1 and 7 are sufficient to

attract S.307 of IPC.       I have already referred to the

deposition of PW1 in chief, with respect to the origin of the

                                23
Crl.A.No.138 of 2011


incident.        According to PW1, there was no altercation and

there was no demand for money and even there was no

verbal exchange between the appellant and PW1. PW1 is

specific in her deposition that, when the appellant came

back by 3 o'clock he was drunken. It is her further case

that, "                                      

   ...........", and hence even according to PW1, the

appellant took quarrel not only against PW1 but also against

his own mother. As I indicated earlier, the reason for such

conduct is that the appellant had already consumed liquor

and he was in a drunken stage. So at that time and under

such a situation, an intention to commit murder of PW1

cannot be attributed against the appellant.       Going by the

evidence of PW1, it can be further seen that on one

occasion the appellant took kerosene in his mouth and spat

to the legs of PW1.         The second incident is taken place

when PW1 was about to enter into the kitchen and

according to PW1 at that time, the appellant after taking

kerosene in his mouth spat the same to PW1 and by using

                               24
Crl.A.No.138 of 2011


cigarette lighter set fire to the kerosene which fallen on her

face and the dress.       Though a bottle of kerosene was

available with the appellant, according to PW1, he never

poured the kerosene on her body directly though he had the

occasion for the same as rightly pointed out by the learned

counsel for the appellant. It is also relevant to note that,

after the spreading of the fire along the maxi of PW1, the

appellant did not make any attempt to pour the balance

kerosene over the body of PW1 and no overtact is alleged

against the appellant to commit murder of PW1. It is also

pertinent to note that during the further cross examination

of PW1 she had categorically stated that, "   

                           ." I find no

reason to disbelieve the above version of PW1.          If the

appellant had maintained any intention to commit murder of

PW1, the appellant would not have poured water on PW1,

on whose body fire was spread to a certain extent as per the

earlier occasion. In the decision reported in Chimanbhai

Jagabhai Patel V. State of Gujarat and Anr. [2009(2)

                                   25
Crl.A.No.138 of 2011


KLT Suppl. 461 (SC)], the Honourable Apex Court has

enumerated the essential ingredients required to be proved

in the case of an offence under Section 307. In para 6 of

the above judgment it has held that,

            " i) that the death of a human being was
            attempted :
                 ii) that such death was attempted to be caused
            by, or in consequence of the act of the accused ;
            and
                iii) that such act was done with the intention of
            causing death; or that it was done with the
            intention of causing such bodily injury as: (a) the
            accused knew to be likely to cause death; or (b)
            was sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to
            cause death, or that the accused attempted to
            cause death by doing an act known to him to be so
            imminently dangerous that it must in all probability
            cause (a) death, or (b) such bodily injury as is likely
            to cause death, the accused having no excuse for
            incurring the risk of causing such death or injury."

          In the light of the foregone discussion and especially

in the light of the above decision, according to me, in the

present case, the prosecution has miserably failed to

establish the essential ingredients of S.307 of IPC. So I

cannot approve the findings of the court below that the

appellant has committed the offence punishable under

Section 307 of IPC.

                                26
Crl.A.No.138 of 2011


       14. But it is pertinent to note that the evidence of PW1

would positively prove that, by the act of the appellant, PW1

has sustained injuries and the said fact is further

established by the medical evidence. PW7 has no case that

the injuries noted in Ext.P7 are fatal or dangerous to the life

of PW1. According to PW7, when he examined PW1, she

was conscious and oriented and her general condition was

good.        According to PW7, he had noted "burns involving

face, neck, anterior aspect of upper chest wall ; percentage

of 25% deep looking burns".        The evidence of PW1 gives

sequence of events under which PW1 sustained burn

injuries which noted down by PW7 in Ext.P7 wound

certificate.        The evidence of PW1 with respect to the

incident, under which she sustained injuries, are intact and

the same can be accepted. Therefore, though S.307 of IPC

is not attracted against the appellant, according to me, the

prosecution has succeeded in proving that the appellant has

committed the offence punishable under Section 324 of IPC

and thus I have no hesitation to convict the appellant for the

                               27
Crl.A.No.138 of 2011


offence under Section 324 of IPC.

       15. In the light of the above discussion and the above

facts and circumstances and the evidence and materials

referred to above, I am unable to approve the conviction

recorded by the learned Judge of the trial court against the

appellant for the offence punishable under Section 498(A)

and 307 of IPC and accordingly the conviction of the

appellant for the offence under Section 498(A) and 307 are

set aside. But in the light of the foregone discussion and

findings, the offence attracted against the appellant is only

under Section 324 of IPC and accordingly, the appellant is

convicted for the offence under Section 324 of IPC.

       16. With respect to the sentence, the learned counsel

for the appellant submits that, as on today the appellant has

crossed 51 years of age and a lenient view may be taken. I

have already referred to the deposition of PW1 and

according to her, the appellant was drunken at the time of

the incident and he took quarrel with herself and his mother

also and for such a quarrel there was no reason also.     As

                               28
Crl.A.No.138 of 2011


rightly pointed out by the counsel for the appellant, now the

appellant had crossed 51 years of age. Under the above

factual background and the mitigating circumstances,

according to me, rigorous imprisonment of 18 months would

be sufficient to meet the ends of justice.  Accordingly, the

appellant is sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment

for a period of 18 months and the appellant is entitled to get

set off under Section 428 of Cr.P.C. for the period which he

had already undergone as a pre-trial prisoner.

       17. In the result, this Criminal Appeal is disposed of

setting aside the conviction and sentence of the appellant

for the offence       under Section 498(A) and 307 of IPC,

whereas convicting the appellant for the offence under

Section 324 of IPC and sentencing him to undergo rigorous

imprisonment for 18 months and allowing set off under

Section 428 of Cr.P.C.

       18. In the light of the above order, setting aside the

conviction and sentence of the appellant for the offence

under Section 498(A) and 307 of IPC and convicting the

                                29
Crl.A.No.138 of 2011


appellant for the offence under Section 324 of IPC and

imposing a sentence of rigorous imprisonment for 18

months, the appellant is entitled to get released from

the jail forth with, if he is not required in any other

case, especially as the appellant had already undergone

the period of 18 months imprisonment. Therefore, the

Registry        is  directed to forward the gist of this

Judgment to the Superintendent of Central Prison,

Thiruvananthapuram, for appropriate action.




                                          V.K.MOHANAN,
                                              Judge
ami/



