
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                PRESENT:

                          THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE C.K.ABDUL REHIM

            TUESDAY, THE 29TH DAY OF NOVEMBER 2011/8TH AGRAHAYANA 1933

                                     WP(C).No. 30657 of 2010 (F)
                                          ---------------------------

PETITIONER(S):
---------------------------

             LAKSHMANAN.A., LINEMAN GRADE-II,
             K.S.E.B., ELECTRICAL SECTION, CHERPULASSERY,
             PALAKKAD DISTRICT.

             BY ADVS.DR.K.P.SATHEESAN
                           SRI.K.K.GOPINATHAN NAIR
                           SRI.M.R.JAYAPRASAD
                           SRI.P.MOHANDAS (ERNAKULAM)
                           SRI.MATHEW SUNNY
                           SRI.ANOOP.V.NAIR

RESPONDENT(S):
-----------------------------

          1. KERALA STATE ELECTRICITY BOARD,
              (K.S.E.B. IN SHORT), REPRESENTED BY ITS SECRETARY,
              VYDYUTHI BHAVAN, PATTOM, THIRUVANANTHAPURAM-4.

          2. THE CHIEF ENGINEER (H.R.M.),
              K.S.E.B., VYDYUTHI BHAVAN, PATTOM,
              THIRUVANANTHAPURAM-4.

          3. THE EXECUTIVE ENGINEER,
              ELECTRICAL DIVISION, K.S.E.B., PALAKKAD,
              PIN- 678 001.


             R1 TO R3 BY ADV. SRI.PULIKOOL ABUBACKER, SC, KSEB
                                    SRI.K.S.ANIL, SC, KSEB
                                    SRI. ASOK M.CHERIYAN, SC, KSEB

            THIS WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD
            ON 29-11-2011, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY DELIVERED
            THE FOLLOWING:



sts

WP(C)NO.30657/2010

                               APPENDIX

PETITIONER'S EXHIBITS:

P1    COPY OF THE APPOINTMENT ORDER ISSUED TO THE PETITIONER BY THE
      DEPUTY CHIEF ENGINEER, ELECTRICAL CIRCLE, K.S.E.B, PALAKKAD DATED
      9/5/1996

P2    COPY OF THE ORDER ISSUED BY THE 3RD RESPONDENT DATED 22/11/1996

P3    COPY OF THE JUDGMENT DATED 10/10/2000 IN SESSION'S CASE NO.134/1997 OF
      THE ASSISTANT SESSIONS COURT, PALAKKAD DIVISION AT OTTAPPALAM

P4    COPY OF THE ORDER ISSUED BY THE 2ND RESPONDENT DATED 25/7/2002

P5    COPY OF THE JUDGMENT DATED 12/5/2006 IN CRL.APPEAL NO.215/2000 OF THE
      ADDITIONAL SESSIONS JUDGE, FAST TRACK COURT NO.II, PALAKKAD

P6    COPY OF THE ORDER ISSUED BY THE 2ND RESPONDENT DATED 26/9/2006

P7    COPY OF THE MEMO OF CHARGES ISSUED BY THE 3RD RESPONDENT TO THE
      PETITIONER DATED 3/8/2007

P8    COPY OF THE ORDER PASSED BY THE 3RD RESPONDENT DATED 24/1/2008

P9    COPY OF THE ORDER ISSUED BY THE 3RD RESPONDENT DATED 7/3/2008

P10   COPY OF THE APPEAL FILED BY THE PETITIONER BEFORE THE 2ND
      RESPONDENT DATED 26/6/2008

P11   COPY OF THE MEMORANDUM OF APPEAL FILED BY THE PETITIONER BEFORE
      THE 2ND RESPONDENT DATED 14/12/2009

P12   COPY OF THE JUDGMENT DATED 26/5/2010 IN WP(C)NO.16091/2010

P13   COPY OF THE ORDER NO.EBVS.7/10/97/743 DATED 30/7/2010 ISSUED BY THE 2ND
      RESPONDENT.


RESPONDENT'S EXHIBITS:         NIL


                                            /TRUE COPY/



                                            P.S.TO.JUDGE


sts


                    C.K.ABDUL REHIM, J.

                 -------------------------------------------
                   W.P.(C) No.30657 of 2010
                 -------------------------------------------
           Dated this the 29th day of November, 2011

                         J U D G M E N T
                         ----------------------

     The petitioner is presently working as Lineman Gr:II in

the 1st respondent Board. He was originally appointed as

Electricity Worker on advise from the Kerala Public Service

Commission (PSC). While working as Electricity Worker the

petitioner was placed under suspension through Ext.P2

order on the ground that he was arrested and remanded to

judicial custody in a criminal case, registered for offences

punishable under Section 498A and 304-B read with Section

34 of IPC. Allegation was that the wife of the petitioner's

brother committed suicide on 21.10.1996 at her parental

house due to torture and harassment met from her

husband, his parents and brothers (including the petitioner

herein) demanding more dowry, while she was residing at

her matrimonial home. Facts alleged in a nut shell was that,

on an earlier occasion she attempted suicide by consuming

W.P.(C).30657/10               -2-




poison, but based on a mediation settlement she was taken

to the matrimonial home. But the torture and harassment

continued and it became intolerable for her to live in the

matrimonial home. The continued torture demanding more

dowry and the intolerate mental harassments put in by the

accused had compelled her to end her life.

      2.    Trial court convicted the petitioner for offences

punishable under Section 304-B and 498A and sentenced

him to undergo rigorous imprisonment for two years, as

per Ext.P3 judgment. On the basis of the conviction and

sentence imposed, the petitioner was removed from service

through Ext.P4 order of the 2nd respondent.            But the

appellate court acquitted the petitioner finding that there

was no overtacts attributed against the petitioner and the

prosecution had failed to prove any guilt against the

petitioner.

      3.    On acquittal of the petitioner in the criminal case

the 2nd respondent had taken a decision to set aside the

earlier order and to reinstate him in service. Exhibit P6 is

the    proceedings   through    which    the   petitioner  was

W.P.(C).30657/10               -3-




reinstated.      But   the   2nd  respondent    decided  that

departmental action should be held under the K.S.E.Board

(Classification, Control and Appeal) Regulation, 1969, on

the basis of the allegations which led to his removal. In

Ext.P6 it is stated that the suspension period as well as the

period between removal from service and reinstatement

will be regularised only on finalisation of the departmental

action. Thereafter the 3rd respondent had issued a memo of

charges       to the   petitioner   alleging   the  following

misbehaviour;

     (1) That you were involved in a criminal case-which
          was registered in Ottapalam Police Station as
          case No.367/96 u/s 304(b) r/w 34 of IPC.
     (2) That your involvement in such a case cannot be
          expected from a Board Employee.
     (3) That your involvement in such a case tarnished
          the image of KSE Board, as you were a Board
          employee then.

Eventhough the petitioner submitted his statement of

defence, the 3rd respondent arrived at a conclusion that his

involvement in the criminal case was not expected from a

Board employee and it amounts to an act violating the

manual of office procedure and other relevant rules. It is

W.P.(C).30657/10              -4-




also stated that the accusations against the petitioner had

tarnished the image of the Board. Hence the 3rd respondent

decided to impose minor punishment of censuring with

warning to the petitioner to abstain from any such cases in

future. In Ext.P8 order issued in this regard, it is made clear

that the period of suspension and dismissal will be treated

as leave without allowance in all respect.

      4.    Subsequently the 3rd respondent     issued Ext.P9

order modifying Ext.P8 to extent of changing the minor

punishment of 'censure' to an order of 'warning on record'.

It is stated therein that, the events led to suspension and

dismissal warrants necessity for disciplinary action, and

considering gravity of the matter it is ordered to warn the

petitioner on record. The decision to treat the period of

suspension and dismissal as leave without allowance was

repeated. It was clarified that such period will not be

counted for any service benefits.

      5.    Aggrieved by Ext.P9, the petitioner submitted

appeal before the 2nd respondent. Since the appeal was not

considered he had approached this court in W.P(C).

W.P.(C).30657/10               -5-




No.16091/2010.      Through     Ext.P12    judgment   the  2nd

respondent was directed to consider the appeal and to take

a decision.      Through Ext.P13 the appeal was rejected

declining the request of the petitioner to cancel the order

treating the broken period as leave without allowance,

relying on a decision of the hon'ble Supreme Court to the

effect that awarding of back wages for the period when the

employee has not worked may amount to rewarding the

delinquent employee and punishing the employer for taking

action for misconduct committed by the employee. In this

writ petition the petitioner is challenging Ext.P13.

      6.    In the counter affidavit it is contended that, the

acquittal does not automatically give any right to the

petitioner for reinstatement in service and it is left to

decision of the competent authority as to whether

disciplinary action need be taken against the delinquent

employee. Further it is contended that, the employee is not

entitled for full back wages on reinstatement into service on

the basis of an acquittal in a criminal case and in such cases

the principle of 'no work no pay' will apply as held by the

W.P.(C).30657/10              -6-




honourable apex court in Ponnamma Vs. State of Kerala

(1997 (1) KLT 720).       Contention of the Board is that

service of the petitioner was terminated for his involvement

in a criminal case, and hence the 1st respondent Board

cannot shoulder any liability, which happened for no

mistake of its own. It was also contended that initiation of

disciplinary action as well as the imposition of punishment

of warning on record is perfectly sustainable.        Hence,

decision taken by the appellate authority in Ext.P13 does

not suffer from any infirmity, is the contention.

      7.    The prime question question to be considered is

as to whether the order treating the period of suspension

and dismissal as leave without allowance, is sustainable or

not. Admittedly the suspension was based on arrest and

remand of the petitioner to judicial custody in a criminal

case. He was dismissed from service only on the basis of

conviction in the criminal case. It is also not disputed that

the petitioner was acquitted by the appellate court.

Whether the disciplinary action initiated against the

W.P.(C).30657/10                -7-




petitioner after his acquittal on the basis of the charges

referred above was sustainable or not is the issue to be

decided. Yet another question arises as to whether

regularisation of the service by treating the broken period

as leave without allowance, can be justified on the basis of

the punishment imposed, in the departmental proceedings.

      8.    Rules 56 and 57 of Part I of the Kerala Service

Rules (KSR) is relevant in the matter. Rule 57 provides that

on reinstatement, the authority concerned should take a

decision in accordance with the circumstances of the case.

It is mentioned that, full amount need be given only on the

event of the officer being acquitted of the blame or if it is

proved that the officer's liability arose from circumstances

beyond his control.     It is settled through various legal

precedents that the words "acquitted of blame" means

something more than mere acquittal and it is not an

acquittal as contemplated under the Code of Criminal

Procedure. But the acquittal should be a 'honourable

acquittal'. In this regard it is to be noticed that, a provision

akin to that of the second proviso to Rule 18, especially

W.P.(C).30657/10             -8-




clause     (b)   therein of   the   Kerala  Civil  Services

(Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules is absent in the

Kerala State Electricity Board Employees (Classification,

Control and Appeal) Regulations, 1969.         Therefore a

decision regarding adjustment of the pay and allowances of

an employees for the period of detention or imprisonment,

should have been arrived at in accordance with the

circumstances in each case. The full amount become

payable only if he is acquitted of the blame. In the case at

hand, through Ext.P6 the 2nd respondent had reinstated the

petitioner after permitting departmental action to be

initiated under the KSEB Employees (CC&A) Regulations.

It was observed that the suspension period and the period

between removal from service and reinstatement will be

regularised on finalisation of the departmental action.

Therefore it is evident that instead of taking a decision as

contemplated under Rule 57 of Part I KSR, the 2nd

respondent directed the subordinate official to finalise the

matter depending on the outcome of the departmental

action.

W.P.(C).30657/10              -9-




      9.    Question arises as to whether the departmental

action initiated on the basis of the charges mentioned, is

sustainable or not. It is evident that the appellate court

acquitted the petitioner on the basis of the following

findings:

     "The overt acts attributed to the persons other

     than the husband are required to be proved

     beyond reasonable doubt. By mere conjectures

     and implications such relations cannot be held

     guilty for the offense relating to dowry death.

     Viewed in that perspective it can be seen that no

     overt acts    in this regard have been proved

     against the 3rd and 4th accused who are brothers of

     the 5th accused. (The petitioner herein was the 3rd

     accused). Apart from a passing mention that a

     younger brother of the 5th accused had also joined

     with other relations for harassing her demanding

     more ornaments and cash, no overt acts of

     harassment have been clearly attributed to the 3rd

     and 4th accused, brothers of the 5th accused by the

     deceased in her aforestated letters. Hence I find

     that the prosecution has succeeded to prove the

     offences charged u/Ss.498A and 304-B r/w Section

     34 of IPC only against the accused Nos.2 and 5.

W.P.(C).30657/10              -10-




     The prosecution failed to prove any guilt under

     the aforesaid Sections of IPC against the accused

     Nos.3 and 4.     Hence I find that the conviction

     recorded and the sentence imposed on accused

     Nos.3 and 4 are liable to be set aside."

      10. When a person implicated as accused is acquitted

by the competent criminal court and when it is an 'acquittal

of the blame', can a disciplinary action be initiated on the

basis of the same the set of allegations, is a matter which

need consideration. Here the charges in Ext.P7 is not on the

basis of the accusations in the criminal case, but on the

basis of allegations that, implication of the petitioner in a

criminal case is a misbehavior and it had tarnished image of

the Board. It is settled law that after acquittal of a person

involved in a criminal case, the department is not entitled to

initiate disciplinary action on the same set of facts. The

Hon'ble Supreme Court in G.M.Tank Vs. State of Gujarat

and others (2006 (5) SCC 446) held that the distinction

which is usually available between        departmental and

criminal proceedings, on the basis of approach and burden

W.P.(C).30657/10              -11-




of proof, cannot be made applicable in a case where the

facts and evidence in the departmental as well as the

criminal case are one and the same and when there is no

iota of difference. It is further held that, when there is an

honourable acquittal of the employee, the same requires to

be taken note of and in such case the departmental enquiry

cannot be sustained.      This court in Balakrishnan Vs.

State Bank of Travancore (2011 (4) KLT SN 93

(C.No.104)) held that acquittal in a criminal case could not

unsettle or invalidate the disciplinary proceedings which

has become final.      But acquittal in criminal appeal is

sufficient to unsettle the departmental proceedings which

were initiated on conviction by the trial court. It is held

that, in case the disciplinary proceedings was initiated on

the basis of conviction by the trial court, acquittal in the

criminal case is sufficient to unsettle the disciplinary

proceedings, because, by the acquittal the very foundation

of the disciplinary action would stand collapsed.

W.P.(C).30657/10             -12-




      11. Analysed on the basis of dictum laid in the cases

referred above, I am of the view that, the charges upon

which the disciplinary action was initiated in this case is

totally unsustainable. It is further noticed that, through

Ext.P8 order the disciplinary action had culminated in

imposing a minor punishment of 'censure'. But it is not

discernible as to how the disciplinary authority could

subsequently take a different view and modify the

punishment.      In   Ext.P9 the  authority   had  imposed

punishment of 'warning on record' in lieu of the punishment

of 'censure'. However, in both the orders the disciplinary

authority had taken a decision to treat the period of

suspension and dismissal as leave without allowance, and

made it clear that it will not be counted for any service

benefits. The appellate authority took the matter in a

different angle and held that since the petitioner has not

worked during the period in which he was kept under

suspension and dismissal, he could not be paid back wages

      12. From the facts mentioned as above, it is evident

that    the    authority  had not decided    the  issue  of

W.P.(C).30657/10             -13-




regularisation of the broken period of service on the basis

of acquittal in the criminal case. But the decision is taken

on the basis of the departmental disciplinary action

initiated. As held above, I am of the considered opinion that

the disciplinary action initiated on the basis of Ext.P7

charge memo is totally illegal and unsustainable. Therefore

I am of the view that the decision taken regarding treating

the broken period as leave without allowance and denial of

benefits for such period, needs reconsideration. A fresh

decision in this regard need be taken as to whether the

petitioner is entitled to pay and allowances and other

service benefits during the period which he was kept under

suspension and dismissal. The decision in this regard is to

be considered on the basis of provisions contained in Rule

57 of Part I KSR, taking note of the settled legal

precedents.

      13. Under the above mentioned circumstances the

writ petition is allowed and Exts.P7, P8, P9 and P13, are

hereby quashed as unsustainable. The 2nd respondent is

directed to take a fresh decision with respect to

W.P.(C).30657/10              -14-




regularisation of the period of suspension and the period

between removal from service and reinstatement. A

decision with respect to payment of back wages and other

service benefits shall also be taken based on acquittal in the

criminal case, taking note of the principles underlying in

Rule 57 of Part I KSR.

      14. The needful in this regard shall be done at the

earliest possible, after affording an opportunity of hearing

to the petitioner, at any rate within a period of two months

from the date of receipt of a copy of this judgment.

                                       (Sd/-)

                           C.K.ABDUL REHIM, JUDGE.

okb



                          True copy

                                   P.A to Judge



