

 IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

Bail Appl..No. 3671 of 2011()


1. JOMON,
                      ...  Petitioner
2. JOSEPH, AGED 62 YEARS, S/O. CHANDY,

                        Vs



1. STATE OF KERALA,
                       ...       Respondent

                For Petitioner  :SRI.THOMAS VARGHESE.K

                For Respondent  : No Appearance

The Hon'ble MR. Justice N.K.BALAKRISHNAN

 Dated :17/05/2011

 O R D E R
                     N.K.BALAKRISHNAN, J.
                ---------------------------
                    B.A.No.3671 OF 2011
                --------------------------
             Dated this the 17th day of May, 2011

                           O R D E R


      Petitioners are the 1st and 4th accused respectively in

Crime No.176/2011 of Njarakkal Police Station for offences

punishable under Section 304 B read with Section 34 IPC.

Petitioners    were arrested on 24/02/2011.          Their bail

applications were dismissed by the trial Court.

      2. The material allegations are that the petitioners, who

are respectively the husband and father-in-law of the

deceased victim, Ms.Shincia, along with other accused

brutally man handled Ms. Shincia,     demanding or for getting

more dowry. Finally the said Shincia committed suicide.

      3. Petitioners seek regular bail.

      4. I have heard the learned counsel appearing for the

petitioners and the learned Public Prosecutor and also gone

through the available records.

B.A.No. 3671/2011                 2

     5. Since 24/02/2011 they have been in judicial custody.

Considering the period of detention already undergone by the

accused and in view of the submission made on behalf of the

accused that they will abide by any condition that may be

imposed on them, the accused are granted bail subject to the

following conditions:

     i.          The accused shall execute a bond for
             Rs.50,000/- (Rupees fifty thousand only) with
             two solvent sureties each for the like sum to the
             satisfaction of the JFCM concerned. If in case
             the Magistrate has any doubt about the
             genuineness or correctness of the tax receipts
             produced     by   the   sureties,   the   learned
             Magistrate can insist for production of the
             attested photo copies of the original title deeds
             of the sureties.
     ii. The accused shall make themselves available for
             interrogation by the investigating officer and
             that      they   should    appear    before   the
             investigating officer on all Mondays and Fridays
             between 9.30 AM and 11.30 AM until further
             orders.

B.A.No. 3671/2011                 3

     iii. The accused shall produce             their original
             passports before the learned Magistrate. If they
             are not having any valid passport, they should
             file an affidavit regarding the same before the
             Magistrate.
     iv. The accused will also file an affidavit that they
             will abide by all the conditions as mentioned
             above and that       they will not commit any
             offence similar to the offence involved in this
             case and that       they shall not directly or
             indirectly make any inducement, threat or
             promise to any person acquainted with the facts
             of the case so as to dissuade him from
             disclosing such facts to the court or to any
             police officer or tamper with the evidence.
     v. The accused and the sureties shall not leave the
             jurisdiction of the JFCM Court concerned
             without the prior permission of the learned
             Magistrate.
     vi. The learned Magistrate will also ensure the
             identity of the accused and the sureties by
             insisting production of electoral photo identity
             cards/Driving licence etc.
     vii. Petitioners will furnish the correct residential

B.A.No. 3671/2011                 4

             address and should also make available land
             phone     number/mobile number or contact
             number.    The petitioners shall not shift the
             residence without intimating the Investigating
             Officer and the learned Magistrate.
     This Bail Application is allowed as above.




                                           N.K.BALAKRISHNAN
                                                (JUDGE)
jg


