
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                        PRESENT:

                    THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE S.S.SATHEESACHANDRAN

                MONDAY, THE 3RD DAY OF SEPTEMBER 2012/12TH BHADRA 1934

                                             Crl.MC.No. 1674 of 2012 ()
                                                   --------------------------
        CC.815/2007 of JUDICIAL FIRST CLASS MAGISTRATE COURT, SASTHAMCOTTA


PETITIONER/ACCUSED:
--------------------------------

             GANGA A., W/O.RAJESHKUMAR K.R,
             KOCHUPURAYIL HOUSE, KANNAMANGALAM NORTH,
             CHETTIKULANGARA P.O., MAVELIKKARA.


             BY ADV. SRI.UNNIKRISHNAN.V.ALAPATT

RESPONDENT/STATE/COMPLAINANT:
------------------------------------------------------

          1. STATE OF KERALA
             REP.BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR, HIGH COURT OF KERALA.

          2. SHINY, D/O.SARADA,
              SREYASS VEEDU, SOORANADU NORTH VILLAGE
              SOORANAD P.O, KOLLAM DISTRICT.

             R1 BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR, SMT. R. REMA
             R2 BY ADV. SRI.R.SURAJ KUMAR
             BY ADV. SRI.M.KISHORKUMAR


            THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE HAVING COME UP FOR ADMISSION
            ON 03-09-2012, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE FOLLOWING:

BP

Crl.MC.No. 1674 of 2012 ()

                                APPENDIX

PETITIONER'S ANNEXURE:


ANNEXURE I: A TRUE COPY OF THE CHARGE SHEET DTD.06/07/2007.


RESPONDENT'S ANNEXURE: NIL.


                                                       //TRUE COPY//


                                                       P.A. TO JUDGE
BP


                S.S.SATHEESACHANDRAN, J.
            -----------------------------------------------
                  Crl.M.C No.1674 OF 2012
        -------------------------------------------------------
        Dated this the 3rd day of September, 2012


                              ORDER



     Petitioner is one among the accused (A3) in a pending

case before the Judicial          First Class Magistrate Court,

Sasthamcotta. She is being prosecuted with her mother and

brother for the offence punishable under Section 498(A) r/w

Section 34 of Indian Penal Code on a report filed by the Sub

Inspector of Police, Sooranad Police Station.            The de facto

complainant/second respondent alleged of matrimonial cruelty

and harassment by her husband, his mother and sister, and the

crime registered thereof after investigation has led to the

report as aforesaid indicting the accused persons, three in

number, for the offence under Section 498(A) of Indian Penal

Code.   Petitioner has filed the above petition to quash the

criminal proceedings against her contending that such

proceedings are abuse of process of the court.

Crl.MC No.1674/2012             2



     2.    Notice given, the second respondent has entered

appearance through counsel. I heard the counsel on both sides.



     3. With the petition a copy of the F.I.R has been produced

as Annexure I. Statement recorded from the second respondent

forming part of Annexure I F.I.R would disclose that soon after

the marriage, after a period of 1 = years, she was continuously

residing at her family house.      At the time of giving that

statement she has two children, the eldest then aged six years

and the youngest one year.        The allegation raised in her

statement would indicate that her case was that at the time of

marriage, towards dowry a sum of Rs.5,00,000/- was given to

her husband apart she being provided with gold ornaments for

101 sovereigns. After her marriage, the aforesaid sum and also

her valuable gold ornaments had been misused by her mother-

in-law and sister-in-law, is her case. She would further allege

that after misusing her valuable assets provided at the time of

marriage, which was so done without her consent, there was a

further demand for a sum of Rs.3,00,000/- and that demand was

made by her mother-in-law and sister-in-law. She was harassed,

intimidated and assaulted, both physically and mentally, at her

Crl.MC No.1674/2012            3



house by both of them, to compel her to accede to the aforesaid

demand, is her further case.     She would also state that her

husband failed to provide any maintenance to her and children

for the last more than one year and there was also default on his

part in taking her back to his house.           On the aforesaid

allegations raised by her, the crime was registered and that led

to the indictment for offences under Annexure I filed by the

police stated supra against her husband, mother-in-law and

sister-in-law. Going through final report also, I find, substantially

the same allegations imputed in the statement given by the

second respondent are reiterated to level the indictment against

the accused persons. In appreciating the challenge canvassed

by the petitioner against the report filed and also further

proceedings taken thereof against her by the Magistrate, it has

to be examined whether a prima facie case has been made out

warranting trial of the petitioner for the indictment leveled.

Statement      given  by   the   second     respondent/de     facto

complainant, though imputes of a demand for Rs.3,00,000/-

from her by the mother-in-law and the sister-in-law, it is not at

all disclosed that such demand was one towards dowry. Even

accepting the allegation raised as such that there was misuse of

Crl.MC No.1674/2012             4



her valuable assets by her mother-in-law and sister-in-law,

which, according to the complainant, were given to her at the

time of marriage, that by itself would not constitute any offence

under Section 498(A) of the Indian Penal Code. Similarly, any

demand for sum without any nexus to dowry cannot also give

rise to any imputation for prosecuting the husband or his

relatives for the offence under Section 498(A) of Indian Penal

Code. Even on the facts and circumstances involved also the

very case of the complainant, as seen from her statement, is

that one and half years after her marriage she shifted residence

to her family house. Her version in the statement is that in the

bed room of her family house she was intimidated and assaulted

by the mother-in-law and sister-in-law.       No date or other

particulars of such incident are given. Leave alone that her

version itself would show that even at the time of giving such

statement she had no injury on her person. Admittedly, she

continued residence in her family house for several years.

Further allegation is raised that there was default on the part of

her husband to take her back to his house and negligence in

providing assistance to her and children, at least one year prior

to giving of the statement. It is further shown that the petitioner

Crl.MC No.1674/2012             5



sister-in-law of the de facto complainant/second respondent is

an Ayurveda medical practitioner and she is living with her

husband. She is having a separate residence from that of her

family house. Her address given in the final report would also

prima facie supports that she has separate residence and is not

residing with her brother and mother. In that back drop, it is

evidently clear the allegation of harassment raised against her is

illmotivated and, prima facie intended only to harass and vex

her.

      4. Needless to point out that a criminal trial may lead to

immense suffering for the persons proceeded against. Though

the penal offence covered by Section 498(A) of Indian Penal

Code enables the wife to proceed not only against the husband,

but his close relatives as well, a pragmatic approach having

regard to the circumstances should be taken by the court and

there should be care and scrutiny whether the imputations

made against the close relatives of the husband warrant

proceedings against them. The Apex Court in "Preeti Gupta

and Another v State of Jharkhand and Another" ((2010) 7

SCC 6670) has emphasised the need to scrutinize the

allegations of the complaint with care and circumspection where

Crl.MC No.1674/2012              6



imputations are made against the close relatives of the husband

alleging harassment by them, especially, where those relatives

are shown to be residing at different places.

      5. Learned counsel for the second respondent/de facto

complainant pointing out that the trial has already commenced

and two among the witnesses are already examined before the

court urged that at this stage no further action from this court is

called for on the petition filed by one among the accused. I

cannot agree. Facts and circumstances prima facie reveal that

the allegations imputed against the petitioner, sister of the

husband, are unsustainable and do not constitute any offence

under Section 498(A) of Indian Penal Code. When that be so, to

compel her to face the trial is nothing but an abuse of process of

the court.    In that view of the matter, criminal proceedings

against the petitioner/third accused in C.C No.815 of 2007 of

Judicial First Class Magistrate Court, Sasthamcotta are quashed

under Section 482 of the Code.




vdv                       S.S.SATHEESACHANDRAN, JUDGE



