
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                PRESENT:

                            THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE P.BHAVADASAN

                    FRIDAY, THE 23RD DAY OF MARCH 2012/3RD CHAITHRA 1934

                                    Crl.Rev.Pet.No. 980 of 2011 ( )
                                        -------------------------------
                     CRA.497/2010 of ADDL. SESSIONS COURT-I, MAVELIKKARA
                                   MC.82/2009 of J.M.F.C., HARIPAD

REVISION PETITIONER:
---------------------------------

             GANGADHARA PANICKER BHUVANENDRAN,
             S/O. GANGADHARA PANICKER, AGED 63 YEARS
             PERMANENTLY RESIDING AT MANIMANDIRAM, KANDALLOOR
             SOUTH.P.O, KAYAMKULAM AND WORKING IN CROWN
             EMIRATES CO. LTD. P.O. BOX NO. 17030, JAFER ALI
             FREE ZONE, DUBAI, U.A.E.

             BY ADV. SRI.N.UNNIKRISHNAN

RESPONDENTS:
-----------------------

          1. SREEJA, W/O. MOHAN SARMA, SUDARSANA,
             KANDALLOOR SOUTH, KANDALLOOR VILLAGE
             PATTOLI MARKET.P.O, PIN - 690 531.

          2. BOBBY SARMA, AGED 10 YEARS
             REPRESENTED BY MOTHER SREEJA
             SUDARSANA, KANDALLOOR SOUTH
             KANDALLOOR VILLAGE, PATTOLI MARKET.P.O
             PIN - 690 531.

          3. THRISHNA, AGED 8 YEARS
             REPRESENTED BY MOTHER SREEJA
             SUDARSANA, KANDALLOOR SOUTH
             KANDALLOOR VILLAGE, PATTOLI MARKET.P.O
             PIN - 690 531.

          4. MOHAN SARMA, AGED 49 YEARS,
             W/O. GANGADHARAN, CTCO, INTERN CARGO
             SERVICES, LLC P.O. BOX NO. 16967, AJMAN
             UAE

          5. YESODHARA, AGED 86 YEARS,
             MANIMANDIRAM, KANDALLOOR SOUTH,
             KANDALLOOR VILLAGE
             PATTOLI MARKET.P.O, PIN - 690 531.

                                                                            (...2)

Crl.Rev.Pet.No. 980 of 2011

                                     :: 2 ::


       6. THE STATE OF KERALA,
          REP. BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR, HIGH COURT OF KERALA
          ERNAKULAM.


         BY ADV. SMT.K.M.MARY SHEEJA
         BY ADV. SRI.SAJEEV KUMAR K.GOPAL
         BY ADV. SRI.NAGARAJ NARAYANAN
         BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SMT.SEENA RAMAKRISHNAN

        THIS CRIMINAL REVISION PETITION HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD ON 23-03-
2012, ALONG WITH CRRP. 2565/2011, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE
FOLLOWING:

STK

Crl.Rev.Pet.No. 980 of 2011

                               APPENDIX




PETITIONER'S ANNEXURES:

A1:    CERTIFIED COPY OF THE JUDGMENT DAT4ED 16/02/2011 IN CRIMINAL
       APPEAL NO.497/2010 ON THE FILE OF THE ADDITIONAL SESSIONS COURT,
       MAVELIKKARA.

A2:    TRUE COPY OF ORDER IN M.C. NO.82/2009 DATED 20/08/2010 PASSED BY
       THE JUDICIAL FIRST CLASS MAGISTRATE COURT-1, HARIPPAD.

A3:    TRUE COPY OF BUILDING TAX RECEIPT NO.71 DATED 31/05/2005.

A4:    TRUE COPY OF BUILDING TAX RECEIPT NO.20 DATED 11/10/2010.

A5:    TRUE COPY OF PROPERTY TAX RECEIPT NO.1001801 DATED 30/12/2008.



RESPONDENTS' ANNEXURES: NIL


                                                      //TRUE COPY//


                                                      P A TO JUDGE


STK


                         P. BHAVADASAN, J.
               - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                 Crl.R.P. Nos. 980 & 2565 of 2011
               - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
            Dated this the 23rd           day of March, 2012.

                                    ORDER



          Judicial Magistrate of the First Class-I, Haripad

before which respondents 1 to 3 herein                                instituted

proceedings under Section 12 of the Protection of Women

from Domestic Violence Act (hereinafter referred to as DV

Act),granted reliefs under various provisions of the Act.

Aggrieved by the said order, the first and third respondents

before the trial court filed Crl.Appeal Nos.496 of 2010 and

497 of 2010 before the Additional Sessions Court,

Mavelikkara. The appellate court dismissed the appeals.

Aggrieved by the dismissal of his appeal, the first

respondent preferred Crl.R.P. 2565 of 2011 and the third

respondent preferred Crl.R.P.980 of 2011. Parties and facts

are referred to as they are available before the trial court.

Crl.R.P.980 & 2565/11.
                                2




             2. Certain facts are admitted. The first petitioner

before the trial court married the first respondent therein

on 23.4.1999 and they took up residence in the matrimonial

house known as 'Manimandiram', which according to the

revision petitioners belongs exclusively to the third

respondent before the trial court.          In that wedlock

petitioners 2 and 3 before the trial court were born. The

petition filed before the JFCM-I, Haripad makes mention of

various articles given at the time of marriage and

appropriated by the respondents. It was alleged that soon

after the marriage, the first petitioner before the trial court

had to suffer humiliation and mental agony due to the

treatment meted out to her by the first respondent. They

not only insulted her but also her parents and       demanded

more dowry from her parents. In 2002 the first respondent

is said to have left abroad on employment and he returned

in 2004. On his return, the treatment meted out to the first

Crl.R.P.980 & 2565/11.
                                3

petitioner became more cruel and brutal and unable to put

up with the same any more, the first petitioner left for her

parental home on 4.10.2005.        Complaining that the first

respondent was not maintaining her and her children and

asserting her right to reside in the shared household,

namely, 'Manimandiram', and claiming return of the gold

and cash given at the time of marriage, proceedings were

initiated under the DV Act claiming reliefs under Sections

18,19, 20 and 22 of the said Act.

             3.       The respondents resisted the petition.

According to the first respondent, the first petitioner is an

arrogant lady, who wanted to live in her own way and she

insisted that the first respondent should go and reside with

her in her parental house. Soon after the marriage she

began to show dislike for staying in the matrimonial house.

It was admitted that the articles mentioned in schedule B of

the petition were infact received by the first respondent and

he was ready to return the same. But he strongly disputed

Crl.R.P.980 & 2565/11.
                                 4

that the gold ornaments and the money said to have been

given at the time of the marriage were misappropriated by

him.     The first petitioner by her own conduct chose to

remain away from the first respondent and the first

respondent has never shown any dislike for the first

petitioner and treated her cruelly. The first petitioner was

never amenable to any acceptable or amicable settlement

and she wanted to have things in her own way. The current

situation has arisen due the acts of the first petitioner and

the first respondent disputed that she is entitled to any

relief under the Act.

             4. In the objection by the second respondent, who

is none other than the mother of the first respondent and

the mother-in-law of the first petitioner, she feigns

ignorance about the articles said to have been given at the

time of marriage. She disputed that she ever committed

any act which caused mental agony or harassment to the

first petitioner.      She also disputed that she had ever

Crl.R.P.980 & 2565/11.
                                5

demanded from the parents of the first petitioner for dowry

or demanded the first petitioner to get more dowry or gold.

According to her, the petition is misconceived.

             5.      The third respondent in his objection

contended that he had nothing to do with the gold

ornaments or so-called articles said to have been given at

the time of marriage. He is employed abroad and he and

his family are settled at his place of employment. He had

at no point of time demanded either gold or money either

from the first petitioner or her parents. The allegations

against him are totally baseless and ill-motivated. He too

prayed for a dismissal of the petition.

             6. Evidence was adduced before the trial court.

Evidence consists of the testimony of P.Ws.1 to 7 and

documents marked as Exts.P1 to P5 marked from the side of

the petitioners.       The respondents chose to   adduce no

evidence. The trial court raised the following issues:

Crl.R.P.980 & 2565/11.
                                6

             "1) Whether the petitioner and her children

      are entitled to any maintenance? If so, at what

      rate?

             2) Whether the petitioner is entitled to any

      amount towards price of gold ornaments from the

      respondents?

             3) Whether the petitioner is entitled to any

      amount towards price of gold ornaments from

      the respondents?

             4) Whether the petitioner is entitled to get

      back the movables mentioned in Schedule B of

      the petition?

             5) Whether the petitioner is entitled to get

      any residence order?

             6) Whether the petitioner is entitled to got

      any Protection order?"

             7. Ultimately after an analysis of the evidence,

the reliefs were granted as follows:

             "(1) The 1st respondent is hereby directed to

      pay Rs.10,000/- per mensem to the petitioner and

      Rs.5,000/- each per mensem to the children of the

      petitioner and the 1st respondent from August,

      2009.

Crl.R.P.980 & 2565/11.
                                7



             (2) The respondents are hereby directed to

      return the items mentioned in schedule B of the

      application.

             (3) The respondents are hereby restrained

      from causing any hindrance to the peaceful

      residence of the petition and her children in the

      shared household of her namely 'Mani Mandiram',

      Kandallur       south  muri,   Kandallur    village,

      Kayamkulam P.O.

             (4) The respondents are hereby prohibited

      from      physically or  mentally    harassing  the

      petitioner.

             The claims for compensation and value of

      gold ornaments stand disallowed."

             8. As already stated the first respondent and the

third respondent preferred appeals before the            lower

appellate court. The first respondent was aggrieved by the

quantum of maintenance granted to the first petitioner and

the injunction against physically and mentally harassing the

first petitioner. His contention was that he had never done

any act which would cause any agony to the first petitioner

Crl.R.P.980 & 2565/11.
                                8

and the allegations in the petition, which have ultimately

been accepted by the court below, are baseless and there is

no evidence regarding the same.

             9.    The third respondent also filed an appeal

mainly aggrieved by the residential order granted in the

shared household, 'Manimandiram', which according to him

exclusively belonged to him and it was never treated as

either as the matrimonial house or the shared household in

order to grant relief to the petitioners in relation to the said

building.

             10. The lower appellate court by a common order

disposed of the appeals. The lower appellate court felt that

the maintenance granted at the rate of Rs.10,000/- to the

first petitioner and Rs.5,000/- each to petitioners 2 and 3

are rather on the high side and came to the conclusion that

the just and reasonable amount is Rs.3,000/- to the first

petitioner and Rs.3,500/- each to the two children.         The

residential order was retained. Thus the appeal filed by the

Crl.R.P.980 & 2565/11.
                               9

first respondent was partly allowed, and the appeal filed by

the third respondent stood dismissed.

             11. Before this court, learned counsel appearing

for the third respondent as Crl.R.P. No.980 of 2011, very

vehemently contended that the courts below have erred in

law and on facts in coming to the conclusion that

'Manimandiram' is the shared household. Learned counsel

went on to contend that there was no domestic relationship

between the petitioners and the third respondent and

therefore no residential order could have been granted to

the first petitioner       in relation to 'Manimandiram'.

According to learned counsel, from 2005 onwards there was

no relationship between the petitioners and the first

respondent. Therefore any domestic relationship that might

have existed earlier got snapped and at the time when the

petition was filed, there was no domestic relationship

existing and 'Manimandiram' could not be treated either as

matrimonial house or shared houehold of the first petitioner

Crl.R.P.980 & 2565/11.
                               10

before the trial court. In fact, learned counsel pointed out

that it was doubtful whether after 2002 the first petitioner

has ever resided in 'Manimandiram'.        First and second

respondents have no right over the building. The building

was put up by him. It is also contended that respondents 1

and 2 have surrendered whatever rights they had in 2006

and thereafter the third defendant became the exclusive

owner of the building and the property, in which the

building stood. The mere fact that at one point of time the

first petitioner might have resided in 'Manimandiram' is

insufficient for her to seek a right of residence in the said

building especially when it did not belong to the first

respondent        and  belonged  exclusively  to  the   third

respondent. In support of his contention, learned counsel

relied on the decision reported in S.R. Batra v. Smt.

Taruna Batra (AIR 2007 SC 1118).

Crl.R.P.980 & 2565/11.
                                11




             12. Learned counsel for the revision petitioner in

Crl.R.P.980 of 2011 went on to contend that the sine qua

non for granting relief under the Act are (i) there should be

domestic violence and (ii) there should be domestic

relationship.        In the case on hand, both are absent.

Drawing attention to the pleadings in the case, learned

counsel went on to point out that even according to the first

petitioner, the so-called cruel acts meted out to her were

prior to 2005 and even according to the first petitioner,

after 2005 there has been no relationship between her and

the first respondent let alone respondents 2 ad 3.        The

petition has been filed only in 2009. The long delay in filing

the petition for reliefs under the Act shows the lack of

bonafides and the malafides in initiating proceedings

against the respondents. Attention was drawn to the fact

that it was conceded by the first petitioner when she was

examined as P.W.1 that the third respondent with his family

Crl.R.P.980 & 2565/11.
                                 12

is residing abroad and therefore there was no joint family as

contemplated under the Act in order to enable the first

petitioner      to    seek residential order  in  respect  of

'Manimandiram' labelling it as a shared household.

             13.     It was also contended that there was no

report called for from the protection officer and without

which, the proceedings could not have been continued by

the learned Magistrate and omission to call for a report

vitiates the whole proceedings. In support of his contention

that delay is a crucial aspect regarding the determination of

rights under the Act, learned counsel relied on the decision

reported in D. Velusamy v. D. Patchaiammal ((2010) 10

SCC 469).

             14. Learned counsel went on to point out that

viewed from any angle, the residential order granted in

respect of Manimandiram which exclusively belonged to 3rd

respondent cannot be sustained.

Crl.R.P.980 & 2565/11.
                               13

             15. Learned counsel appearing for the revision

petitioner in Crl.R.P.2565 of 2011 contended that sine qua

non for initiating proceedings is the commission of domestic

violence which might have compelled the first petitioner to

initiate proceedings under the Act. Learned counsel also

drew the attention of this court to the order passed by the

trial court and pointed out that there is no finding that any

domestic violence as such has been committed by the first

respondent or other respondents in order to clothe the

petitioners with right to initiate proceedings under the Act.

Unless it is found that domestic violence has been

committed, reliefs could not have been granted under the

Act. According to the learned counsel, the commission of

domestic violence is not a matter of presumption but of

pleadings and proof. Learned counsel contended that even

according to the first petitioner, the so-called cruel acts

were committed prior to 2005 and after 2005 there was no

relationship whatsoever between the first petitioner and the

Crl.R.P.980 & 2565/11.
                              14

first respondent. It escapes one's understanding, according

to learned counsel, as to what had prevented the first

petitioner from either complaining about the cruel acts said

to have been committed by the first respondent or the other

respondents till 2009 when suddenly the first petitioner

initiated proceedings under the Act. The long delay and also

the absence of any finding regarding the commission of any

domestic violence vitiates the orders of the courts below.

Therefore, it is contended that the order passed by both the

trial court as well as the appellate court are unsustainable

in law.

             16.      Learned counsel  appearing    for  the

respondents on the other hand pointed out that though the

contentions raised by the revision petitioners may look

formidable and attractive, they are totally baseless and

unwarranted. Learned counsel went on to point out that in

order to constitute a domestic violence, it is not necessary

that physical violence or other forms of violence should be

Crl.R.P.980 & 2565/11.
                                  15

committed immediately prior to the filing of the petition.

Further, physical violence is not necessary to invoke the

provisions of the Act. The Act contemplates several types of

violence which would be clear from Sections 3 and 4 of the

Act. It is true that the first petitioner has stated that she

had snapped           relationship between her and the first

respondent in 2005 and has been residing in her parental

house since then. But she has also stated that the first

respondent has not cared to maintain her and her children

which is a statutory obligation and that constitutes

economic abuse. She has also stated in her petition that the

gold and money given to her at the time of marriage have

been misappropriated by the respondents and they

continued to demand more money and dowry. Domestic

violence contemplated under the Act takes in verbal and

emotional abuse as well as economic abuse.           Learned

counsel drew the attention of this court to the averments in

the petition and the evidence of P.W.1 and highlighted the

Crl.R.P.980 & 2565/11.
                               16

plight of the first petitioner in having been compelled to

reside in hotel rooms with the first respondent and the cruel

treatment meted out to her on various occasions. Petitioner

has given evidence as P.W.1 to the effect that soon after the

marriage she was taken to        'Manimandiram', which was

considered as her matrimonial house and she stayed there

till 2005. It is true that she returned to her parental house

soon after the first respondent left for employment abroad.

But frequently thereafter she used to go and reside in

'Manimandiram'. It is also stated that on a later occasion

when she went to reside there, the second respondent

objected to the same stating that the building belonged to

the third respondent. Drawing attention to the evidence

adduced in the case, learned counsel for the respondents

pointed out that the evidence is clear to the effect that the

petitioners before the court below and the       respondents

have lived together in 'Manimandiram' as a joint family and

that was treated as the abode of the petitioner and all the

Crl.R.P.980 & 2565/11.
                               17

respondents at all points of time. The contention now taken

that 'Manimandiaram' exclusively belonged to the third

respondent and the first and second respondents were

residing there only as beneficiaries of the mercy shown by

the third respondent is urged only in appeal and before this

court. A look at the objections filed by the respondents

before the trial court did not reflect any such contention at

all. At the time of evidence, the respondents never had a

case that 'Manimandiram' was neither the matrimonial

house nor the shared household of the parties.            The

so-called affidavits filed by the first and second respondents

asserting that 'Manimandiram' belonged exclusively to the

third respondent is a clear afterthought and cannot be of

any significance or consequence.           The petitioner has

pointed out about her stay at hotels in 2004 when the first

respondent returned from abroad and the humiliating and

agonizing treatment she had to face at the hands of the first

respondent.

Crl.R.P.980 & 2565/11.
                              18




             17. Learned counsel referring to the definition of

'domestic relationship', 'shared household' and 'domestic

violence' as mentioned in Section 3 of the Act pointed out

that      in order to attract the definition of 'domestic

relationship' and 'shared household',    it is not necessary

that at the relevant point of time the petitioner should

continue her residence with the parties concerned or in the

residence involved in the proceedings. Past conduct in this

regard would be sufficient to clothe the petitioners with

rights to invoke the provisions under the Act. In support of

his case that even after divorce provisions of the Act can be

invoked, learned counsel relied on the decisions reported in

Smt.Bharati Naik v. Shri.Ravi Ramnath Halarnkar

(CDJ 2010 BHC 549) and Priya v. Shibu (2008(3) KHC

125).       In support of his contention that 'domestic

relationship' does not mean that the relationship should be

subsisting at the time of institution of the proceedings,

Crl.R.P.980 & 2565/11.
                              19

learned counsel relied on the decision reported in Palani M

v. Meenakshi (2008(3) KHC 320).           Reliance was also

placed on the decision reported in Preceline George v.

State of Kerala (2011(4) KHC 502). In support of his case

that even economic abuse is sufficient to clothe the

petitioners with right to invoke the provisions of the Act,

learned counsel relied on the decision reported in Jovita

Olga Ignesia Mascarenhase Coutinho v. Rajan Maria

Coutinho (CDJ 2010 BHC 1915).             In support of his

contention that the courts below were justified in grating

residential order, learned counsel relied on the decision

reported in Prabhakaran v. State of Kerala (2009(1)

K..L.T. 175).

             18. Learned counsel for the respondents went on

to point out that the contention that unless a report is called

for from the Protection Officer, the proceedings under the

Act cannot go on is baseless.      Drawing attention to the

provisions of the Act, learned counsel contended that the

Crl.R.P.980 & 2565/11.
                                 20

proceedings under the Ac seeking appropriate reliefs could

be initiated in two ways. Proceedings could be initiated

either on the report of the Protection Officer or by an

independent application by the person concerned.              If

proceedings are initiated by the person aggrieved, it is not

mandatory that the court should call for a report of the

Protection Officer. The court may do so and if a report is

obtained, that shall be taken into consideration at the time

of passing orders. If on the other hand, proceedings are

initiated on the basis of the report filed by the Protection

Officer, then necessarily at the time of considering the

reliefs, that report will have to be taken note of. In support

of the above contention, learned counsel relied on the

decision reported in Shah Sami Khan v. Adnan Sami

Khan (2011(3 K.L.T. SN 11).

             19. It is true that the trial court has not as such

entered       a finding of domestic violence which justified

initiation of proceedings under the Act. It is also true that

Crl.R.P.980 & 2565/11.
                                 21

no specific issue as such has been raised. But the trial

court has noticed the various complaints raised by the

petitioners and the objection filed by the respondents. It

has also considered whether the petitioners are entitled to

protection orders as envisaged under the Act. The trial

court has considered those aspects and have come to the

conclusion that on the basis of the materials available, the

petitioners are entitled to the various reliefs granted by the

said court.

             20.     The appellate court was confined to the

question of grant and quantum of maintenance as well as

residential order passed by the trial court.      It does not

appear that the lower appellate court was actually

addressed regarding the question as to whether the trial

court had not entered a specific finding regarding domestic

violence nor was there an issue raised regarding that aspect

of the case.

Crl.R.P.980 & 2565/11.
                                22




             21. As rightly pointed out by the learned counsel

for the respondents, it is not physical violence that enables

the petitioners to initiate proceedings under the Act. It will

be useful at this point of time to refer to some of the

definitions, which are relevant in the present context.

             22.      Section 2(a) defines aggrieved person.

Section 2(f) defines domestic relationship.       Section 2(s)

defines shared household.         Section 3 defines domestic

violence. It makes mention of physical abuse, sexual abuse,

verbal and emotional abuse and economic abuse. Section

17 of the Act recognises the right of the aggrieved person to

reside in the shared household. Section 18 concerns itself

with grant of protection orders.       Section 19 deals with

residential orders and Section 20 deals with monetary

reliefs. The application to be filed seeking the above reliefs

is under Section 12 of the Act.

Crl.R.P.980 & 2565/11.
                              23




             23. Before going further, the object and the

purpose of the Act       may be considered.      Considering

domestic violence as a human rights issue and its

magnitude, it became        necessary to enact a law to

safeguard the victims, i.e., woman, who is subjected to

cruelty by her husband and relatives. The Act takes within

its purview wide range of abuses and seeks to prevent any

form of abuse of women, be economic, sexual or otherwise.

The expression domestic violence is       couched in a wide

language and so also it can be seen from the definitions that

it is not necessary that the relationship necessary to attract

the provisions of the Act      exist at the time of seeking

protection atleast in respect of some of the reliefs. It takes

care of woman whose marriage relationship subsists and

who are also divorced. May be that the relief available to

the divorced wife may be quite different and may not be as

wide as a woman holding the marital status. The Act seeks

Crl.R.P.980 & 2565/11.
                               24

to provide secure housing, protection from any harassment

of any nature, threats etc for women.

             24. A look at the definition of 'domestic

relationship' shows that it is not necessary that the

relationship contemplated under that definition should exist

at the time of invoking the provisions of the Act.       Past

relationship would also suffice.        Construing the said

provision, in the decision reported in Palani M's case

(supra) it was held as follows:

             "The above referred provision makes it clear

      that any woman who is or has been in a domestic

      relationship with the respondent can make a

      complaint under the provisions of the said Act.

      Further the "domestic relationship' thus defined

      as a relationship between two persons, who life or

      have, at any point of time, lived together. The

      provision does not say that they should have lived

      together for a particular period. Even as per the

      case of the petitioner, he had consensual sex with

      her, but there was no promise to marry her.

      Thus, the averments made in the plaint as well as

Crl.R.P.980 & 2565/11.
                                   25

      in the counter affidavit will make it very clear

      that the        petitioner and the respondent had a

      close relationship and had sex. As stated already,

      the Act does not contemplate that the petitioner

      and the respondent should live or have lived

      together for a particular period or for few days.

      From the averments made by the petitioner in his

      plaint and in his counter affidavit, one can infer

      that both of them seems to have               shared

      household and lived together at least at the time

      having sex by them. From the discussions made

      above, I am unable to accept the contention of the

      learned counsel appearing for the petitioner that

      the application filed by the respondent under the

      provisions of the said Act is not maintainable."

             25.    In the decision reported in Smt. Bharati

Naik's case (supra) it was held as follows:

             "In my view, the definition of the "aggrieved

      person" and the "Respondent" are the defining

      definitions in so far as the issue that arises for

      consideration        in   the  present  petitions is

      concerned. The definition of "aggrieved person"

      postulates a woman who is or "has been" in a

Crl.R.P.980 & 2565/11.
                              26

      domestic relationship with the Respondent and

      the Respondent means any adult male person who

      is, or "has been", in a domestic relationship with

      the aggrieved person.          Since a domestic

      relationship is a sine qua non for invoking the

      provisions of the said Act, Section 2(f) also

      becomes material. Section 2(f) as can be seen

      from a reading of the said provision means a

      domestic relationship between two persons who

      live or "have", at any point of time, lived together

      in a shared household, when they are related by

      consanguinity,     marriage,     or    through    a

      relationship in the nature of marriage, adoption

      or are family members living together as a joint

      family. Therefore, the aforesaid three definitions

      take in their sweep even a past relationship as the

      words "has been" or "have lived" have been used

      in the said definitions. The said words therefore

      have been used purposefully as the said Act has

      been enacted to protect a woman form domestic

      violence and therefore, there cannot be any fetter

      which can come in the way by interpreting the

      provisions in a manner to mean that unless the

      domestic relationship continues on the date of the

Crl.R.P.980 & 2565/11.
                               27

      application, the provisions of the said Act cannot

      be invoked. The words "has been" and the words

      "have lived" have been used for the purpose of

      showing the past relationship or experience

      between the concerned parties. To interpret the

      said provisions so as to mean that only subsisting

      domestic relationship are covered would result in

      turning the provisions of the said Act Otiose. As

      is well settled by the judgments of the Apex Court

      in     cases     of beneficent  Legislations,   an

      interpretation which furthers purpose must be

      preferred to the one which obstructs the object

      an paralyses the purpose of the Act. Reference

      could be made to the judgment of the Apex Court

      reported in (2009) 14 SCC 546 in the matter of

      Union of India V/s Devendra Kumar Pant and

      others. Apart from that a literal construction of

      the provisions would show that even if the woman

      was in the past in a relationship she would be

      entitled to invoke the provisions of the Said Act.

      The words "has been" or "have lived" appearing

      in the definitions are plain and clear and

      therefore effect would have to be given to them.

      In the instant case, the Petitioner who is the

Crl.R.P.980 & 2565/11.
                                28

      aggrieved person and the Respondent No.1 had

      lived together in the shared household when they

      were related by marriage. The petitioner though

      divorced continued to stay in the shared

      household till she was allegedly forcefully evicted

      by the Respondent No.1, she would therefore be

      entitled to invoke the provisions of the said Act,

      as the Petitioner and the Respondent No.1 are

      squarely covered by the the provisions of the said

      Act."

             26. The issue as to whether the provisions of the

Act are applicable in a case where a woman was no longer

residing with her husband or who was subjected to actual

domestic violence prior to the coming into force of the Act

was considered in the decision reported in Bhanot v.

Savita Bhanot (2012 (1) K.L.T. 637), wherein it was held

as follows:

             "The attitude displayed by the Petitioner has

      once again thrown open the decision of the High

      Court for consideration. We agree with the view

      expressed by the High Court that in looking into a

      complaint under S.12 of the PWD Act, could be

Crl.R.P.980 & 2565/11.
                                   29

      taken into consideration while passing an order

      under Ss.18,19 and 20 thereof. In our view, the

      Delhi High Court has also rightly held that even if

      a wife, who had shared a household in the past,

      but was longer doing so the Act came into force,

      would still be entitled to the protection of the

      PWD Act,2005.

                    ..........             ...........

             In our view, the situation comes squarely

      within the ambit of S.3 of the PWD Act, 2005

      which defines "domestic violence" in wide terms,

      and, accordingly, no interference is called for

      with the impugned order of the High Court.

      However, considering the fact that the couple is

      childless       and     the Respondent   has    herself

      expressed apprehension of her safety if she were

      to live alone in a rented accommodation, we are

      of the view that keeping in mind te object of the

      Act to provide effective protection of the rights of

      women guaranteed under the Constitution, who

      are victims of violence of any kind occurring

      within the family, the order of High Court

      requires to be modified. We, therefore, modify

      the order passed by the High Court and direct

Crl.R.P.980 & 2565/11.
                               30

      that the Respondent be provided with a right of

      residence where the Petitioner is residing, by way

      of relief under S.19 of the PWD Act, and we also

      pass protection orders under S.18 thereof. As far

      as any monetary relief is concerned, the same has

      already been provided by the learned Magistrate

      and in terms of the said order, the Respondent is

      receiving a sum of `6,000/- per month towards her

      expenses.

             Accordingly in terms of S.19 of the PWD Act,

      2005, we direct the Petitioner to provide a

      suitable      portion of his   residence    to the

      Respondent for her residence, together with all

      necessary amenities to make such residential

      premises properly habitable for the Respondent,

      within 29th February, 2012. The said portion of

      the premises will be properly furnished according

      to the choice of the Respondent to enable her to

      live     in   dignity in the   shared    household.

      Consequently, the sum of `10,000/- directed to be

      paid to the Respondent for obtaining alternative

      accommodation in the event the Petitioner was

      reluctant to live in the same house with the

      Respondent, shall stand reduced from `10,000/- to

Crl.R.P.980 & 2565/11.
                                31

      `4,000/-, which will be paid to the Respondent in

      addition to the sum of `6,000/- directed to be paid

      to her towards her maintenance. In other words,

      in     addition   to  providing    the   residential

      accommodation to the Respondent, the Petitioner

      shall also pay a total sum of `10,000/- per month to

      the Respondent towards her maintenance and

      day-to-day expenses."

             27. The issue as to whether domestic relationship

should continue as on the date of preferring the claim was

considered in the decision reported in Priya's case (supra),

wherein it was held as follows:



             "The further question is as to whether the

      applicant should continue to be in a domestic

      relationship with the respondents on the date of

      preferring the claim and whether the persons are

      who are related by consanguinity, marriage or

      any of the relationship referred to in S.2(f) of the

      Act should continue to be in that relationship on

      the date of filing the petition. In other words,

      whether the employment of present perfect

      continuous tense in S.2(a), S.2(f), S.2(q) and S.2

Crl.R.P.980 & 2565/11.
                                32

      (s) renders its obligatory on the part of the

      applicant to be in a domestic relationship on the

      date of preferring the application.     I am not

      inclined to accept the contention made on behalf

      of the respondents that the present perfect

      continuous tense used to indicate the continuance

      of the relationship even on the date of preferring

      the application. On the contrary, the words 'has

      been' and the words 'have lived' are employed for

      the purpose of showing the past relationship or

      experience between the parties concerned and

      they cannot be so construed as to mean that

      unless the "domestic relationship" continues on

      the date of application, the application, the

      application will have no locus standi to move the

      Magistrate. The existence of the present status

      as a wife cannot be read into those provisions to

      hold that the application filed by the revision

      petitioner      before the  Magistrate  was   not

      maintainable.      The view taken by the learned

      Sessions Judge is clearly wrong. The judgment

      sought to be revised is accordingly set aside and

      the order dated 11/01/2007 passed by the

      Magistrate is restored. Respondents 1 and 3 are

Crl.R.P.980 & 2565/11.
                                33

      given one month's ime from today to deposit the

      arrears of maintenance before the Magistrate.

      They shall thereafter continue to pay the interim

      maintenance in accordance with and subject to

      the order passed by the Magistrate. The revision

      petitioner as well as respondents 1 to 3 shall

      appear before the learned Magistrate without any

      further notice on 01/07/2008 and participate in

      the further proceedings before the Magistrate,

      who shall pass final orders, as expeditiously as

      possible, after giving the counter petitioners also

      an opportunity of being heard."

             28. The term domestic violence was considered in

the      decision     reported  in   Jovita    Olga    Ignesia

Mascarenhase Coutinho's case (supra), wherein it was

held as follows:

             "As regards the domestic violence or for that

      matter physical abuse is concerned, the learned

      Magistrate is totally silent about it but the matter

      has been considered by the learned Additional

      Sessions Judge in the Judgment dated 3.3.2010

      observing that the petitioner had failed to prove

      any acts of domestic violence against her, had in

Crl.R.P.980 & 2565/11.
                               34

      fact taken place, when she resided along with the

      respondent in the matrimonial house             at

      Chinchinim. The said attempt appears to be not

      very satisfactory either, as the learned Additional

      Sessions Judge has misunderstood the concept of

      domestic violence.      In fact, it appears that

      another Additional Sessions Judge in Criminal

      Appeal No.30/2008, between the same parties,

      had in fact noted in his Order dated 1.8.2009, and

      in my view rightly, that domestic violence

      includes "physical abuse",        "sexual abuse",

      "verbal and emotional abuse".         The learned

      Additional Sessions Judge had also observed that

      to consider the application (under Section 12 of

      the Act) it is not necessary to consider other

      forms of abuses except the economic abuse, since

      the Complainant had averred that she was living

      without any monetary support, had no means to

      support her and that the respondent had

      deliberately kept the passbook and the FDR in is

      custody in order to cause to hardship to her.

             The expression "domestic violence" has a

      very amplitude, as defined under Section 3 of the

      Act, and it includes, as already stated physical

Crl.R.P.980 & 2565/11.
                               35

      abuse, sexual abuse, verbal and emotional abuse,

      economic abuse which in turn, inter alia, includes

      deprivation of all or any economic or financial

      resources to     which the   aggrieved person is

      entitled under any law or custom whether

      payable under an Order of a Court or otherwise

      or which the aggrieved person requires out of

      necessity including, but not limited to, household

      necessities for the aggrieved person and her

      children, if any, stridhan, the property jointly or

      separately owned by the aggrieved person,

      payment of rental related to the shared household

      and maintenance."

             29. The contention on the basis that from 2005

onwards the first petitioner before the trial court has been

residing in her own house without any connection with the

first respondent or others will disentitle her to claim any

relief under the provisions of the DV Act cannot be

countenanced in view of the decisions referred to above. As

to the contention that there is no finding regarding the

domestic violence, of course it is true that no such issue is

Crl.R.P.980 & 2565/11.
                               36

seen raised by the trial court nor was any specific finding

to that effect.       But the fact remains that there is no

evidence to show that as regards the maintenance of the

petitioners anything was provided by the first respondent

atleast from 2005 onwards, when he had a statutory

obligation to maintain his wife and children. He had the

obligation to provide        them abode, food and other

necessities of life. He has no case that he has provided

maintenance to the petitioners before the trial court. It may

be true that even though she had alleged physical assault

and other forms of domestic violence, which had taken

place long ago, she had not complained about the same to

any of the authorities till 2009. But that does not mean

that she cannot take recourse to the provisions of the Act

which does not depend upon the filing of a complaint before

any other authority immediately on commission of domestic

violence. As regards the place of residence, she gets a right

to reside in the shared household if she had lived in the

Crl.R.P.980 & 2565/11.
                              37

house concerned in the past as contemplated under the

definition of the shared household.

             30. It was contended with much vehemence that

'Manimandiram', the alleged shared household belonged

exclusively to the third respondent and that does not qualify

therefore to be called as a shared household.       The first

petitioner has stated that after marriage she was taken to

'Manimandiram' and that was her matrimonial house. In

her evidence, she had stated that after marriage she had

been taken to 'Manimandiram', where all the respondents

including the third respondent along with his family were

residing. She would also say in her evidence that quite

frequently the third respondent and his family used to come

down to their native place and reside in 'Manimadiram'

along with his wife and children.

             31. It may be useful at this juncture to refer to

the objections filed by the respondents        to the petition

preferred by the first petitioner. In the objection filed by

Crl.R.P.980 & 2565/11.
                               38

the first respondent,     in paragraph 9 it is mentioned as

follows:

             "The petitioner intentionally refused to

      reside in her matrimonial home even though the

      1st respondent made several requests for the

      same."

In paragraph 10, it is seen stated as follows:

             "The first respondent was not interested in

      residing permanently in the house of the

      petitioner and the petitioner intentionally refused

      to come and reside in her matrimonial home even

      after repeated demands, the 1st respondent was

      forced to take the hotel rooms and rented house."

In paragraph 15, it is stated as follows:

             "The 1st respondent and his relatives never

      prevented the petitioner from residing in the

      shared household. The petitioner is residing in

      her home according to her whims and fancies."

In the objection filed by the second respondent, in

paragraph 7 it is mentioned as follows:

Crl.R.P.980 & 2565/11.
                                39

             "The petitioner was not interested        in

      residing in the house of the respondents. ... The

      petitioner never managed the entire domestic

      affairs of the shared household, never prepared

      and served food to the 2nd respondent."

In paragraph 8, it is mentioned as follows:

             "The 2nd respondent never prevented the

      petitioner and children for residing in the house of

      the 2nd respondent."

             32.      What is significant is that there is no

statement in any of the objections by anyone of the

respondents that 'Manimandiram' exclusively belonged to

the third respondent and first and second respondents have

no rights over the building.        On the contrary, the first

respondent refers to the house as both matrimonial home

and shared household and so does the second respondent.

Even though the third respondent does not say it is the

matrimonial house of the first petitioner, he does not also

say that it exclusively belonged to him or others have no

rights over the building. Later the respondents grew wise

Crl.R.P.980 & 2565/11.
                               40

and at the appellate stage came forward with a case that

the first and second respondents had no manner of right

over 'Manimandiram' and that it exclusively belonged to the

third respondent. Nowhere in the objection filed by the

third respondent it was stated that the building was

constructed by him and that it belonged exclusively to him

and that respondents 1 and 2 have no manner of right over

the same. He also did not say that the first and second

respondents were residing in 'Manimandiram' under the

mercy of the third respondent.

             33. Learned counsel appearing for the revision

petitioner in Crl.R.P.980 of 2011 placed considerable

reliance on the decision reported in S.R. Batra's case

(supra).       That was a case where the couple lived in the

house belonging to the mother -in-law. Later a claim was

raised with respect to the said building by the wife as a

shared household. In the said case, it was held that stray

incidents of residence is not sufficient to constitute a shared

Crl.R.P.980 & 2565/11.
                                41

household. The decision went on to hold as follows:

             "As regards Section 17(1) of the Act, in our

      opinion the wife is only entitled to claim a right to

      residence in a shared household, and a 'shared

      household' would only mean the house belonging

      to or taken on rent by the husband, or the house

      which belongs to the joint family of which the

      husband is a member. The property in question in

      the present case neither belongs to Amit Batra

      nor was it taken on rent by him nor is it a joint

      family property of which the husband Amit Batra

      is a member. It is the exclusive property of

      appellant No. 2, mother of Amit Batra. Hence it

      cannot be called a 'shared household'.

             No     doubt,  the   definition  of   'shared

      household' in Section 2(s) of the Act is not very

      happily worded, and appears to be the result of

      clumsy drafting, but we have to give it an

      interpretation which is sensible and which does

      not lead to chaos in society."

             34. One fails to see how the principle laid down in

the above decision can have any application to the present

case. That decision was rendered on the facts of the said

Crl.R.P.980 & 2565/11.
                                 42

case that the house over which claim was laid was neither

matrimonial house nor the shared household as far as

Smt.Taruna Batra is concerned.           It was an occasional

staying in the house of the mother-in-law and there was

nothing to show that the members of the family had resided

as a joint family.       Holding that if stray and occasional

residence is to be construed as a shared household, it would

lead to a calamity, the Apex Court went on to hold that such

occasional residence cannot be treated as conferring a

right to claim residential order as a shared household.

             35. The evidence in the case on hand may be

looked into. P.W.1, the first petitioner had given evidence

to the effect that after marriage, she was taken to

Manimandiram and she resided there till 2002.              The

children were born while she was residing there. Later,

when her husband, namely, the first respondent went

abroad, she had gone to her parental house. However, she

in her evidence        stated that she had gone to her parental

Crl.R.P.980 & 2565/11.
                                 43

house as directed by the first respondent. Of course, she

also says about the ill-treatment meted out to her by the

second respondent. It is also true that she says that from

2005 onwards she has been continuously residing in her

parental house.

             36.      It is clear from her evidence and the

statements in the objections already referred to that the

respondents treated 'Manimandiram' as the matrimonial

house of the first petitioner as well as the first respondent

and they too were willing to grant the building the status

of a shared household. P.W.1 has given evidence to the

effect that after marriage when she went to the matrimonial

house, i.e., 'Manimandiram', respondents were there and

the third respondent and his family were also residing

there. The mere fact that the third respondent is employed

abroad and he has a permanent residence at his place of

employment, it does not mean that there is no joint family

as envisaged under Sections 2(f) and 2(g) of the Act. At any

Crl.R.P.980 & 2565/11.
                              44

rate, whenever the third respondent along with his family

comes to the native place, they used to reside along with

the first petitioner and respondents. In order to attract the

definitions regarding    'domestic relationship' and 'shared

household', it is not necessary that all persons concerned

must reside jointly at every point of time.

             37. It was contended on behalf of the revision

petitioner in Crl.R.P. 980 of 2011 that atleast from 2006

onwards the building exclusively belonged to the third

respondent when the first and second respondents and the

sister of the third respondent relinquished their rights over

the property in respect of the third respondent.

             38. There is nothing to show that the building

exclusively belonged to the third respondent except for the

belated assertions made by the respondents          that the

building was put up using his funds. At any rate, there is

ample evidence and pleadings even from the side of the

respondents to show that 'Manimandiram' was treated as a

Crl.R.P.980 & 2565/11.
                              45

shared household where the first petitioner had resided for

a considerable period.       Even assuming that the first

petitioner left 'Manimandiram' in 2005 and never came and

resided thereafter, that does not denude her from asserting

rights over the shared household in terms of the provisions

of the Act. She had an accrued and acquired right which

she could enforce after the coming into force of the Act

even though the rights might have accrued before the

commencement of the Act.

             39. One cannot omit to note that there was no

evidence adduced on the side of the respondents. Therefore

the     evidence      adduced by  the  petitioners   stands

uncontroverted.

             40. When P.W.1 was cross-examined, there was

no suggestion to her that the house belonged exclusively to

the third respondent and the first and third respondents

had no manner of right over the same. It will be interesting

to see the suggestions made in cross-examination to P.W.1

Crl.R.P.980 & 2565/11.
                               46

by the first respondent. It is suggested as follows:

      "                                           

                                CP  

                                                    CP

              ."


Further suggestion is

      "(Q) 1st CP                          
           ?

      (A)  1st CP          . 1st CP  
                    ."



In cross examination by respondents 2 and 3, the

suggestion made is as follows:

      "(Q) Shared house hold       2nd & 3rd

      CP              ?

      (A) 2nd CP        .                    3rd CP  

                                          ."



The house referred to in the cross-examination of both the

counter petitioners is obviously 'Manimandiram'.

Crl.R.P.980 & 2565/11.
                                  47

             41.    It is clear from the objection filed by the

respondents and also from the suggestion made in

cross-examination to P.W.1 that they had no misgivings

about 'Manimandiram'. They considered it and treated as a

matrimonial house of the first petitioner and as a shared

household.

             42. The contention that merely because the first

petitioner at some point of time in the past might have lived

in the house and since from 2005 onwards she has been

living in her own house is sufficient to reject the claim

cannot be countenanced. This is so, because the words

defining 'domestic relationship' and        'shared household'

used to indicate that the conduct in the past is sufficient

and it is not necessary that the relationship and the

residence should continue at the time of filing of the

petition.

             43. Therefore, if there is evidence to show that

Manimandiram was treated as the matrimonial house and

Crl.R.P.980 & 2565/11.
                                48

was considered as the shared household in which the

petitioner has resided for the first time, then she will be

certainly entitled to the protection contemplated under

Section 17 of the Act. It is not necessary that she should

have continued her residence at the time of instituting the

petition or that the domestic relationship as far as joint

family is concerned should subsist at the time of filing of the

petition.      Snapping      of   domestic    relationship    or

non-occupation of the shared household subsequently

cannot deprive the aggrieved person to enforce a valid,

acquired and accrued right.

             44. After divorce there may be some justification

in saying that some of the reliefs are not available to the

aggrieved person. In such case also, as far as economic

abuse is concerned, that would stand on a different footing.

             45. It was contended on behalf of the petitioners

in these two revision petitions that it is significant to notice

that the claim regarding gold ornaments and money made

Crl.R.P.980 & 2565/11.
                                  49

by the first petitioner before the trial court was declined

and she did not immediately choose to assail rejection of

her claim which according to the revision petitioners is

sufficient to show that the petition is filed with malafides

and ill-motive.

             46. It is difficult to accept the above contention.

The mere fact that the first petitioner before the trial court

chose not to assail the said finding is not a ground to reject

the claim which she is entitled to as per law. Even though

the respondents before the trial court attempted to show

that the first petitioner had her own means of income, there

was no acceptable evidence in that regard. It is true that

the first petitioner was practicing as a lawyer, but she got

enrolled only in 2008. There is nothing to show that the

first respondent was providing maintenance to his wife and

children. Since the first petitioner has started practice only

in 2008, it is difficult to say that she should be receiving

sufficient income to maintain herself and her two children.

Crl.R.P.980 & 2565/11.
                                 50

There can be no doubt that the first respondent has a

statutory duty to maintain the petitioners before the trial

court.      The lower appellate court has been extremely

considerate in slashing down the amount of maintenance to

what it thought was a reasonable amount for the

petitioners. Since there is no challenge to the reduction of

the maintenance awarded to the petitioners, the question as

to whether the amount of maintenance as awarded by the

appellate court is reasonable or just does not arise for

consideration.

             47.     It could thus be seen that it was after

considering all these facts and circumstances that the

courts below have modulated the reliefs to which the

petitioners are entitled to. None of the contentions taken

by either of the revision petitioners are tenable either on

facts or in law. It is idle for the revision petitioners to

contend that there is no evidence of domestic violence. The

simple answer would be the refusal to let the first petitioner

Crl.R.P.980 & 2565/11.
                               51

to reside peacefully in the shared household and also the

inaction on the part of the first respondent to provide

maintenance to his wife and children do attract the

provisions of the Act.

             The result is that these revision petitions are

without any merit whatsoever and they are liable to be

dismissed.       I do so confirming the order of the lower

appellate court.




                                         P. BHAVADASAN,
                                              JUDGE


sb.



