
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                 PRESENT:

                THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE V.RAMKUMAR
                                      &
                 THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE K.HARILAL

       TUESDAY, THE 10TH DAY OF APRIL 2012/21ST CHAITHRA 1934

                           AFA.No. 53 of 1998 ( )
                         ----------------------
    AGAINST THE ORDER/JUDGMENT IN AS.485/1991 DATED 06-07-1998

APPELLANT(S):
------------
     1. PUTHIYAPURA SHEIK KOYA THANGAL,
        KARANAVAN AND MANAGER OF PUTHIYAPURA THARWAD,
        ANDROTH ISLAND, UNION TERRITORY OF LAKSHADWEEP (DEAD)

         "PUTHIYAPURA SYED MOHAMMED JALALUDDIN THANGAL,
         KARANAVAN AND MANAGER OF PUTHIYAPURA THARWAD,
         ANDROTH ISLAND, UNION TERRITORY OF LAKSHADWEEP" -
         (Substituted in the place of deceased appellant as per order
         dated 11-08-2005 in I.A. No. 1750 of 2003).

      2nd appellant:

           KUNHI SEEDI KOYA, S/O. KOYAMMA KOYA, PUTHIYAPURAM
           ANDROTH ISLAND, UNION TERRITORY OF LAKSHADWEEP - is
             imleaded as 2nd appellant as per order dt. 24-10-2012 in I.A.
                   No. 2922 of 2003 in A.F.A. 53 of 1998.

       BY ADVS.SRI.G.SREEKUMAR (CHELUR)
               SRI.K.RAVI (PARIYARATH)
               SMT.T.RESMI DAMODARAN

RESPONDENT(S):
--------------

     1.    P.P. Koyammakoya,
           President of Mohiyuddeen Palli Committee, Androth,
           represented the Palli Committee, by P.P. Khaleel,
           power-of-attorney - holder.

     2.    Union of India, represented by the Secretary,
           Home Affairs, Central Secretariat, New Delhi

     3.    The Administrator, Union Territory of Lakshadweep,

                                     -:2:-


           Kavaratti

     4.    The Lakshadweep Wakf Board, represented by
           its Secretary, Kavaratti

     5.    Alyathammada Isayyera Thangakoya,
           S/o. Sheik Koya, Androth, Union Territory of Lakshadweep

     6.    Mathilperala Koya, S/o.Ahmmed of -do-

     7.    Mnakket Nallakoya, S/o. Ukkas of -do-

     8.    Sekkinteveedu Mohammed Asraf, S/o. Syed Koya of -do-

     9.    K. Mayapura Cheriyakoya,
           S/o. Bammai Koya of -do

     10.   Puthiyazhikkakam Pookkoya,
           S/o. Mohammed Iqbal of -do-

     11.   K.Puradam Pookunhikoya, S/o. Koya Thangal of -do-

     12.   K. Puthiyannal Muthukoya Thangal,
           S/o. Kunhi Seethi Koya Thangal of -do-

     13.   Nallal Kathurkoya Haji,
           S/o. Aboobacker Haji, of -do-

     14.   Mayamkakkada Nallakoya,
           S/o. Syed Koya Thangal of -do-

     15.   Sekkinteveedu Padippura Muthukoya,
           S/o. Syed Koya of -do-

     16.   Puthiyapura Sirajuddin,
           S/o.Attakoya, Pattakkal of -do-

                By Senior Advocate Sri. M.C. Sen for Ist respondent
                        By Senior Adv. S.V. Balakrishna Iyer
                      &    Adv. Sri. P.B. Krishnan for R5 to 16
                       BY ADVs. M/s. NARAYANIKUTTY CHETTOOR,
                      K.K.MOHAMED RAVUF, M.P.SREEKRISHNAN,
               JOE   KALLIATH &          SMT.SHAHNA KARTHIKEYAN

       THIS APPEAL FROM FIRST APPEAL HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD ON
21-02-2012, THE COURT ON 9-4-2012 DELIVERED THE FOLLOWING:

-:3:-


                                                                                CR



                                V. RAMKUMAR
                                          &
                                 K. HARILAL, JJ.
                ........................................................
                           A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998
               .........................................................

              Dated this the 10th day of April 2012

                                   CONTENTS

Sl.No..                            Inner Titles                            Para No.
  1.    Who are the appellants ?                                              1
   2    Nature of suit                                                        2

   3    The plaintiff's case                                                  3
   4    Defence of D1 & D2                                                    4

   5    Defence of D3                                                         5
   6    Defence of D4                                                         6

   7    Stand taken by D5 to D14                                              7
   8    Is the suit a representative suit                                     8

   9    The Trial                                                           9 & 10
  10    The trial Court's verdict                                             11

  11    First appeal and Cross-objection to the High Court and their fate     12
  12    This intra-court appeal                                               13

  13    Arguments of the contesting respondent (D4)                           14
  14                    JUDICIAL EVALUATION                                15 to 36

         A                        Lakshadweep Islands                      16 to 23

                  i)       Location and Geography                             16

                 ii)       The people                                      17 & 18
                 iii)      Administration of Justice                       19 & 20

                 iv)       The present judicial set up                        21

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998                     -:2:-




                   v)       The offcial historiography                         22

                         a)    Conversion to Islam
                         b)    Administration under the Arakkal Principality

                         c)    Property and inheritance
                         d)    Religious beliefs and practices

                         e)    Festivals

            B                         Androth Island                           23

                    i)     Its Geography
                   ii)     William Logan's account
                            Position and extent
                            People, their customs and occupation

                            Religion and Mosques

            C.     Buhari Koya's Case - a "locus classicus"                    24

            D.     ANALYSIS OF THE CONTENTIOUS ISSUES IN                     25 to 28
                   THIS CASE
                      i)      Whether a suit       by a Karanavan can be
                              deemed to be instituted on behalf of his         26
                              tarwad ?

                     ii)      Whether the plaintiff in his capacity as only
                              the de facto Karanavan could institute the       27
                              suit ?
                     iii)     Appreciation of the evidence                     28

            E.     Dedication of a Mosque and the sanctity of prayers          29

            F.     Muthawalli - his status, rights and duties                30 to 33

            G.     Whether Muthawalliship can be hereditary ?                  34

            H      The first appellate Court was wrong                         35

            I      OUR CONCLUSION                                              36

  15.       Glossary of terms                                                  37
  16.       Not merely a pious wish                                            38

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998                -:3:-




                               JUDGMENT

                        Who are the appellants ?

       The plaintiff (Puthiyapura        Sheik Koya Thangal) in the suit
O.S. No. 4 of 1989 on the file of the Subordinate Judges' Court,
Lakshadweep at Kavaratti Island filed           this   intra-court appeal
under Sec. 5 of the Kerala High Court Act, 1958.              Pending this
appeal,      the said appellant/original plaintiff died on 27-1-2003.
Thereupon Puthiyapura Syed Mohammed Jalaluddin Thangal filed
I.A. No. 1750/2003 for substituting his name in the place of the
original appellant and the same was allowed on 11-8-2005.
Subsequently,one Kunhi Seethi Koya           claiming himself to be the
Karanavan of the second tavazhi of Puthiyapura tarwad filed I.A.
No. 2922/03 to implead him as the second appellant. The said
application was allowed on 24-01-2012 without prejudice to the
contentions of the first respondent.

                         NATURE OF THE SUIT

one:-2.        The aforementioned suit instituted on 3-5-1989 was

                     (i)      For a declaration that the plaintiff namely,
                     Puthiyapura Sheik Koya Thangal has been, and is,
                     the Muthawalli of the plaint schedule mosque known
                     as Mohiyudheen Palli and its properties comprised in
                     Sy. No. 117/11 of Androth Island, that the said mosque
                     and its properties belong to the Puthiyapura tarwad of

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998                  -:4:-




                     the plaintiff, that the office of the Muthawalli and Sheik
                     of the said mosque        vests   in the said tarwad   on
                     hereditary rights;

                     (ii)         For a perpetual injunction restraining the
                     defendants from causing obstruction to or interfering
                     in any         manner in the holding and continuing the
                     office of    the Muthawalli and       Sheik of the plaint
                     schedule mosque and its properties by the plaintiff and
                     the succeeding Karanavans;

                     (iii) For a mandatory injunction directing the third
                     defendant namely, the Lakshadweep Wakf Board to
                     make the       requisite entries in the Wakf Register
                     showing the plaint schedule Mosque and its properties
                     as belonging to the plaintiff's tarwad and the plaintiff
                     as its Muthawalli and Sheik and the said office as
                     hereditary in nature vested in the Puthiyapura tarwad
                     of the plaintiff; and

                     (iv) For a direction to defendants 1 and 2 namely, the
                     Union of India and the Administrator, Union Territory
                     of Lakshadweep to give requisite police aid to the
                     plaintiff for continuing in his office of the Muthawalli
                     and Sheik of the Mohiyudheen Mosque without any
                     illegal obstruction and interference caused by any
                     other islander.

                                  THE PLAINTIFF'S CASE

       3.     The case of the plaintiff can be summarised as follows:_

       The plaint schedule property comprised in Sy. No. 117/11 of
Androth Island belongs in ancient jenm right to the tarwad of the
plaintiff called "Puthiyapura tarwad".           The former Karanavan and

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998              -:5:-




the Manager of the Plaintiff tarwad constructed a mosque therein
by name "Mohiyudheen Palli".         Ever since the construction of the
mosque,        religious festivals  and ceremonies like       Ratheeb,
Moulood, Kuthubiyath, Khattam etc. used to be conducted by the
Karanavan of the tarwad.         It was decided that the succeeding
karanavans and        managers of the tarwad should duly hold the
office of Muthawalli and Sheik of the Mosque and its properties.
That was the practice followed in all the islands of Lakshadweep .
One Sri. Syed        Sheikoya   Thangal was the last karanavan and
manager of the plaintiff's tarwad., He used to be mostly away in
Ceylon      in connection with his function and duties as a priest.
Therefore, even during his life time, under his instructions and
authorisation the plaintiff was acting, conducting, functioning and
exercising the rights and discharging the duties of the karanavan
and manager of the tarwad.          The plaintiff was in that capacity
functioning as the Muthawalli and Sheik of Mohiyudheen Palli. Sri.
Syed Sheikoya Thangal died about 15 years back and on his death,
the plaintiff became the karanavan and manager of Puthiyapura
tarwad and ex-officio the Muthawalli and Sheik of the mosque. A
portion of the plaint schedule property is used as a     cemetery.   It
is only after getting the permission of the plaintiff that dead bodies
used to be buried in the said cemetery. It was the plaintiff who
had taken electric connection to the mosque and he was paying
the electricity charges. All the expenses for the conduct of the

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998              -:6:-




affairs of the mosque are met by the plaintiff. While so, some of
the local inhabitants      misusing     their political affiliation and
influence,       started creating trouble in the administration and
management of the mosque .              Therefore, the plaintiff   was
constrained to move the Hon'ble High Court of Kerala for police
aid.    The mosque and its properties have not been registered by
the Wakf Board represented by the 3rd defendant who has a duty
to register the same. The plaintiff issued Exts. A25 to A27 notices
to the defendants who were served on 14-2-1989. The defendants
sent a reply raising untenable contentions. The plaintiff was not
aware of Ext. B6 notification alleged to have been issued in the
Gazette dated 1-11-1968.         The said notification is bad, illegal,
without jurisdiction, void and not binding on the plaintiff or his
tarwad. Hence, the suit.

                          DEFENCE OF D1 & D2

       4.     The    second   defendant    (the   Administrator,  Union
Territory of lakshadweep) filed a written statement disputing the
plaint claim and contending inter alia as follows:-
              The plaintiff is not the Muthawalli and Sheik of the
Mosque. As per Ext. B6 notification published in the Gazette the
Amins and Karanavans of the Androth Island are and have been
the Muthawalli of the Mosque. The major portion of the expenses
of the mosque is met by contributions. The Muslims of Androth
Island consist of two groups:- i)         Jumayath Himyathi    Shariatil

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998             -:7:-




Islamiya       ("JHSI" for short) and (ii) Lakshadweep Shareeath
Pravarthaka Sambarkka Samithi ("LSPSS" for short). The dispute
about the mosque started in the year 1986 when the JHSI to which
the plaintiff owes his allegiance passed a resolution and the
Khasi of      Androth declared that the followers of LSPSS are non-
Muslims and they have no right to enter Mosques, Madrassas etc.
Police protection was sought for implementing the above
resolution.      The Executive  Magistrate was constrained to take
proceedings under Sections 144 and 145 Cr.P.C. with regard to
the Juma Mosque in question . The decision of the JHSI and the
Khasi was questioned before the Hon'ble High Court in Crl.R.P.
10/1987.,        The High Court held that the right of a Muslim to
worship in a Mosque cannot be denied on the basis of sect . The
plaintiff is demanding police protection for excluding a section of
people. It is against the orders of the High Court. Due to division
on the basis of faith criminal cases have increased in Androth
island since 1986. This defendant is an unnecessary party to the
suit . The suit is bad for non-joinder of other necessary parties.
Till the year 1984 the annual religious functions in the mosque
were conducted under the Amin . In the year 1985 the then Amin
died and the plaintiff organized the religious functions. In the year
1986 the dispute between the JHSI and LSPSS erupted. The plaint
schedule property is a Wakf.          The plaintiff has no right of
management.         The suit which is devoid of any merit is   to be

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998              -:8:-




dismissed.
       The first defendant ( Union of India ) filed a memo adopting
the contentions of the 2nd defendant.

                            DEFENCE OF D3

       5.     The third defendant (the Lakshadweep Wakf Board ) filed
a written statement contending inter alia as follows:-
        The plaintiff is not the Muthawalli of the plaint schedule
mosque. There is no hereditary right of Muthavallyship in favour
of the plaintiff.     The suit is barred under Sec. 55 (E) of the Wakf
Act, 1954. Neither the plaintiff nor any of his karanavans ever
applied for registration of    the plaint schedule mosque which is a
Wakf. The Lakshadweep Wakf Board had published a list of Wakfs
within its jurisdiction      in the Gazette dated 1-11-1988 after
conducting proper enquiries . The said list was published under
Sec. 5 of the Wakf Act, 1995. In that notification the Mohiyudeen
Palli is stated as belonging to the people of Androth Island and
the Muthawalli of the said Mosque is shown as the Amin and
Karanavans . So far nobody had objected to the said notification.
The Civil Court has no jurisdiction to try the suit which is within
the cognizance of the Wakf Tribunal by virtue of Sec. 6 of the
Wakf Act, 1995.

                            DEFENCE OF D4

       6.        There were only three defendants in the suit as

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998            -:9:-




originally instituted. One P.P. Koyammakoya styling himself as the
President of the Mohiyudheen Palli Committee      filed I.A. Nos. 94
and 99 of 1989 before the trial Court seeking to implead him in
the suit as well as in the injunction application (I.A. 79 of 1989)
The said applications      were dismissed by      the trial Court .
Aggrieved by the trial Court's order the said Koyammakoya filed
C.R.P. 1944 of 1989 before this Court. As per Order dated 21-11-
1989 this Court allowed the said C.R.P. directing impleadment of
the said Koyammakoya in the suit as well as in the injunction
application. That is how the said Koyammakoya was impleaded as
the Addl. 4th defendant . He resisted the suit contending inter alia
as follows:-
       The plaint schedule property including the Mohiyudheen Palli
does not belong to the Puthiyapura tarwad of the plaintiff.     The
Mosque was not constructed by the karanavan of Puthiyapura
tarwad as claimed by the plaintiff.      There was a partition in
Puthiyapura tarwad and thereafter the said tarwad is extinct. The
plaintiff is ,therefore, not a member of the Puthiyapura tarwad.
None of the earlier karanavans of Puthiyapura tarwad nor the
plaintiff had ever officiated as the Muthawalli or Sheik of the
Mohiyudheen Mosque . Similarly, they have not conducted any
religious function in the mosque.     The plaint allegation that the
office of Muthawalli and Sheik of the said mosque is to be enjoyed
by the karanavans of Puthiyapura tarwad and it is a heritable

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998           -:10:-




right , is false. The Lakshadweep islands do not know of a custom
of heritable Muthawalli and Sheik. In most of the mosques there
will not be a Sheik. The plaint allegation that the permission of
the plaintiff is necessary for burying the dead in the graveyard
attached to the plaint schedule mosque is false.          No such
permission is required for burying a dead Muslim in a graveyard
attached to a mosque . That is the custom followed in Androth
island as well. The plaint schedule property is the acquisition of
the islanders. At the time of the construction of the mosque the
Amins and the karanavans were the rulers of the island.        As
such, the Amin and the Karanavans          were appointed as the
Muthawallis of the Mosque.     That system was continued till the
year 1970 when the office of the karanavans was abolished. From
1970       to 1985 the Amin alone managed the mosque as the
Muthawalli. In the year 1985 Komalam Muthukoya who was the
last Amin from Androth died.          Thereafter  the Amins were
appointed from other islands.      Hence, the islanders of Androth
island     constituted a committee    under Sri.  Aliyathara  Syed
Mohammed to manage the mosque and its properties. While so, a
section of the people in the island formed the JHSI and tried to
interfere with the management of the mosque. Thereupon , the
islanders formed the 4th defendant/committee (Mohiyudheen Palli
Committee) on 2-11-1988 to manage the mosque.           So far, no
bye-law has been framed for the said committee. At present, no

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998              -:11:-




one other than the 4th defendant has any right          to manage the
plaint schedule mosque and its properties. The electric wiring in
the mosque was got done by the Amin and the Karanavans who
also obtained the electric connection to the mosque. The last
Amin Komalam Muthukoya was a close relative of the plaintiff.
Hence, he might have concocted documents to suit the claim of
the plaintiff.     The plaint allegation that the plaintiff was unaware
of the Gazette notification is false. The plaintiff is not entitled to
any of the reliefs prayed for and the suit is liable to be dismissed.

                      STAND TAKEN BY D5 TO D14:

       7.     Defendants 5 to 14 who responded to the public notice
under Order 1 Rule 8 C.P.C.        filed written statements supporting
the plaint averments.

                  IS THE SUIT A REPRESENTATIVE SUIT ?:

       8.     The suit was not instituted in a representative capacity
by the plaintiff.     However, Koyammakoya, the 4th defendant had
filed I.A. No. 136 of 1989 before the trial Court prior to his
impleadment seeking permission under Order 1 Rule 8 (3) C.P.C.
to defend the suit in a representative capacity on behalf of all the
people representing the Mahl in which the disputed Mohiyudheen
Mosque is situated. The said application was dismissed on 2-09-
1989. However, after          the High Court allowed C.R.P. 1944 of
1989 on 21-11-1989 and the said Koyammakoya was impleaded

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998                  -:12:-




as the 4th defendant in the suit, he had filed I.A. No. 138 of 1990
again under Order 1 Rule 8 (3) read with Sec. 151 C.P.C. on 12-7-
1990. The said application was allowed on 8-8-1990 and                      he was
directed to publish the notice in the "Lakshadweep Times" daily.
Subsequently, the draft publication was approved by the Court and
a public notice was published in the "Lakshadweep Times" daily
dated 10-09-1990.          The publication in the Lakshadweep Times is
available at 179 of the Lower Court records. The 4th defendant was
thus permitted to defend the suit on behalf of and for the benefit of
all persons interested in the           Mohiyuddin Palli Committee.             The
decree will, therefore, bind all persons having the same interest in
the suit.

                                    THE TRIAL

       9.     The trial Court framed the following 9 issues:-

               1) Whether the suit is bad for non-joinder of necessary parties ?

               2) Whether the suit is bad for misjoinder of parties ?

               3)   Whether the predecessor karnavan of plaintiff's tharwad was
                    the Muthawalli and sheik of the mosque in question ?

               4)   Whether the plaintiff was/is the Muthawalli and sehik of the
                    mosque in the plaint schedule property ?

               5)   Does the office of Muthawalli and sheik vest in plaintiff and his
                    successors as a hereditary right ?

               6)   Whether the plaintiff    is entitled for prohibitory injunction
                    prayed for ?

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998                   -:13:-




               7)   Whether the plaintiff is entitled for the mandatory injunctions
                    prayed for against the defendants 1 to 3         for making the
                    entries in the Wakf Register and for police aid ?

               8)   Is the jurisdiction of this Court is ousted by Sec. 55 (E) of the
                    Wakf Act ?

               9)   Reliefs and costs.


       10)    On the side of the plaintiff two witnesses were examined
as P.Ws 1 and 2 of whom P.W.1 is the plaintiff himself and P.W.2
(Sayed Fathruddeen) who is also a native of Androth Island is the
nephew of P.W.1. P.W.2 knows photography and it was P.W.2 who
took Ext.A32 series of photographs and proved Ext.A33 series of
negatives. As per Ext.A32 (a) photograph taken by P.W.2 in July
1989 the plaintiff examined as P.W.1 is shown as officiating in his
capacity as the Sheik of the plaint schedule Mosque for giving
permission for Ratheeb.              As per Ext.A32 (b) photograph               the
plaintiff in his capacity as the Sheik              is chanting prayers         and
healing the wounds of a person who had sustained injuries during
Ratheeb.       Exts. A1 to A35 were got marked on the side of the
plaintiff. On the side of the contesting defendants two witnesses
were examined as Dws 1 and 2 of whom DW1 is the 4th defendant
who claimed to be             the    President of the         Mohiyudheen Palli
Committee. DW2 (Adul Khader) who is a native of Keecheri Village
of    Androth Island was examined in support of the contentions of
the 4th defendant. Exts. B1 to B22 were marked on the side of the

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998                    -:14:-




contesting defendant.

                         THE TRIAL COURT'S VERDICT

       11.    The learned subordinate Judge after trial, as per
judgment and decree dated 3-5-1991 partly decreed the suit as
follows:-
               i) The contesting defendant has not been able to          show that
                   Sec. 55 (E) of the Wakf Act, 1954 has come into force. Even
                   if the above provision has come into force, it does not bar a
                   suit of the present nature in which there is no prayer for the
                   enforcement of any right on behalf of any Wakf.

               ii) There is no acceptable evidence adduced by the plaintiff to
                   prove that the plaint schedule mosque was constructed by
                   the then karanavan of        the Puthiyapua     tarwad of the
                   plaintff or that the founder made a decision that the future
                   karanavans will be the Muthawalli and Sheik of the said
                   mosque by way of hereditary rights.

               iii)   Plaintiff has failed to prove that the office of the
                   Muthavally and Sheik of the plaint schedule mosque is to
                   be held by the successive karanavans of          Puthiyapura
                   tarwad of the plaintiff.     The plaintiff is, therefore, not
                   entitled to     a mandatory injunction directing the 3rd
                   defendant Lakshdweep Wakf Board to amend Ext. B4
                   register so as to show that the office of the Muthawalli
                   and Sheik of the plaint schedule mosque       is vested in the
                   karanavans of the Puthiyapura tarwad.

               iv) The evidence in the case shows that the plaintiff was not
                   only conducting himself as the Sheik of the mosque and
                   attending to     the religious affairs, the plaintiff was also
                   performing acts of management of the mosque. Hence the
                   plaintiff is the de facto Muthawalli and Sheik of the plaint
                   schedule Mosque. Consequently defendants 1 , 2 and 4
                   are restrained by a perpetual injunction from causing any
                   obstruction to the plaintiff         in functioning as the

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998                  -:15:-




                  Muthawalli and Sheik of the plaint schedule mosque. But
                  the injunction will not prevent Muslims irrespective of
                  caste or sect from entering the mosque for worship or for
                  using the     burrial ground attached to the mosque for
                  burying the dead.

               v) The plaintiff is not entitled to police protection so as to
                  exclude any section of the Muslim public from entering
                  the mosque.


       FIRST APPEAL AND CROSS OBJECTION TO THE HIGH
                        COURT AND THEIR FATE.


       12.    Aggrieved by the verdict of the            trial Court     the 4th
defendant filed an appeal before this Court as A.S. No. 485 of 1991.
Assailing that part of the trial Court verdict which went against
the plaintiff,     he preferred      a memorandum of Cross-Objection
before this Court. Both the aforesaid appeal A.S. No. 485/1991
and the Cross Objection were heard by a learned Single Judge of
this Court who as per judgment dated 6-7-1998                      allowed the
appeal preferred by the 4th defendant and dismissed the Cross-
Objection of the plaintiff.         The suit was       thus dismissed in its
entirety holding inter alia that if at all the plaintiff had assumed
the office of the Muthawalli it was only by way of trespass.

                            THIS INTRA-COURT APPEAL

       13.    It is aggrieved by the judgment and decree passed by
the learned single judge that the plaintiff has preferred this appeal.
We heard Advocate Sri.G. Sreekumar (Cheloor) the learned counsel

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998            -:16:-




appearing for the appellant/plaintiff and Senior Advocate Sri.M.C.
Sen appearing for the first respondent (4th defendant) .

          ARGUMENTS OF THE CONTESTING RESPONDENT (D4)

       14. Advocate Sri. M.C. Sen appearing for the Ist respondent
(4th defendant) made the following submissions before us opposing
this appeal:-
       The main prayer of the plaintiff for a declaration that the
plaint schedule mosque Mohiyuddin Palli and its properties belong
to the Puthiyapura tarwad of the plaintiff and that the office of the
Muthawalli and Sheik of the said mosque vests in the said tarwad
on hereditary rights, stand concurrently rejected by the Courts
below.      Eventhough the plaintiff has described himself as the
karanavan and manager of Puthiyapura tarwad, the suit which is
not instituted on behalf of the tarwad, was not maintainable.     As
a matter of fact, the plaintiff was not the karanavan of the tarwad
on the date of institution of the suit.  He had an elder brother by
name Jalaluddin Thangal which fact is borne out by Ext. A15 O.M.
of the Co-operative Registrar. Going by the extent of 0.033 Ares
shown for the plaint schedule property which is less than one cent,
the same         cannot take in the "Mohiyuddin mosque" and its
properties including the cemetery which is the description given
for the plaint schedule.       Admittedly, the name of the plaint
schedule mosque is "Mohibyuddin Mosque". The said name itself
indicates that it is a public    Wakf   and not a private mosque

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998              -:17:-




allegedly belonging to the plaintiff's tarwad. At page 66 of "A
short Account of the Laccadive Islands and Minicoy" by R.H. Ellis it
is observed that on every island of the Laccadive Islands (presently
Lakshadweep Islands) there are three public mosques which are
the Jamath, Moidin and Ujira mosques and there are many private
mosques which are out of all proportion in numbers to the
inhabitants and each of those private mosques has its own little
tank and graveyard. Thus, from the very name of the mosque as
"Mohiyuddin Palli" it can be presumed that it is a public mosque.
At page 93 of the Gazetteer of India pertaining to the              Union
Territory of Lakshadweep edited by Sri. N.S. Mannadiar it is
observed that in almost all islands there are three main mosques,
the Juma, the Mohiddin and the Ujira and the Mohiddin and Ujira
mosques are mainly intended for the performance of Ratheeb. At
pages 22,24,and 25 of "Traditional Futures " by Sri.V. Vijayakumar
also there is reference to the aforementioned classes of mosques.
The case of the plaintiff that he is the Muthawalli as well as Sheik of the
plaint schedule mosque has not        been proved    by him.    Sheik and
Muthawalli are not the same. The plaintiff might have been a Sheik
but not a Muthawalli. Page 37 of the aforementioned book by R.H.
Ellis would go to show that for each island there was an Amin
selected from among the karanavans and he was having jurisdiction in
petty civil and criminal cases and appeals from the Amin's decisions
were to lie with the Collector of Malabar.           The 3rd defendant
Lakshadweep Wakf Board had contended that the plaint schedule

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998              -:18:-




mosque though not registered under Sections 25 and 26 of the Wakf
Act, 1954 was included in the list of Wakfs under Section 5 of the Wakf
Act; 1954 and the plaintiff did not apply for registration of the Wakf.
A perusal of Ext. B6 notification dated 25-08-1967 will show that
the Lakshadweep Wakf Board had registered the plaint schedule
Wakf and had appointed the Amin and the karanavans as its
Muthawalli. Since Ext.A1 Land Register itself shows that it is not
final, the registration of the plaintiff as the Manager of the plaint
schedule Mohiyudheen mosque in the year 1962 cannot be taken
as conclusive. In Ext.A34 petition dated 8-11-1967 the plaintiff
has admitted that he was the second Sheik of Mohiyudheen Palli
due to the absence of           the first Sheik namely     Puthiyapura
Syed Sheik Koya in the islands. If so, even as per the admission
of the plaintiff the said Syed Sheik Koya alone could be the Sheik
in respect of the mosque. In the plaint also it is admitted that the
Karanavan of the plaintiff tarwad was the said Sheik Koya who was
very often in Ceylon and the plaintiff used to be his delegate and
agent and that the said Syed Sheik Koya died somewhere around
the year 1974.         Ext.A35 petition was    pertaining to another
Mosque (Velleri mosque, at Chemmacheri in Androth) in which the
applicant therein        alleging himself to be in management      was
seeking permission from the Androth Amin for electrification of
that Mosque.         Ext.A13    proceedings of the Registrar of Co-
operative Societies        would show that the plaintiff herein    had
described himself as the Sheik of the plaint schedule mosque for

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998            -:19:-




the purpose of Khattam which is the annual feast. That does not
mean that the plaintiff should be recognized by the Court as the
Sheik of the plaint schedule mosque.     Same is the position    with
regard to Ext. A14 special permit which was obtained just two
months prior to the suit. Ext.B8 order of the Sub Divisional Officer
("S.D.O." for short) refusing police aid to the plaintiff will suggest
that     the plaintiff could not have conducted      Khattam in the
premises of the Mosque in the year 1987. Moreover, Ext.B8 order
further indicates that until the year 1984 religious functions were
conducted under the supervision of the Amin. Ext.A15 special
permit dated 21-11-1988 shows that the plaintiff was not the
Karanavan but he had an elder brother by name Jalaludheen
Thangal who after the death of the plaintiff pending this appeal,
was impleaded as the 2nd appellant. Ext.A16 receipt dated 25-
11-1987 evidencing payment of money by the Mukri from the
plaintiff described as managing the plaint schedule mosque is a
self serving document. Ext.A18 suit by the then Sheik of the
plaint schedule mosque      instituted in the year 1922     does not
advance the case of the plaintiff. Ext.A19 application         24-10-
2987 for police aid submitted by the plaintiff was rejected as per
Ext.B8 order dated 2-11-1988 passed by the S.D.O.         In Ext.A20
judgment dated 25-11-1987 passed by the High Court in O.P. No.
9410 of 1987 filed by the plaintiff challenging the order of the
S.D.O refusing police aid to the plaintiff, the High Court had

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998              -:20:-




directed the S.D.O. to pass fresh orders after considering whether
the plaintiff was conducting khattam namely, the annual feast in
the past 3 years.       Ext.B8 is the order dated 2-11-1988 passed
by the S.D.O. in compliance of Ext.A20 judgment. The S.D.O. inter
alia observed that       after the death of the last Amin  Komalam
Muthukoya in the year 1985 the people of Androth got divided
into two groups JHSI and LSPSS and the plaintiff was a follower of
JHSI and in view of the fight between the two groups the rival
groups can organise separate function outside the premises of
the plaint schedule mosque. The police aid sought by the plaintiff
was accordingly disallowed. Eventhough the plaintiff filed Ext.B9
appeal before the Lakshadweep Administrator           against Ext.B8
order, after the impleadment of the present 4th defendant in that
appeal      the plaintiff filed Ext.A21 memo for withdrawal of the
appeal in view of the plaintiff instituting the present suit and
accordingly Ext.A22 order was passed permitting the plaintiff to
withdraw the appeal. The documents produced by the plaintiff do
not show that        plaintiff or his predecessor - karanavans were
acting as the Muthawalli in respect of the mosque.          At best,
they could only be described as the Sheik having control only
over the religious function and they cannot have any authority
over the adminsitration of the mosque and its properties. The very
fact that Ext.B22 mass petition by 40 members of the Mahal was
preferred against the Amin who had given one goat head to one

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998              -:21:-




Karallalpura Sayed Koya deviating from the settled custom will
suggest the participation of the public in the affairs of the mosque
and they even questioned the authority of the Amin to depart
from the settled custom. Ext.B3 is the order of the Amin on Ext.
B22 mass petition. Pages 25 and 26 of "Traditional Futures, Law
and custom in India's Lakshdweep Islands" by V. Vijayakumar also
show that        the Ujjra   and Mohiyuddin     Mosques    are public
mosques in Kavarati and Amindivi islands and makes mention of
the rift between Koyas and Melacheries in holding of the Ratheeb
ceremonies in those islands. Ext.B4 minutes dated 2-11-1988 of
the meeting of the 4th defendant Committee would show that 607
persons participated       in the meeting    and  suggests that  the
Khattam and Daff Ratheebs were conducted by members of the
public. Ext.B5 true extract of Land Register of Androth Island
shows that the Managers of Mohiyudheen Palli are the Amin and
Karanavans. Exts. A1 and B5 Land Registers were prepared under
the Laccadive, Minicoy and Amindivi islands              Survey and
Boundaries Regulation 4 of 1959. Hence, Ext.A1 Land Register is
not final.     Ext.B6 is the notification dated 25-08-1967 issued by
the Lakshadweep Wakf Board. Serial Nos. 1 and 185 in Ext.B6 will
show that        the Muthawalli in respect of    the  two respective
mosques in Kalpeni and Androth islands are "committies".         As
against Serial No. 147 which pertains to the plaint schedule
Mohiyudheen Palli       it is not the plaintiff who is shown as the

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998            -:22:-




Muthawalli in column 2 . What is stated in Column 2 is "under the
supervision of Amin and Karanavans".       The plaintiff examined as
P.W.1 was pretending ignorance of the       above entries. Ext.B10
note book shows that plaintiff had paid on 19-5-1976, 8-6-
1976 and 16-6-1976 various amounts being the hire charges
for plates and utensils after the      Khattam   of the year 1976.
Similarly, Ext.B11 note book shows the payment of hire charges
by the plaintiff on 1-1-1978 and 23-7-1979 for the copper
vessels after the Khattam of the year 1977. Ext.B12 is the note
book showing the accounts of the 4th defendant Committee for the
expenses incurred for the Khattam feast held on 1-12-1987
temporarily       in the Chemmancherry Puthiyapalli, Androth under
the leadership of Aaliyathara Saidu Muhammed consequent on
the inability of the plaintiff to conduct the Khattam in the plaint
schedule mosque. Ext.B12 has been signed also by the Amin of
Androth.       The fourth defendant examined as DW1 has deposed
that Ext.B10 and B11 note books were kept by the Thimani
(Peon) who had made the same available to him and it was the
Thimani who was lending the vessels on hire . Exts. B13 to B20
are the receipts       issued by   the 4th defendant Committee to
persons who supplied mutton and beef for the Khattam feast.
DW1 has further deposed that Khattam is conducted in memory of
Mohiyudeen Sheik Thangal and the post of Khateeb is there only
in Jama Mosque where         the Friday prayers and Id prayers are

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998             -:23:-




performed, that       Muthawalli is the manager who has temporal
powers whereas the religious performances like Ratheeb         etc.
can be done only by the Sheik. The evidence of P.W.1 at page 46
would go to show that the fourth defendant who is the President
of the Committee is a member of the Puthiyapura Puthiyaveedu
Branch of Puthiyapura tarwad of the plaintiff. P.W.1 has also
admitted that he is the Muthawalli of the Koya Palli (which is Sl.
No. 134 of Ext.B6 Wakf Register and that there is no Sheik in that
mosque since no Ratheeb ceremoney is        performed there. P.W.1
who claimed to have conducted the Ratheeb and Id ceremonies in
the mosque as          the Sheik    of the plaint schedule mosque
confessed that he has described himself as the second Sheik in
Ext.A34 during the absence of the first Sheik who was in Ceylon.
His statement that he came to know of the publication of the
plaint schedule mosque as a Wakf in the year 1968 only when his
counsel       was informed in the year 1989 by the counsel for the
Lakshadweep Wakf Board can only taken with a pinch of salt. His
version that he was not aware of Ext.B6 notification and that was
why he did not register the plaint schedule Wakf also cannot be
believed for a moment.        The account book maintained in the
mosque        is claimed by P.W.1   to have been stolen.  Komalam
Muthukoya who was the last Amin who died on 25-11-1985 as
evidenced by Ext.A23 death certificate, was admittedly a family
member of P.A. Nallakoya Thangal who is the father-in-law of the

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998           -:24:-




plaintiff. A Muthawalli does not perform any religious ceremony.
A hereditary Muthawalli is unknown to Muslim law as can be seen
from the "Law of Wakfs" by S.A. Kader and Mulla on Mahommedan
Law.     There is no legal impediment in a committee acting as the
Muthawalli of a Muslim mosque.            The decision      in Sayed
Muhammed Mashur Kunhi Koya Thangal v. Badagara Jamayath
Palli Dharas Committee - AIR 2004 SC 4365 will show that           the
suit in that case was filed by a committee functioning as the
Muthawalli and the suit was dismissed only for want of proof of
title and not on the ground of locus standi. Ext.A1 Land Register
of the year 1962, no doubt contained an entry           showing the
plaintiff's ancestor Puthiyapura Sayed Sheik Koya as the manager
of the plaint schedule Mohiyudeen Palli.       But    the same was
corrected by substituting the words "Amin and Karanavans" in
the place of Puthiyapura Sayed Sheik Koya as evidenced by Ext.A3.
Eventhough the plaintiffs application for correcting the alleged
interpolation      was allowed by the S.D.O. as per Ext.A36 order
dated 9-6-2003, the matter is pending in appeal filed by the 4th
defendant before the Administrator. The concurrent finding by
the trial Court and the first appellant Court to the effect that there
is no evidence to show that the mosque was constructed by the
plaintiff's tarwad does not call for any interference in this appeal.
Pending this appeal the plaintiff died on 21-7-2003 . Thereupon
I.A. 1750 of 2003 was filed by Puthiyapura Syed Muhammed

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998            -:25:-




Jalaludheen Thangal to substitute his name in the cause title in
the place of the plaintiff. He was the senior most member of the
tavazhi of which the plaintiff was a       member.       The said
application was allowed on 11-08-2005. It was by resort to the
definition of "Muthawalli" in Section 3 (1)  of the Wakf Act which
takes in         "any person  for the time being     managing or
administring any Wakf property", that the trial court held that the
plaintiff was the de facto Muthawalli even without a plea. The
learned single judge in appeal has rectified the infirmities in the
judgment of the trial Court by holding that the plaintiff was
neither the Muthawalli nor the Sheik        of the plaint schedule
mosque and has even found that the plaintiff was a trespasser
and that        it was the fourth defendant committee which was
managing the mosque in question. The said finding also does not
warrant any interference by this Court in Appeal.      This appeal
which, is devoid of any merit, may therefore, be dismissed.


                   JUDICIAL EVALUATION

       15.    We are afraid that we find ourselves unable to agree
with the above submission in its entirety made on behalf of the 4th
defendant/ committee.        Before delving deep into the merits of
the case      it may be necessary to    have some idea   about the
geographical location, the custom and manners and the religious

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998            -:26:-




habits and the law of inheritance of the people of the Lakshdweep
Islands in general and Androth Island in particular.
                   A. LAKSHADWEEP ISLANDS
                    (i) Location and Georgraphy

       16. The Lakshadweep Islands are located on the south-
western frontiers of India between 8o and 12o North latitude and
71o and 74o East longitude. These islands, which together comprise
the smallest Union Territory of India , lie about 220 to 440 kms
away from the coastal city of Kochi in Kerala in the emerald Arabian
Sea.    This archipelago consists of 36 islands, 12 atolls, 3 reefs and
5 submerged banks and covers an area of 32 square kilometres.
Of these islands only ten are inhabited. The inhabited islands
are :-
                      Agatti,
                      Amini,
                      Androth,
                      Bitra,
                      Chetlath,
                      Kadmath,
                      Kalpeni
                      Kavaratti,
                      Kiltan, and
                      Minicoy.


The following notional map shows the relative positions of the
major islands of Lakshadweep vis-a-vis the Indian mainland:-

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998    -:27:-

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998             -:28:-




The first settlement of the      island   is attributed to   Cheraman
Perumal, the last Chera King of Kerala. It is said that the first
settlers of the islands were Hindus and Budhists.       The advent of
Islam goes back to the 7th century A.D. around the year 41 Hijra .
It is universally believed that Saint Ubaidulla    propagated Islam in
all the islands. In 1787, Tippu Sultan took over the administration
of five islands      and the rest  continued to be governed by the
Arakkal Family of Cannanore (presently Kannur) in Malabar. The
islands were annexed to the         British East India Company from
Mangalore after the battle of Sreerangapattanam in 1799. In 1854
all the remaining islands were        handed over to the East India
Company by the Raja of Chirakkal. Thus the islands came under
the British Rule.     The Union Territory of Lakshadweep was formed
in the year 1956.      Kavarathi is the administrative capital and the
headquarter of the Union Territory of Lakshadweep since 1964. Till
first November 1974 these islands were called          the Laccadives,
Amindivi and Minicoy islands. All the islands now constitute one
district with 4 Tehsils. Each Taluk has a democratic set up in the
form of Dweep Panchayath. At the Union Territory level there is a
District Panchayath.        The Administrator      heads    this Union
Territory. (Vide "A Short Account of the Laccadive Islands and
Minicoy by R.H.Ellis and the official Website of Lakshadweep).

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998             -:29:-




                          ii)   The People

       17.    The inhabitants are classified as scheduled tribes. They
are 100 percent Muslims.        More than 93 percent of the total
population is indigenous. Though they are Muslims, they follow
some sort of caste system. According to the Scheduled Caste and
Scheduled Tribe Lists (Modification Order, 1956) 'the inhabitants of
Lakshadweep, who or both of whose parents were born in those
islands are treated as Scheduled Tribes. There is no specific name
for this tribe.      No caste has been scheduled in relation to
Lakshadweep. As members of a scheduled tribe, the islanders are
eligible for benefits of positive and protective discrimination which
includes 'reservation' for government jobs, educational, courses,
and for scholarships. All native islanders are entitled to get free
higher and professional education.         The Kavarathi Thangals are
considered as owners and patrons of all the Mohiuddin and Ujjra
mosques throughout Lakshadweep. Their representatives on each
island are called Khalifas. Each Khalifa is the head of the Sufi order
on his island.
       18.    According to the 2011 census the total population of
Lakshadweep Islands was 64,429. The language spoken in all the
inhabited islands except Minicoy is Malayalam. In Minicoy, the
spoken language is Mahl.
                 (See the official Website of      Lakshadweep;
         Gazetteer of India     (Union Territory of Lakshadweep )
         edited by N.S. Mannadiar and Traditional Futures (Law

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998               -:30:-




         and    Custom   in  India's  Lakshadweep Islands) by V.
         Vijayakumar )


                    (iii) Administration of justice

       19.     After the defeat of Tippu Sultan the northern islands
came under the control of the British in the year 1792. Those
islands were attached to the South Kanara         District. Karyakkars
functioning under the Zamorin were removed and a Monegar was
appointed. Monegar was stationed at Amini and was assisted by a
Karani with peons in other islands of the group.          The powers of
the Monegar steadily increased in criminal matters but disputes of
a civil nature were left for the decision of Karanavars or the Kazi.
The remaining islands (Kadamat, Kiltan, and Chetlat) continued to
be administered from Amini.         In the year 1867 the Monegar was
first confirmed with powers of a Village Magistrate and Village
Munsiff. In the year 1871 he was invested with the powers of a
third class Magistrate. For certain types of cases he was required to
associate three Karanavars as          assessors. In due course      the
Monegar became a Deputy Tahsildar . In 1875 in the remaining
islands also the system of karyakars was abolished and Amins and
Gumasthans (accountants) from the mainland were appointed. In
1877 the mainlanders were removed and Amins were appointed
from among the islanders. While the earlier system was hereditary,
by the year 1920 it was discontinued.        The Amins were appointed
by selections from         amongst     the Karanavars.   Eventually, the

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998           -:31:-




gumasthans also were appointed from amongst islanders. The
Amin had jurisdiction in petty civil and criminal cases with appeals
to the Collector and the High Court of Kerala by the Laccadive
Islands      and Minicoy Regulation 1 of 1912, the powers and
functions of the Amin were codified. The Amin was to sit with four
or more Karanavers as assessors in criminal cases and with two or
more assessors in civil cases.
       20.    A provision was made for an appeal against the decision
of the Amin before the inspecting officer or the collector.       The
collector was also vested with the power to transfer any appeal to
the Divisional Officer for disposal.   The Regulation provided for
some technicalities and difference between the Inspecting Officer
and the Divisional Officer in the case of appeals. Appeals could be
filed before the Collector, particularly those against decisions in
cases where original jurisdiction had been exercised. In the case of
the Inspecting Officer exercising original jurisdiction, ordinarily no
appeal could be made. But this rule was not absolute. If sufficient
grounds were shown, the collector had the discretion to entertain
an appeal against the original jurisdiction exercised by the
inspecting officer. In the case of decisions by collectors' assistants
exercising original civil jurisdiction, the right of appeal to the
Collector, was an absolute vested right. (Vide Traditional Futures
(supra).

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998              -:32:-




                      (iv) The present judicial set up
       21.    With the promulgation of fresh Regulations in the year
1965, the old judicial set up was abolished with effect from 1-11-
1967. The Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 and other statutes were
brought into force in the Lakshadweep Islands. The Karanavans
who constituted the last vestige of the former jury system were
discontinued       from the    practice of   functioning as assessors
assisting the Amins.        There is now a Munsiff Court at Androth
having jurisdiction over the islands of Kavaratti , Androth, Minicoy
and Kalpeni. Another Munsiffs Court is in Amin with jurisdiction
over the Amini, Agatti, Kadmat , Kiltan , Chetlat and Bitra Islands.
These courts also function as the Courts of judicial Magistrates of
the First Class. The Judicial Magistrate of Androth is in charge of
the Chief Judicial Magistrate. The Subordinate Judges' Court at
Kavaratti was upgraded as the District & Sessions Court with
effect from April 1997.        (See Lakshadweep Gazatteer (supra);

Traditional Futures (supra) and the official Website of

Lakshadweep).

                    (v) The official historiography

       22.    In the Gazetteer of India      pertaining to the Union
Territory of Lakshadweep edited by N.S. Mannadiar and published
in the year 1977 by the Administration of the Union Territory of
Lakshadweep         after referring to a copious bibliography which

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998                  -:33:-




includes "A Short Account of the Laccadive Islands and Minicoy" by
R.H. Ellis, Malabar Mannual by William Logan etc., we find the
following useful information:-
                       a) Conversion to Islam

                            Perhaps the most significant event in the early
                     history of the territory was the complete religious
                     transformation brought over by the conversion of the entire
                     population to Islamic faith.    There is no specific proof
                     regarding the actual period of conversion. The popular
                     tradition current in all the islands is that it was brought
                     about by an Arab Saint named Ubaidullah, who reached
                     Amini in Hejira 41 (A.D.663). According to this tradition,
                     Ubaidullah the grandson of Siddique-ul-Akbar had a dream
                     while praying at a mosque in Medina to proceed to Jiddah
                     and from there by ocean to distant lands to spread the
                     message of Islam. Accordingly he proceeded from Jiddah,
                     but the vessel in which he travelled collapsed due to a
                     storm, Saint Ubaidullah, however, drifted on a plank and
                     finally reached the small island of Amini. The Saint started
                     preaching at this island, but met with general opposition.
                     He, however, got a female convert from the Pondambelli
                     family with whom he proceeded to Androth and succeeded
                     in converting the inhabitants there.      Then he went to
                     Kavarathi and Agatti, and returned once again to Amini in
                     A.H.44. He succeeded this time in coverting the entire
                     population. He then proceeded to Kalpeni converting the
                     inhabitants there, and finally returned to Androth where he
                     spent the rest of his life.
                            Saint Ubaidullah is universally known in the islands
                     as Munbe Mullaka, which is a mispronunciation of Munbe
                     Mussaliyar Kaka meaning the first Mussaliyar. He died at
                     Androth and his grave is enshrined there in a mosque.
                     Androth was accordingly regarded with deep veneration.
                     All the Juma mosques in the islands of Amini, Kalpeni,
                     Agatti and Kavarathi are believed to have been founded by
                     the Saint.

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998                -:34:-




                      b) Administration under the Arakkal Principality

                            The islands were kept as colonies by the Arakkal
                     Rajas with an ultimate aim of economic exploitation.
                     There were no public services in the islands and the
                     main involvement of the government was to maintain
                     law and order in a place where there were only very
                     few criminal offences. The principality appointed a
                     Karyakkar in important islands like Agatti, Kalpeni,
                     Androth and Minicoy on a salary of Rs.12 per month.
                     He was directly responsible to the Ali Raja and was
                     the executive authority in all civil and criminal
                     matters. The Karyakkars were generally deputed from
                     the   mainland,     though   sometimes    members     of
                     influential families of the islands were also appointed
                     to that covetable post.      The traditional system of
                     participation of elders in Administration was retained
                     by the Arakkal house and the Karyakkar was advised
                     by the Karnavans in all important matters.          The
                     Karyakkar was the pivot of the whole administrative
                     structure and he controlled the entire administration
                     and day to day life of the people. The properties in the
                     direct possession of the Arakkal house were managed
                     by him. Generally fishing licences were also issued by
                     him. But in all matters, the people could appeal to the
                     Ali Raja and instances are not wanting where the
                     Karyakkars were dismissed because of their cruelty or
                     injustice towards the people.
                            The trade was mainly based on barter.        The
                     Karyakkar supplied the essential food stuffs to the
                     people who gave him the island produce in return.
                     The boats of Arakkal family shipped the essential
                     articles to the islands and the islands products to the
                     mainland. Salt was generally brought from Goa. The
                     exchange rate of rice and other articles was fixed each

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998                -:35:-




                     year by the Arakkal rulers arbitrarily.      The island
                     products were purchased from people at rates far
                     below their market rate and sold in the best market in
                     the mainland. But instructions were always given to
                     safeguard the interest of the poor people, when the
                     principality stocked rice    in the islands before the
                     monsoon.

                        All civil and criminal suits were filed before the
                     Karyakkar. When suits were filed directly before the
                     Ali Raja, an enquiry report used to be obtained from
                     the Karyakkar before taking a decision in the matter.
                     If the decision of the Karyakkar was not acceptable to
                     the concerned parties, they could file an appeal before
                     the Raja.    Heavy penalties were imposed for theft.
                     Those who were found guilty of stealing coconuts,
                     were liable to pay penalty at the rate of ten rupees per
                     coconut. For the depredation of coconut seedlings by
                     cows, generally the cows were sold in auction and the
                     damages were allowed to the plaintiff. The balance
                     amount was divided and shared by the owner of the
                     cow and Arakkal principality. If a person removed a
                     coconut seedling deliberately from another man's
                     property, he would be required to pay a fine of 51
                     varahan ( a silver coin) to the Arakkal house. The
                     quasi-religious disputes were settled by the Khazi,
                     with the assistance of the Karyakkar. The verdicts of
                     the Khazi, in religious matters were always given due
                     respect by the rulers.

                                c)      Property and inheritance

                            Property in the islands is either ancestral or self
                     acquired. Ancestral property is known as Velliazhcha
                     (literally Friday property) pronounced as Belliazhcha
                     in the Amindivis. Self acquired property is known as

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998                -:36:-




                     Thinkalazhcha (literally Monday property) on the
                     Laccadives and Belasha on the Amindivis.

                            Ancestral or Tarwad property is governed by the
                     Marumakkathayam law of inheritance prevalent on the
                     Kerala coast. However, there is no codified law and
                     the practices are governed by customs which differ
                     from island to island.     Broadly speaking, property
                     right descends through the female line, the male
                     members having only right for sustenance during their
                     lifetime. The property is enjoyed by the joint family,
                     consisting of brothers, sisters and sister's children.
                     The children are not entitled for any share in the joint
                     family property of their father.

                            The property is managed by the eldest male
                     member known as Karanavan. He is responsible for
                     the upkeep of the trees in the land and for effecting
                     improvements to the Tarwad properties.         He can
                     mortgage the Tarwad property for debts incurred and
                     can also repay debts from the income therefrom. He
                     has, however, no right to alienate or sell any portion
                     of the joint family property.

                            The Tarwad properties can be partitioned only
                     with the consent of all members of the Tarwad.
                     However, there are local variations in the criteria for
                     partition. In Kavarathi and Agatti, for example, all the
                     members of the joint family are eligible for one share.
                     In Androth and Kalpeni on the other hand division of
                     properties is between branches or tavazhis of the
                     family.   A tavazhi does not possess the right to
                     mortgage or sell the Tarwad property so divided and
                     has only the right to enjoy the income from property
                     during the lifetime of the members of the tavazhi.

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998                -:37:-




                           Self-acquired or personal property is governed
                     by Muhammadan Law of succession. Here also there
                     are variations in different islands.       In Androth,
                     succession to personal property is also governed by
                     Marumakkathayam Law unless it is specifically laid
                     down in the will of the deceased that it should go to his
                     wife and children.       Self-acquired property can,
                     however, be disposed of in any manner one likes.
                     Under the Muslim Law followed in the islands, the son
                     is eligible for two shares in the property, while the
                     daughter gets only one share.

                               d)   Religious beliefs and practices

                           Islam enjoins 5 duties upon its followers- the
                     recitation of the Kalma ( an expression of faith in God
                     and in (Muhammad), offering of namaz(prayers) 5
                     times a day, roza (fasting in the month of Ramzan),
                     Zakat (contribution in cash or kind for charitable
                     purposes) and Haj to Mecca.         The people of the
                     islands are very strict in all their religious
                     observances. The daily prayers are said at day break,
                     soon after mid-day, before sunset, after sunset and
                     early in the night.

                           The Ramzan fast which lasts for thirty days
                     begins on the first of Ramzan, the ninth month of
                     Hijjra. The fasting requires total abstinence from food
                     and drink from sunrise to sunset. On the 27th day,
                     which is regarded as mot sacred, the Muslims give
                     Zakat to the poor to the tune of 2 = % of their income.
                     The Haj-Pilgrimage to Mecca is performed on the 9th
                     day of Dulhaj (12th month of Hijjra era). The Haj is
                     not compulsory for those who cannot afford to
                     undertake the long and expensive trip. Those who
                     have performed the Haj are reverentially called

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998                -:38:-




                     Hajiar.

                            Muslims of the territory also follow certain
                     ritualistic practices which do not have the sanction of
                     islam. Such a religious ritual common to all islands,
                     except Minicoy, is the Rathib.         The Rathib is
                     performed twice a week in the name of the two shieks
                     popularly known as Rifai Shiek and Moheiddin Shiek,
                     at the Ujira Mosque and Moheiddin Mosque
                     respectively. Special Rathibs are conducted on special
                     days and also by individuals.      There is very little
                     difference in the ritualistic practices followed in the
                     two Rathibs, except in the rendering of the baith or
                     hymns sung in praise of the respective saints during
                     the performances.

                            The performance of the Rathib is initiated by the
                     Khalifa of the mosque who renders the baith. The
                     participants sit in two rows facing each other, each
                     holding a kind of tambourine known as duff.        They
                     beat the duff to the tune of the baith, and perform a
                     series of exercises. At the same time, about half a
                     dozen of them dance up and down between the rows
                     carrying a sharp instrument known as labbus and get
                     into fits of frenzy as the pace of the baith, as well as
                     the beating gain momentum. At the climax they leap
                     into the air shouting and apply the labbus in their
                     bodies.     Rathib is also performed without the
                     accompaniment of the duff and the ritual of inflicting
                     pain with labbus is performed only on special
                     occasions.

                            The mosques in the islands are structures built
                     with the main entrance on the eastern side. In almost
                     all islands, there are three main mosques, the Juma,
                     the Mohiddin and the Ujira. The Juma mosque is

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998                 -:39:-




                     generally the largest where the Id congregration
                     meets. The Mohiddin and Ujira mosques are mainly
                     intended for the performance of Rathib. Apart from
                     these, there are numerous mosques, big and small in
                     size. In some islands like Kavaratti, Agatti, Amini and
                     Kiltan there are separate Niskarapuras (prayer
                     houses) for women, where the person leading the
                     prayer is a woman. A mosque is in charge of a Mukri
                     or Mullah, whose main function is to make the call for
                     prayer five time a day and lead the Niskaram. The
                     Mukri's remuneration consists of the yield of the
                     coconut trees set apart for the purpose by the
                     community and the offerings or Nerchas by the
                     devotees. The Khasi leads the Friday prayers. In
                     Minicoy, the office is known as Kathib. The office of
                     the Khasi is hereditary in all islands except in Minicoy
                     where it is elective.

                                            e)   Festivals

                               The most important festivals celebrated
                         in the territory are Id-Ul-Fitr, Id-Uz-Zuha (or
                         Bakrid), Milad-Un-Nabi, Shab-e-Barat and
                         Muharram.
                               Id-Ul-Fitr, locally known as Cheriya
                         Perunal marks the culmination of the Ramzan
                         fast. It falls on the first of the month of Shawwal
                         when thanks giving prayers are offered in
                         important mosques for the successful completion
                         of the fasts of the previous month of Ramzan. It
                         is a day of feasting. In some islands community
                         feasting is also prevalent.        In Kavaratti, for
                         example, a big feast is arranged at the Mohiddin
                         Mosque with contributions made by the people
                         in the form of offerings of goats, cows, rice etc.
                         Moulood (prayer) in the name of Prophet is

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998             -:40:-




                       conducted at the mosque on the day. Special
                       Rathibs are conducted at the Ujira and
                       Mohiddin Mosques.         Women and children
                       adorned in their best clothes attend the Rathibs.
                       In some islands (Kadmat for example) women
                       participate in the performance of the Rathib. In
                       Minicoy, a community feast is arranged in each
                       village, expenditure being met from the village
                       funds.

                              Id-Uz-Zuha or Valiya Perunal (Bakrid)
                       falls on the 10th day of Dul Haj to commemorate
                       the occasion      when   the   Prophet   Ibrahim
                       submitted himself to the will of God. Men attend
                       the morning prayers in mosques and cows and
                       goats are sacrificed in God's name and
                       distributed. Special Rathibs are performed to
                       mark the Valiya Perunal.

                       Milad-Un-Nabi, the birth day of the Prophet
                       Muhammed falls on the twelfth day of Rabi-Ul-
                       Awwal. Alms are distributed on this day and
                       people gather at the mosques to listen to
                       discourses on the Prophet's life.

                              Shab-e-Barat is celebrated on the night of
                       the fourteenth day of Shaban when special
                       prayers are offered for the peace of the souls of
                       one's deceased kin and sweets are then
                       distributed.

                              Muharram is an occasion for mourning
                       rather than an occasion for festivity, as the first
                       ten   days   of    the   month   of  that   name
                       commemorate the tragedy of Karbala which
                       witnessed the martyrdom of Imam Hussain, (the

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998                -:41:-




                         grandson of Prophet Muhammad) and his
                         companions. On the tenth day evening sweets
                         are distributed in the mosques.

                                While the above festivals are common to
                         Muslims all over the world, certain other
                         festivals in the name of Muslim Saints are also
                         celebrated in the territory. The death of the
                         Rifai Sheik and the Mohiddin Sheik are
                         celebrated in all islands except Minicoy with
                         great   veneration.      Special  prayers   are
                         conducted.      The death of Ubaidullah, the
                         Muslim Saint who is said to have converted the
                         inhabitants to Islam, is celebrated with special
                         mouloods at the Ujira Mosque at Androth.
                         Similarly the death of Shaik Mohammed
                         Khassem Oliyulla whose remains are in the
                         Ujira Mosque in Kavaratti island is also
                         celebrated with special prayers.


                        B.     ANDROTH ISLAND


                            (i) ITS GEOGRAPHY

       23.     This Island is located between 100 49' North latitude   and
73 0 41' East longitude as well as 293 kms. away from Kochi. It is the
nearest island to the mainland and has an east-west orientation unlike
other islands lying in the north-south direction. It is the largest
island in Lakshadweep with thick vegetation mainly coconut groves
which add to the beauty of the island. This was the first island to
embrace      Islam.  (Vide    the official website of Lakshadweep). A
notional map of the Androth Island is given below:-

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998    -:42:-

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998                -:43:-




                     (ii) William Logan's Account

       23.       William Logan, who lived during the period from 1841
to 1914 was a Scottish civil servant who had his long stint in the
Madras Civil Service from August 1862 to November 1888. Logan
was in the erstwhile Malabar District between 1864 and 1888 and
served there in various capacities like Sub Collector, Joint
Magistrate, Acting District and Sessions Judge of North Malabar at
Tellicherry and later of South Malabar at Calicut, Collector and
District Magistrate of Malabar etc. It was this administrator turned
historiographer who is the proud author of the famous "William
Logan's Malabar Manual". Logan has in            the 2nd volume of the
above manual incorporated a detailed description of the

Lakshadweep Islands (formerly Laccadive islands) given by the

historian V.Chappu Menon.             The following is the description

given with regard to the Androth Island, so far as it is relevant to

the present context:-

                    "Position and Extent:-     This island, which is the
             largest of the northern group of the Cannannore Islands is
             situated in Lat.10o 48' N and Long.73o 57' E. It is about
             139 miles from Calicut and differs in its formation from all
             the other islands of the group in that it lies east and west
             and has hardly any lagoon. The coral shoal upon which it
             is situated is of considerable extent, but the coral crops up
             to the surface only in the immediate neighbourhood of the
             land, the reef being hardly anywhere above sixty yards
             from the beach and on the east the beach and reef are

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998                 -:44:-




             coincident. The greatest length of the island from south-
             east to north-west is about 3 = miles, and the greatest
             breadth, which is at about the centre of the island, is 1 <
             miles. The area is 1,067 2/3 acres or about 1 2/3 square
             miles. The coast line is scarcely at all indented, so that
             the island forms a regular oval figure. The surface is
             generally a level plain, elevated but a few feet above the
             sea, but here and there it is varied by mounds formed
             mostly of the heaped-up material excavated in forming the
             "Tottam" or arable land. The highest mound is probably
             not 40 feet above the sea and the average elevation not
             more than 7 or 8 feet.

             People, their Customs and Occupation- The people of the
             island fall under three main classes viz-

                    (1) Karnavar (doers, agents) subdivided into Karnavar proper
                        and Thanakapiratha Kudiyans.

                    (2) Malumis (pilots and sailors), subdivided into (a) Malumis
                        proper (b) Urukars.

                    (3) Melacheris (tree climbers).

                    The first class of Karnavars is composed of the rich
             odam(vessel) owners and Panchayatkars (arbitrators). The
             male members of this class are also distinguished by the
             title of Koya- a religious dignity. The island Karnavans,
             Amin and Kazi, all belong to this class.                         The
             Thanakapirantha          Kudiyans are less wealthy and
             cultivators. The second class or the Malumis are as the
             name implies, sailors. They are generally Patta Kudiyans,
             i.e.partly independent and partly dependant on the higher
             classes. The only difference between the Malumis proper
             and the Urukars appears to be in the names. The third

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998              -:45:-




             class, Melacheris are servants and toddy-drawers (the
             name signifies one who works aloft).
                    These are generally Adima Kudiyans or serfs of the
             Karnavars, but they are at liberty to change their
             employers.    Inter-marriage between the two classes of
             Karnavars is free and unrestrained, and lately it appears
             that   the   jusconnubium(right   of   intermarriage    with
             Karnavars) has been accorded to the second class), but it is
             still withheld from the third class or Melacheris,
             intermarriage with whom is punished by the exclusion of
             the offender from his or her caste.       The marriage is,
             however, deemed a valid one.
                    The islanders compare favourably in physique with
             the people of the coast and in their customs and habits
             closely resemble the Mappillas of North Malabar. The men
             of the upper classes wear jackets and head gear, but the
             Melacheris or lowest classes wear neither the one nor the
             other. Contrary to what is the usage on the mainland, the
             women do not cover their heads and are not kept in
             seclusion. The women are generally very untidy and dirty.
                    The people are, as a rule, quiet in their disposition,
             but the complexities of the Muhammadan rules of
             inheritance and marriage and the existence, side by side, of
             the Makkatayam and Marumakkathayam rules give rise to
             frequent litigation. The men are comparatively indolent,
             but the women are engaged from morning till dark in
             cooking, pounding rice, beating, unravelling and twisting
             coir-fibre, carrying loads, boiling toddy in order to make
             jaggery etc.
                    It is somewhat difficult to define what is the
             occupation of the Karnavar class, as they rarely do
             anything save bullying their dependents or quarreling
             among themselves; occasionally they do a little cultivation
             and fishing and those who have odams (vessels)

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998                -:46:-




             superintend the repairs and accompany the odam on the
             voyage to the coast where they do all the buying and
             selling, only rendering an account upon the return of the
             odam to the island.
                    The dependents of the Karanavar caste serve for
             nothing in their master's odam (boat), or, when he has
             none, in the odam in which he sails or sends his goods. The
             Kudiyan must also ship the produce of his trees etc., in the
             master's odam, or through him in the odam in which the
             master ships his own goods, and 20 per cent of the goods he
             so exports is appropriated by the master as freight. The
             tottam or arable land is sometimes cultivated by the master,
             but most is given over to Kudiyans (dependants) on the
             share-and -share-alike system.

                    The income of the Karnavar class, who are all
             landholders and may of them odam-owners is thus derived
             from the following sources:-
                                   (1) From the produce of parambas retained
                            in their own hands.
                                   (2) From the export and sale of the goods
                            worked up by the females of the family.
                                   (3) From the freight    paid them by their
                            Kudiyans on the goods they export.      Where the
                            Karnavan is also the odam-owner he gets the whole
                            20 percent; when he is not , he usually gets freight
                            for his own goods and those of his Kudiyans at the
                            rate of 10 per cent in the odam of another and the
                            other 10 per cent of the expots of his Kudiyans is
                            alone appropriated by him.
                                   (4) From the rent (half the produce) of their
                            arable lands.
                                   (5) Kudiyans are also bound to give the
                            Karnavan a share of the fish they catch when
                            fishing in his boat and to make presents on the
                            occasion of weddings and other festivities in the

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998                -:47:-




                             Karnavan's family.
                                    (6) Some of this class also make tours on the
                             mainland giving themselves out to be priests and
                             often return to the island with large sums collected
                             from the faithful of the places they visit.

                           The second class or Malumis are sailors and
                     are engaged in exporting the produce of the island to
                     the mainland in the Karnavar's odams; some of
                     them also possess fishing boats and small odams of
                     their own, in which they make voyages to the coast,
                     and this has excited the jealousy of the Karnavar
                     class, who look upon them as interlopers and rebels.
                     There is thus ill-feeling between the two classes.

                       The Melacheris or the third class are the hardest
             working population of the island. they alone climb trees
             and so pluck the nuts and draw toddy from the trees in the
             possession of the higher classes. For plucking nuts a small
             percentage is given them as hire and the toddy which is
             drawn twice a day is given every other day to the Karnavan,
             ie. half goes to the Melacheri and half to the Karnavan.
             Besides their profession of toddy-drawing, they have to do
             odam service for their lords and they also work in the
             tottam and go fishing. A few coast people who have settled
             in the island are silversmiths and jewellers.

                     Religion and Mosques- All the people of the island
             profess Muhammadanism.            There were 30 mosques in
             1880, of which 28 had graveyards attached".

           C)    BUHARI KOYA'S CASE - A "LOCUS CLASSICUS"
       24. Any study on the customary Marumakkathayam Law as
administered in the Amini and other islands of the Lakshadweep

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998            -:48:-




will be incomplete if one were to ignore the illuminating verdict
rendered by Justice Janaki Amma in Buhari Koya v. Kasim Koya
Haji - ILR 1979 (1) Kerala 730 where the pristine Malabar Law
including attaladakkam      rights in the historical setting of those
islands has been beautifully adumbrated.
    D.     ANALYSIS OF THE CONTENTIOUS ISSUES IN THIS CASE
       25.    We now proceed to analyse the evidence with a veiw to
ascertain whether the findings recorded and conclusions reached
by the learned single Judge are unsustainable or not .


(i) Whether a suit by a Karanavan can be deemed to be instituted
                       on behalf of his tarwad ?
       26.      There was no issue, much less, any contention before
the Courts below that the suit was not instituted on behalf of the
Puthiyapura tarwad.     Such an argument was advanced for the first
time before us. In order that a decree against a Manager or a
Karanavan may bind the joint family or tarwad or other members
of the joint family or tarwad, it is enough that the Manager or
Karanavan sues or is sued as such Manager or Karanavan ( See
Leelavathi Amma v. Varghese Mathai - 1965 KLT 701).          It is not
even necessary, where the Manager or Karanavan is the plaintiff,
that the plaint should state in distinct terms that he is acting as
the Manager or the Karanavan or where he is the defendant, the
plaint should state that he is being sued        as the Manager or

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998             -:49:-




Karanavan.        A Karta can represent the family effectively in a
proceeding though he is not named as such. (Amrit Sagar Gupta v.
Sudesh Behari Lal - AIR 1970 SC 5).


     ii) Whether the plaintiff in his capacity as only the de facto
                   Karanavan could institute the suit ?
       27.    This also was not an issue or subject matter of any
pleadings or contention before the courts below . We had adverted
to the passage from Logan's Malabar Manual taking note of the
fact that      some of the Karanavans were making tours          to the
mainland and offering their services as priests. In the plaint also
such a practice has been specifically pleaded. Moreover,             the
question as to whether it was the plaintiff or somebody else who
was entitled to represent the Puthiyapura tarwad as its Karanavan,
could at best, between the plaintiff and other members of            his
tarwad. It is not open to a stranger like the 4th defendant to raise
any such contention.

                     iii) Appreciation of evidence

       28. Eventhough in the plaint the total extent shown for the plaint

schedule mosque is 0.033 Ares which is less than a cent, the said

extent is evidently a mistake . Ext.A36 order dated 9-6-2003 passed

by the Assistant Settlement Officer, Androth and produced along with

I.A. 684/2004 and marked in this appeal shows that the area of the

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998             -:50:-




Mohiyuddin Palli is 2350 sq.metres which is about 50 cents.      Ext.A36

also shows that there were 43 coconut trees in the property. Ext.A1 is

the    certified extract of the  old Land Register of Androth      Island

prepared in the year 1962. The said certified    extract was issued on

10-11-1987. This Land Register issued in accordance with law shows

that the plaintiff namely Puthiyapura Sayed Sheik Koya is the Manager

of Mohiyuddin Palli situated in Sy. No. 117/11     and that  altogether

there were 42 coconut trees in the property at that time . Ext.A2 is an

extract    from the original Field Measurement Book     issued    by the

Assistant Settlement Officer,    Collectorate of Lakshadweep, Kavaratti

showing the Survey plan pertaining to Field No. Survey No. 117 of

Androth Island.       The plaint schedule Mohiyuddin Palli is shown as

located in Sub Division No. 11 of Survey No. 117.   Ext.A3 is a copy of

Ext.A1 Land Register      extract showing that    the   entry    reading

Mohiyudheen Palli Manager in Column 3 of Ext.A1 Land Register has

been scored off and in that place the words "Amin and the Karanavars"

have been interpolated. There is no dispute that on the plaintiff coming

to know of the above interpollation in the Land Register he preferred

an appeal before the Assistant Settlement Officer, Andrott and the said

officer as per Ext.A36 order dated 9-6-2003 produced in this appeal

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998               -:51:-




held that     there was an illegal interpolation in the old Land Register

and accordingly the interpolated entry was rectified and the plaintiff's

name was restored. The 4th defendant claims to have filed an appeal

before the Administrator against Ext.A36 order and the said appeal has

not been disposed of.       The argument on behalf of the 4th defendant

that Ext.A1 Land Register is not final does not carry much conviction. In

the first place, all the columns and the entries in Ext.A1 are written in

blue ink.     After the  heading    Land Register, Andrott Island , 1962

which is also in blue ink,      it is written by hand in red ink within

brackets "not final". It is not known whether the above addition was

there while the certified extract was issued . Even assuming that those

words are there in the original register and have been faithfully carried

over    to   the certified extract, the fact remains that  the  old Land

Register which is admittedly maintained in accordance with the

provisions of the statutory Regulation, has not been revised since the

year 1962.       The fact that after the     disputes arose there was an

attempt to substitute the name of the plaintiff described in the original

Land Register as the Manager of the plaint schedule Mohiyudeen Palli

with the words "Amin and Karanavans" as revealed by Ext.A3 and the

same on detection and protest by the plaintiff, was corrected and the

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998              -:52:-




original entries were restored as per Ext.A36 order   dated 9-6-2003,

also cannot be       easily brushed aside.  It is not disputed that the

plaintiff's name     had been entered in the said Land Register as the

Manager of the plaint schedule mosque       and there is absolutely   no

explanation as to why such an entry was originally made in a public

document like the Land Register at an undisputed point of time. If the

plaint schedule mosque was constructed by the      people of the Mahal

and    the plaintiff  or his predecessors  had nothing to do with the

mosque as is contended by the 4th defendant, there is absolutely no

explanation for the above entry in the original Land Register.   It is in

this context that Exts. A4 to A12 electricity bills in the name of the

plaintiff evidencing payment of electricity charges by the plaintiff in

respect of the energy consumed in the mosque, assumes relevance.

Ext.A13 proceedings dated 5-4-1976 by the Registrar or Co-operatives

issuing special permits to the plaintiff for 100 kgms. of rice and 25

kgms. of sugar for the Khattam         ceremony in the plaint schedule

mosque, was definitely in recognition of the status of the plaintiff as

the Sheik of the Mosque in question. There is no dispute that the

expression Sheik is purely a word of island origin and the said word is

understood as the person performing the religious ceremonies in the

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998               -:53:-




mosque.      A32 series of photographs proved by P.W.2 provide eloquent

testimony for the fact that the plaintiff has been conducting himself as

the Sheik in connection with the       Ratheeb    performed in the plaint

schedule mosuqe. Exts. A14 and A16 are special permits dated 22-8-

1989 and 21-11-1988 respectively          issued to the plaintiff for lifting

bulk quantities of rice etc. in connection with the Khattam ceremony.

Ext.A16 receipt dated 25-11-1987 is issued by the Mukri for having

received money from the plaintiff who is described therein as managing

the mosque. This document is also in perfect accord with Ext.A1 Land

Register entry. Ext.A17 is a certificate dated 5-12-1988 issued by the

Wakf Board Lakshdweep to the effect that the plaint schedule mosque

has not been registered with the Wakf Board as on that date. This will

strengthen the plaintiff's case that the bar of suit under sub section (5)

of Sec. 6 of the Wakf Act, 1995 and under Section 55-E of the Wakf

Act, 1954, is not attracted.    Ext.A18 is an important document which

throws considerable light on the contention of the plaintiff.     The then

Sheik of the plaint schedule mosque and belonging to the Puthiyapura

tarwad of the plaintiff instituted a suit as Case No. 90/1922 before the

Amin's Court, Andrott against the Mukri of the Mosque and another

person.      Ext.A18    is the plaint as well as the decree passed in that

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998               -:54:-




case. The plaintiff /petitioner therein is described as the Sheik of the

Mohiyudheen Mosque.         His complaint was that      the Mukri     had

unauthorisedly leased out 57 coconut trees belonging to the mosque to

one Mutharammel Pookkukoya, the second defendant therein. In that

litigation the Amin and the Karanavans who were exercising the powers

of a civil Court made a local inspection of the property and prepared a

plan     demarcating the      area occupied by the mosque from the

neighbouring properties      on the south, west and south west of the

property of the mosque.            The first defendant Mukri       namely

Mutharammel Abdu Rahiman Koya finally swore before the Amin and

the Karanavans that the property demarcated in the plan belongs to

the mosque. The relevance of this document lies in the fact that unless

the    Sheik who instituted the suit was the manager of the mosque, he

could not have         lodged the complaint before the Amin and the

Karanavans.       If the Amin and the Karanavans were the Muthawallis in

respect of the mosque as        is    contended by the Mohiyuddin Palli

Committee represented by the 4th defendant,             the Muthawallis

themselves could have      taken action and they would not have allowed

the then Karanavan of the plaintiff's tarwad to style himself as the Sheik

of the Mosque and to lodge a complaint on behalf of the mosque. It is

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998                -:55:-




pertinent to bear in mind that the above dispute dates back to the year

1922.      Ext.A19 petition dated 24-10-1987 by the plaintiff as the Sheik

of the mosque seeking police aid from the S.D.O. for the proposed

Khatam ceremony and Ext. B8 order dated 2-11-1988 declining to

grant police aid and Ext.A20 Judgment dated 25-11-1987 by the High

Court     in O.P. 9410/1987 filed by the plaintiff directing the S.D.O. to

decide whether        the plaintiff was    conducting the festival for the

previous three years     and, if so, to grant police aid etc. do not clinch

the issue either way. This is because even before       the subject matter

of the said dispute became final, the plaintiff approached the civil Court

with the present suit.     Ext.A35 is an application dated 7-11-1967 by

the Muthawalli of      Velleripalli (Sl.No. 156 of Ext. B6 notification) in

Andrott Island      seeking permission of the Amin Andrott to take the

necessary electric connection to the said Mosque.      This document will

show that even in respect of a Mosque of which the Amin was not

shown as the Muthawalli, but instead, one P. Padippura Syed Koya was

shown as the Muthawalli even according to Ext.B6 notification, had to

apply to the Amin for permission for electrification.     Exts. A23 death

certificate and A24 proceedings of the Collector show that Komalam

Muthukoya who was the Amin of Androth and who retired as such on

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998                -:56:-




31-7-1983 died on 25-11-1985. It was after the death of            the said

Amin that there was an attempt by the Mohiyudheen Palli Committee

headed by the 4th defendant       to slowly grab at the control over the

management of the plaint schedule mosque.              Ext.B1 is a reply to

Ext.A25      notice  issued   by the plaintiff   under Sec. 80 C.P.C. and

Sections 55 and 56 of the Wakf Act, 1954. Ext. B2 is the copy of the

deposition     of the first petitioner  in Ext.B22 mass petition.   As per

Ext.B3 order dated 18-2-1948         the Amin disposed of Ext. B22 mass

petition granting the head of three goats to one Karalalpura Syed

Koya . Ext.B4 is the minutes dated 2-011-1988 of the meeting of the

Mohiyudheen Palli Committee          containing  self serving   statements.

Admittedly, the number of signatories to this meeting is only 610

which is only a microscopic minority of the total population of Androth

Island . Ext.B4 minutes was rightly discarded by the trial Judge. Ext.B5

is the certified extract of the    Land Register extract pertaining to the

property in Sy. No. 117/11. Ext.B5 has been issued on 22-6-1989 . In

this   Land Register extract      the Manager of Mohiyudheen Church is

shown as the Amin and the Karanavars.           It is pertinent to note that

this document was issued after the objectionable interpolation was

effected in the original entry in the Land Register and this document

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998               -:57:-




does not have any relevance after Ext.A36 order of the S.D.O. deleting

the interpolation and restoring the original entry. Moreover,        even

under Ext.B6 notification which is the sheet anchor of the contesting

4th defendant,     the Muthawalli of the plaint schedule mosque is only

shown as "under the supervision of the Amin and Karanavans" .         Ext.

B6 is the trump card of the Palli Committee (contesting 4th defendant).

It is a notification dated 25-08-1968 issued by the Laccadive Wakf

Board, Union Territory of Laccadives, Kavarati Island in exercise of its

powers under Sec. 5 (2) of the Wakf Act, 1954. By this notification the

Wakf Board was including the      214 Mosques referred to therein in the

list of Wakfs under Sec. 5 (2) of the Wakf Act.    Sl.Nos. 1 to 22 are the

Mosques in Kalpeni Island, Sl.Nos. 23 to 25 are the Mosques in Bitra

Island, Sl.Nos. 26 to 67 are the Mosques of Amini Island, Sl. Nos. 68 to

111 are the Mosques of       Kiltan Island, Sl.Nos. 112 to 130 are the

Mosques of Kadmat Island, Sl. Nos. 131 to 167 are the Mosques of

Androth Island , Sl.Nos. 168 to 201 are the Mosques of Agatti Island

and Sl.Nos. 202 to 234 are the Mosques in Kavaratti Island. Ext.B6

notification on the first page itself gives the following heading:

   "Name and Address of Wakf and beneficiaries-Muslim Community.
    How the Wakf is administered - By custom"
The above heading itself cuts at the root of the contention of the Palli

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998               -:58:-




Committee that Muthawalliship cannot be hereditary by custom. Sl.No.
147 is the entry pertaining to the plaint schedule Mohiyudheen Palli .
Column 2 of Ext.B6 pertains to the name of the Muthawalli .         Against
Sl.No. 147, what is given under Column 2 is "under the supervision of
Amin and Karanavans".        It was the above entry which persuaded the
learned Judge in appeal to hold that        the Muthawalli    of the plaint
schedule mosque was the Amin and Karanavans. The very fact that
Column 2 of Ext.B6          shows "under the supervision of Amin and
Karanavans" itself indicates that the Muthawalli whoever he be was only
under the supervision of the Amin and Karanavans .         It certainly does
not    mean that the Amin and the Karanavans are the Muthawallis. The
learned Judge was misreading the evidence to hold that as per Ext. B6
the Muthawalli      was   Amin & Karanavans.      Sl.No. 158   in Ext.B6 is
Jumathpalli       in the very same Androth Island. In column 2 pertaining
to the name of Muthawalli what is entered is "Members of Pattackal
under the supervision of Amin and Karanavans". If the argument of the
contesting respondent (D4) is to be accepted, then all Mosques having
the name Mohiyudheen , Jumaath or Ujira         are public Mosques which
are to be administered by the Amin. The said contention falls to the
ground in the case of Sl.No. 158 "Jamath Mosque" which has been held
to be a Mosque of which         the members of the Pattakal family were
entitled to function as the Muthawalli in hereditary rights by a Division
Bench of this Court in C.R.P. Nos. 460 and 462 of 2006 which shall be
adverted to     later.  The statement of R.H. Ellis at page 66 of "A Short
Account of the Laccadive Islands and Minicoy" that the Jamath, Moidin
and Ujira Mosques on every island except Minicoy are public mosques
does not mean that those mosques          have been constructed by the

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998                -:59:-




public. The word "public mosque" only means that it is a mosque in
which the members of the public have a right of worship.          It is true
that the plaintiff has not been able to establish that the plaint schedule
mosque was constructed by the former Karanavans of his tarwad.           But
there is no evidence to show that the mosque was constructed by the
members of the mahal either .        As a matter of fact the committee of
the 4th defendant came into existence only in the year 1988. They have
absolutely no explanation as to how and why the name of Puthiyapura
Sayed Sheik Koya      the previous Karanavan of the plaintiff's      tarwad
came to be entered as the Manager of the plaint schedule Mohiyudheen
Palli in the year 1962 in Ext.A1 Land Register which is       admittedly a
statutory one.      Similarly, Sl.Nos. 24 , 25, 47, 73 , 81 , 91, 94 , 120,
123, 178, 189, 199 and 204 in Ext.B6 are all mosques           having the
name Mohiyudhin Palli or Jamath Palli but are not managed by Amin or
Karanavans. As against the mosques at Sl. Nos. 21 and 22 in Kalpeni
island the person shown as the Muthawalli is the Government.           This
means that        in those     public mosques     which were under the
management of the Government, the notification has taken special
care to show the Government as the Muthawalli.            Similarly, for the
mosques at Sl. No. 1 in Kalpeni island and Sl. No. 185 in Agatti island a
Committee is shown as the Muthawalli. This again shows that if the
Muthawalli of the plaint schedule mosque was not a member of the
Puthiyapura Tarwad of the plaintiff but was a Committee,          the Wakf
Board would have very well shown such committee as the Muthawalli.
The learned Appellate Judge was clearly in error in holding that as per
Ext. B6 notification the Amin and Karanavans were the Muthawallis in
respect of the plaint schedule mosque. The Muthawallis indicated for

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998              -:60:-




other similarly situate mosques in Ext. B6 notification were not taken
note of     in this connection.  Ext. B10 and B11 are self serving note
books     which do not in any way go against the contentions of the
plaintiff. So, is the case with Exts. B12 account book and Exts. B13
to B20 receipts .      At page 18 of his deposition DW1 would say that
Ext.B12 account book        is maintained by the Thimani (peon of the
mosque).      No explanation whatsoever   has been offered by him as to
why     the said account book was not produced from proper custody.
Apart from the fact that Ext.B22 mass petition does not prove or even
suggest that the mosque in question         belongs to the public,  the
allegation therein    that the Amin had given the goat heads deviating
from the custom is something pertaining to the religious ceremony and
not pertaining to     the ownership    or administration of the mosque.
P.W.1 the plaintiff and P.W.2 his nephew who also knows photography
have both testified in terms of the plaint averment. But the case of
P.W.1 that the mosque was established       about 200 years ago by the
Karanavan of his tarwad has no material to corroborate. He was the
Karanavan and Sheik only for 17 years prior to suit and his knowledge
is only through the versions passed on by his elders and that cannot
constitute legal evidence.     But his testimony to the effect that the
former Karanavans and after their tenure he himself were officiating
as    the Muthawalli and Sheik of the plaint schedule mosque          is
corroborated by the documentary evidence already adverted to and was
also   accepted by the trial Judge    who had the unique advantage of
seeing the witnesses and assessing their credibility.   The testimony of
the 4th defendant as DW1 cannot be accepted to hold that the Mosque
was constructed by the local people and that the Amins and Karanavans

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998                -:61:-




were the Muthawallis.      The above version of DW1 has no evidentiary
support. It is rather contrary to the evidence on record. With regard to
the construction of the Mosque there was no acceptable evidence before
the Court.       With regard to the claim of DW1 that the Amins and
Karanavans were functioning as the Muthawalli of the Mosque, the same
is opposed to the        documentary evidence in the case.          We are,
therefore, of the view that the trial Court also was not coming to the
right conclusion when it held that the plaintiff     is only the de facto
Muthawalli and Sheik of the Mosque and that the said office has not
been enjoyed       as a hereditary right by the     representatives of the
Puthiyapura tarwad by custom.

   E.    DEDICATION OF A MOSQUE AND THE SANCTITY OF PRAYERS

       29.       The Supreme Court in its leading judgment             Syed
Mohd.Salie Labbai v. Mohd. Hanifa- AIR 1976 SC 1569, after
quoting authorities of Scholars and Doctors of Mohammedan law
has condensed the law in the following words-


                           "The dedication to a mosque is governed by special
                    rules and special equity in the light of a particular
                    dedication has to be determined. A mosque is obviously
                    a place where the Muslims offer their prayers. It is well
                    known that there are certain formalities which have to be
                    observed by the Muslims before they offer the prayers.
                    These formalities are-

                       (i) Wazoo, i.e.washing of hands and feet in a
                       manner prescribed by Shariat;

                       (ii) the recitation of azann and ikamat which is

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998                -:62:-




                       usually done by the Pesh Imam or the Muazzin.

                       (iii) there must be a person who possesses virtuous
                       qualities and a knowledge of Quran and other
                       religious rites who should lead and prayers.

           It was further observed that :

                  "This is necessary in case of prayers offered in
           congregation. A single Muslim can also offer his prayers with or
           without an Imam who         leads the prayers.    As Islam is an
           extremely modern and liberal religion, there is no question of any
           person being denied admission in a Mosque for the purpose of
           offering prayers and that is why the law is so strict that the
           moment a person is allowed to offer his prayers in a Mosque for
           the purpose of offering prayers in a Mosque, the Mosque become
           dedicated to the public.     Finally, it is not necessary for the
           dedication of a public Mosque that a Muthawalli or a Pesh Imam
           should be appointed which could be done by the members of the
           Muslim Community. All that is necessary is that there should be
           a declaration of the intention to dedicate either expressly or
           impliedly and a divestment of his interest in the property by the
           owner followed by delivery of possession. Here also the delivery
           of possession does not involve any ritual formality or any
           technical rule.    For instance in the case of a Mosque, if the
           Mohammedans of the village, town of the area are permitted to
           offer their prayers either on the vacant land or in a Mosque built
           for the said purpose that amounts to the delivery of possession
           and divestment and after the prayers have been offered the
           dedication becomes complete."

          F . MUTHAWALLI - HIS STATUS, RIGHTS AND DUTIES

       30 . The word "Muthawalli" was unknown to the Laccadive Island
until the Wakf Act, 1954 was brought into force there in the year 1968.
The Muthawalli was known by the name Khazi.               (Vide the common

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998               -:63:-




order dated 18-12-2007 passed by a Division        Bench of this Court in
C.R.P. Nos. 460 and 462 of 2006 to be adverted to in detail hereinafter).
The definition of the word "Muthawalli" in Section 3 (f) of the Wakf Act,
1954 reads as follows:-
                  "Muthawalli" means any person appointed either
                  verbally or under any deed or instrument by which a
                  Wakf has been created or by a competent authority to
                  be the Muthawalli of a Wakf and includes any person
                  who is a Muthawalli of a Wakf by virtue of any custom
                  or who is a naib - Muthawalli, khadim,        mujawar,
                  sajjadanashin, amin or other person appointed by a
                  Muthawalli to perform the duties of a Muthawalli and,
                  save as otherwhise provided in this Act, any person,
                  Committee or Corporation for the time being managing
                  or administering any wakf or wakf property:

                       Provided that no member of a        Committee or
                  Corporation shall be deemed to be a Muthawalli unless
                  such member is an office bearer of such Committee or
                  Corporation".


Thus, a person who is Muthawalli by virtue of a custom or any
person , for the time being, managing or administering any wakf or
wakf property is also a Muthawalli. The same dentition has been
adopted in the Wakf Act, 1995 as well.


       31. Sri. S.A. Khader who was a         former Judge of the High
Court of Madras in his "Law of Wakfs - An Analytical and Critical
Study " (2nd Edition) states as follows:-

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998                   -:64:-




              Scope

              General. One of the fundamental differences between trust as known to
              English Law and Wakfs as conceived by Muslim jurists is that while
              under the English Law the property dedicated vests in the trustee,
              under Islamic jurisprudence, the property vests in God Almighty and
              the curator whether called Muthawalli or sajjadanashin or by any other
              name, is merely a manager.

              Custom. The definition of Muthawalli includes " any person who is a
              Muthawalli of a wakf by virtue of any custom."

                             The appointment of a Muthawalli in such cases may be
              made according to custom and usage. In cases of institutions confined
              to any locality or to any particular school, for example, mosque or
              Kabirstan, by custom and usage the appointment is made by the Muslim
              congregation well known as the "Muslim Jamaat".


       32.    Mulla on Mohammedan Law (1st Edition) published by
Dwivedi Publishing Company, has the following to state :-
                           "The office of a Muthawalli , in absence of any provision
                    in wakfnama, is neither heritable nor transferable.

                           The office of Muthawalli     is not heritable and at his
                    death, and in absence of Wakif or his executor Court (now
                    Board) is empowered to appoint his successor. The new Act has
                    put sajjadanasheen etc. who have a larger interest       in the
                    usufruct, have been put at par with the Muthawalli, but have no
                    right in the endowed property".

                           The rules for successor-in-office may be deduced through
                    customs and usage of the sect or the locality, in absence of any
                    directions.

                            The office of Muthawalli is not transferable and Muslim
                     Law does not recognize the office to be hereditary unless there
                     is a custom.
                                            xx xx    xx xx

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998                     -:65:-




                         The right of Muthawalli is not, equivalent to that of a
                  mahant. A Muthawallis' right is purely a right of management of
                  the property and is not a proprietary right. The duties of a
                  Muthawalli are purely of a secular character. His duties are not
                  of a religious character. He has no beneficial interest of any kind
                  in the property which he administers while a mahant has such an
                  interest in the property belonging to the math. A mahant's right
                  is not only a right of management of the property but he holds a
                  beneficial interest in it".

       33.     Dr.    Tahir Mahmood in the Muslim Law of India                  (1980

Edition) has enumerated the Rules of Muslim Law regarding Muthawalli

as follows:-

              "1. Rules of Muslim Law:

                         1.   Under Muslim law a wakf is ordinarily to be
                  managed by a Muthawalli.

                         The Muthawalli       of a wakf is its superintendent. He is
                  different from a trustee inasmuch as the wakf property does
                  not vest in him. The legal position of a Muthawalli, as distinct
                  from a trustee, is well understood in India and the courts have
                  aptly explained the same. They have asserted that:

                                 (i)   the Muthawalli does not own the wakf
                                 property;
                                 (ii) he is only its manager and supervisor; and
                                 (iii) his functions resemble those of a trustee but
                                 do not make him one.

                         2. It is the duty of a Muthawalli to administer and
                  protect the wakf property in his charge to the best of his
                  capabilities.   He must discharge his responsibilities with
                  diligence, honesty, caution and integrity. The wakf property
                  belongs to God, the Muthawalli is its bailee (amin) and must
                  act as such.
                         3. As a general rule the Muthawalli cannot by himself,
                  alienate any portion of the wakf property. He can do so only:-

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998                    -:66:-




                           (i) if the wakf-deed expressly empowers him to do so,
                           or

                           (ii) where alienation is necessary and he obtains for it
                           prior permission of the court (which grants it
                           exercising the power of the kazi in this behalf).

                  Some courts have held that an alienation or mortgage without
                  court's prior permission, if it is for the benefit of the wakf or
                  necessary for its purposes, is not void ab initio and may,
                  therefore, be retrospectively confirmed by the court.

                         4. A permanent or long-term lease of wakf property
                  stands on the same footing as alienation. it can be valid only in
                  the aforesaid two situations ( and the court can confirm such a
                  lease retrospectively if it is not for a legal necessity or for the
                  benefit of the wakf or its beneficiaries). A lease in violation of
                  these conditions will not, however, be void ab inito , it will be
                  voidable at the option of the Muthawalli or the beneficiaries of
                  the wakf.

                         As regards a temporary lease, the Muthawalli may, in
                  his discretion, grant it for a period up to one year in the case of
                  non-agricultural and up to three years in the case of
                  agricultural(wakf) property; for these he needs neither the
                  sanction of the wakf-deed nor prior approval of the court.

                         5. The wakif of every wakf can make provision for the
                  remuneration of the Muthawalli          in the form of a fixed
                  allowance or otherwise. In the absence of such a provision the
                  court can fix a remuneration for him, which cannot in any case
                  exceed one-tenth of the wakf's income.

                         6. The sajjadanashi of a khanqah has larger rights than
                  an ordinary Muthawalli.        he may own, or share with the
                  founder's descendants, the surplus income of the institution. If
                  there is a Muthawalli (other than the sajjadanashin)           the
                  sajjadanashin has supervisory powers over him.               As a
                  Muthawalli he is bound          by the general rules governing
                  Muthawallis, but as sajjadanashin he may have a superior
                  position and better rights.           The superior rights of

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998                    -:67:-




                  sajjadanashin and his position vis a vis the descendants of the
                  founder of the khanqah and its additional personnel (khuddam
                  etc. have been inquired into and explained in several cases.

                         7. The wakif of every Hanafi wakf can (if he choses),
                  and that of every Ithna Ashari wakf must, appoint the first
                  Muthawalli.     In addition he can name persons (or classes of
                  persons) to succeed him one after another (subject to the
                  conditions which the wakif may chose to lay down). The wakif
                  can also empower the Muthawalli to nominate a successor
                  when eh (the Muthawalli) vacates office.

                         Where the office of the Muthawalli of a wakf falls
                  vacant, while the wakf-deed is silent on the mode of succession,
                  the wakif (if alive) or his executor (if any) can appoint a
                  successor . In the absence of both the Muthawalli vacating the
                  office can also in one particular case (i.e. when he is suffering
                  from maraz-ul-maut) appoint his successor.

                         8. Where neither the wakif nor his executor is available,
                  nor did or could the outgoing Muthawalli act, the court
                  (representing the kazi) can appoint a successor. The courts
                  have in this regard accepted some guidelines for themselves,
                  and these are:
                                i) wakif's directions, if any, must be honoured,
                                unless it is necessary to overlook them for the
                                manifest benefit of the wakf, and

                                ii) in the presence of a qualified member of the
                                wakif's family a stranger should not be appointed
                                among the family members themselves the court
                                does not have to observe any order of priority
                                and may exercise discretion.

                         9.   Under the law the office of Muthawalli is not
                  hereditary , though the wakif can chose to name his lineal
                  descendants to be the successive Muthawallis one after another.
                  In some cases decided in 1935 and earlier the courts, while
                  recognizing this general rule, had held that the office of
                  Muthawalli could in a particular case become hereditary by
                  custom and in such a case custom would prevail. These cases
                  are, it is submitted, to be reviewed in the light of the Shariat

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998                    -:68:-




                  Act enforced in 1937.

                         10. No Muthawalli can 'transfer' his office to another
                  person.

                         11. The wakif-Muthawalli of a wakf who has named a
                  person to be his successor after his death can, in his life-time
                  appoint a third person as Muthawalli. Such a person can act
                  during the rest of the wakif's life but not thereafter.
                         A wakif cannot, however, dismiss a Muthawalli who has
                  already taken charge of his office, unless he has reserved such
                  a right under the wakf-deed.

                         12. In the absence of a proper Muthawalli, a de facto
                  Muthawalli can act without establishing his de jure character.
                  A person who for the time being manages the property of a
                  wakf will be governed by the rules determining powers, duties
                  and limitations of Muthawallis.

                         13. When there are two Muthawallis and one of them
                  dies, the survivor remains the Muthawalli unless there is a
                  contrary direction in the wakf-deed. The survivor can also, on
                  his death-bed, nominate his successor.

                         14.   As a general rule, the person appointed as a
                  Muthawalli (whoever appoints or nominates him) must be
                  major according to the Indian statutory rules) and of sound
                  mind

                         An exception can, however, be made in the case of a
                  person who is a minor when his turn comes to serve as
                  Muthawalli under the terms of the wakf-deed.           The cases
                  allowing such an exception, it is submitted, need a
                  reconsideration. No wakif, it can be expected, would have
                  stipulated that a person indicated by him must act as
                  Muthawalli even if he be a child.

                         15. There is no general inhibition against a woman
                  acting as a Muthawalli.
                  \
                         The courts have held that where the Muthawalli has to
                  act also as sajjadanashin, mujawar, imam or khatib, no woman

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998                     -:69:-




                  can hold the office since the special duties of these
                  functionaries cannot be performed by a woman.
                         16. A non-Muslim can be appointed as muawalli of a
                  wakf, unless in a case the functions of the Muthawalli are of a
                  religious nature.

                         While there is nothing in the texts of Muslim law
                  prohibiting a person belonging to a particular school of law to
                  act as Muthawalli for a wakf belonging to followers of another
                  school of law, the courts have exercised their discretion in some
                  cases of this nature keeping in view the facts of those cases.

                         The trend of administrative legislation in India relating
                  to wakfs, however, seems to be in favour of maintaining the
                  sectarian differences in the matters of management of wakfs.

                         17. As regards Muthawallis, the courts have settled the
                  following miscellaneous rules:-

                         (i) a Muthawalli can in his personal capacity sue for a
                         declaration that he is the Muthawalli of a particular wakf;

                         (ii) he can, also sue for possession of the wakf property;

                         (iii) in the execution of a decree against a Muthawalli in
                         his personal capacity the property of a wakf (of which he
                         is the Muthawalli) is not liable to sale or attachment.

                         (iv) vacancy of a Muthawalli which has already come to
                         exist may be filled by the court (when competent to do so)
                         on an appreciation in that behalf; for this purpose a suit
                         is unnecessary.

                         (v) while filling the vacancy of a Muthawalli the court
                         shall give notice to all interested persons;

                         (vi) a Muthawalli who wants to alienate wakf property
                         and needs, under the rules, court's sanction for it, may
                         obtain the same by making an application; he need not ,
                         for this purpose, institute a suit;

                         (vii) possession of a Muthawalli cannot be adverse to the
                         wakf".

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998                 -:70:-




                 G.  WHETHER MUTHAWALLISHIP
                       CAN BE HERIDITARY ?

       34.    It has already been seen that the definition of the word
"Muthawalli" itself recognises a Muthawalli who holds it by virtue
of a custom. Both Justice S.A. Kader and Mulla in their authoritative
commentaries have also noticed that the Muslim Law recognises a
Muthawalli by custom and usage.               In Ext. B6 notification dated
25-08-1968 issued by the Laccadive Wakf Board under Sec. 5 (2)
of the Wakf Act, 1954 and which is heavily relied on by the 4th
defendant it is specifically mentioned that the Wakfs thereunder
are administered by custom .            Even the 4th defendant who was
taking the stand that       there is no custom in the island to show
that the office of Muthawalli is hereditary, confessed at page 26 of
his (DW1) deposition that in respect of            his own mosque          it is his
tarwad which is the Mutavalli.            At pages 672 and 673 of "the
Commentaries on Muhammedan Law '' by V.R. Verma (9th Edition )
it is observed that        the office of the Muthawalli may become
hereditary by custom or usage. S.A. Kader of in the "Law of Wakfs"
(supra) at page 38 has specifically observed as follows:-


                       Hereditary right to the office of Muthawalli.    Muslim law
                       does not recognise any right of inheritance or rule of
                       hereditary succession to the officer of Muthawalli. There
                       are two exceptions to this principle:

                             (1) Where the founder has laid down the rule of
                       hereditary succession to the office in which case the rule has

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998                -:71:-




                      to be adhered to, and

                             (2) Where the office of Muthawalli becomes
                      hereditary by custom in which case the custom should be
                      followed.


       35.    A Division Bench of this Court in the common order
dated 18.12.2007 in CRP Nos.460 and 462 of 2006 had occasion to
consider the very same question in            respect of the Jama- ath
mosque in the very same Andrott Island of             Lakshadweep.       The
Division Bench was considering the sustainability of the common
judgement of the Wakf Tribunal of Lakshadweep                    which had
disposed of two suits OS Nos. 1of 1998 & 2 of 2001 jointly. The
plaintiff in OS 1 of 1998 contended that the Jama -ath Mosque at
Andrott Island was the first among the Mosques established in the
said Island, that the said Jama- ath mosque was originally built and
dedicated by Saint Ubaidulla during the 7th century A.D, that the
original Muthawalli of the said Wakf was the Wakif himself namely
the said Ubaidulla,       that by     virtue of immemorial custom and
usage, the post of Muthawalli and traditional Khazi of the Mosque
was vested in and devolved on the members of the Pattackal family
and     the members of the said family constituted             the de Jure
Muthawalli and the family had the discretion to choose the most
eligible and qualified among them to be the de facto Muthawalli.
The above claim of the plaintiff was opposed by the defendants
therein contending inter alia that the Jama- ath mosque of Andrott
was constructed by the people of the Mahal and that the Mosque

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998              -:72:-




was managed by a committee under the supervision of the Amins
and Karanavans of the Island. The defendants denied the claim of
the plaintiffs therein that they were the descendants of the said
Ubaidulla and that the members of the Pattackal tarwad had the
right of customary Muthawalliship        in respect of the Andrott Jama
-ath mosque. The Wakf Tribunal in that case notwithstanding the
voluminous        evidence and the reports of     ancient historians to
suggest that members of the Pattackal family of the Plaintiffs
therein were acting as the Muthawallis of the said Mosque, as per
the common judgment dated 20-5-2006, came to the conclusion
that the plaintiffs therein failed to establish that the Pattackal family
was the traditional and customary Muthawalli of the Andrott Jama-
ath Mosque. It was further held that the said Mosque was a public
mosque managed and supervised by the Amins and Karanavans who
were representatives of the Administration, that the Committee of
the members of the Mahal set up by the contesting defendants
therein was only an organization formed for the maintenance and
repair of the Jama -ath Mosque and accordingly dismissed the said
OS 1 of 1998. The other suit namely OS 1 / 2001 was instituted
by the contesting defendant in OS 1 /1998 praying for the framing
of a scheme for the proper administration of the Jama ath mosque
of Andrott alleging that the said Mosque belongs to the entire
members of the Mahal. As per the aforesaid common Judgement
dated 20.05.2006 the Wakf Tribunal dismissed OS 1 of 1998 filed

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998                  -:73:-




by the members of the Pattackal Tharavd and decreed OS 1 of 2001
filed by the members of the Mahal Committee. It was                         the said
common Judgment which              was assailed before this Court in CRP
Nos.460 and 462 of 2006. The Division Bench of this Court after an
exhaustive consideration of the oral and documentary evidence as
well as the authoritative commentaries including " A SHORT
ACCOUNT OF THE LACCADIVE ISLANDS AND MINICOY " by R.H.Ellis
published in the year 1924 and the "Lakshadweep Gazetteer" edited
by N.S.Mannadiar and published in the year 1977 set aside the
common Judgment passed by the Wakf Tribunal and decreed O.S
No. 1 of 1998, but dismissed O.S No. 1 of 2001. In the course of
the common Order of this Court,                  Mr. Justice Hrun-ul-Rashid,
speaking for the Division Bench observed inter alia as follows:-


                                    "From historical books, we have noticed the
                     fact that the Khazi of Andrott (Khazi and Muthawalli were
                     known by the name Khazi till the Wakf Act came into force
                     in 1968 in the Lakadives islands) during 1847 as stated in
                     Annexure A5 and in 1920 as reported in Annexure A36 book
                     by R.H.Ellis are from the members of the Patttakal famly.
                     All the books referred to above also reported the fact that the
                     name of the family founded by Saint Ubaidulla is known by
                     the name Pattakal and that his descendants continued to
                     hold the Khaziship............"

                                    " All the historians noted that the tradition of
                     the Lakkadives island dwellers ascribes the conversion to the
                     Arab Saint Ubaidulla, his visit to the Lakkadives island, that
                     he converted the islanders to Islamic faith, that he
                     established the family by name Pattakkal which held the
                     khaziship of Androth Juma-ath mosque of Androth and that
                     the office is held in the greatest veneration........."

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998                   -:74:-




                                    "There is no difference of opinion among the
                     historians or in the Gazetteer of India notification about the
                     conversion of people by Saint Ubaidulla,........"

                                 "It was also recorded in the writings of Mr.Ellies,
                     the Gazetteer and other historians that Saint Ubaidulla
                     married a lady Hamidathbi) from Amini island and settled at
                     Androth island.       The historians also recored that the
                     Pattackal family is the tharwad name given to the
                     descendants of Ubaidulla and Hamidathbi at Androth. The
                     historical books also support the case of the plaintiffs that
                     the plaintiffs Pattakkal family are the descendants of saint
                     Ubaidulla.

                                    16. The only conclusion that can be arrived at
                     is that the first Juma ath mosque in the island is the disputed
                     mosque and it was founded by Saint Ubaidulla and that he
                     was the first khazi/Muthawalli of the said mosque. It is a
                     proved fact that he spent the rest of his life in Androth and
                     his tomb is in the Juma-ath of Androth.              It can be
                     legitimately and reasonably inferred that he was the
                     Muthawalli of the Juma-ath and that his successors
                     continued to hold the said post.       We find that such a
                     conclusion is possible not only from the historical books
                     referred to above but also from the Gazetteer of India of
                     Lakshadweep islands which is an official publication. We
                     agree with the conclusion arrived at by the court below that
                     the Pattakkal family at Androth is the tarwad name given by
                     Ubaidulla and Hamidathbi and that the plaintiff's Pattakkal
                     family are the descendants of Saint Ubaidulla........."

                                    "The Gazetteer of India and the historical
                     evidence from the writings of the historians in the books
                     produced would show that the mosque was founded by Saint
                     Ubaidulla and that he was the first Muthawalli of the
                     mosque and his descendants continued as Muthawallies.
                     Ext.A1 document shows that one Ahmed koya of the
                     Pattakkal family was the khazi as on 06.12.1892 and Ext A2
                     document proved that Kunhikoya Thangal of the same
                     family was the Khazi as on 26.01.1933. Ext.B5 in O.S10/1974
                     shows that the plaintiff therein was the Muthawalli from

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998                      -:75:-




                     1959. His evidence also shows that his predecessors had been
                     the Muthawallies for generations in continuation.           The
                     historical statement of historians also corroborate the
                     Gazetteer of India. All material particulars would establish
                     that Saint Ubaidulla and his descendants held the post of
                     khazi and Muthawalli in succession.

                            19. It has been held by the Honourable Supreme
                     Court in the decision reported in Srinivas Ramanuja Das
                     Vs.Surjanarayan Das AIR 1967 SC 256 that the Gazetteer
                     can be consulted on matters of public history.

                            20.        In the decision rendered by the Hon'ble
                     Supreme Court in Bala Shankar Bhattjee and others v.
                     Charity Commissioner Gujarat State (AIR 1995 SC 1967), it
                     was held that the Gazeteer           of the Bombay Presidency
                     Volume III published in 1879 is admissible under Section 35
                     read with Sec. 81 of the Evidence Act, 1872. The Gazetteer is
                     admissible being official record evidencing public affairs
                     and the Court may presume their contents as genuine. The
                     statement contained therein can be taken into account to
                     discover the historical material contained therein and the
                     facts stated therein is evidence under Section 45 and the
                     court may in conjunction with other evidence and
                     circumstances take into         consideration in adjudging the
                     dispute in question though may not be treated as conclusive
                     evidence. In the said decision Hon'ble Supreme Court also
                     relied on, as supporting evidence, historical statements of
                     historians        and     the  passages    in   the    historical
                     books................."

                                       "it was held that the Gazetteer of the Bombay
                     Presidency Volume III published in 1879 is admissible under
                     Section 35 read with Section 81 of the Evidence Act 1872.
                     The Gazetteer is admissible being official record evidencing
                     public affairs and the court may presume their contents as
                     genuine......"

                                       "all the other documents referred to in this
                     paragraph are positive proof of the fact that there is an
                     unbroken chain of succession of the members of the Pattakal
                     family as Muthawalli of Andrott Juma Mosque in direct

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998                  -:76:-




                     descent from the Saint Ubaidulla and no other persons nor
                     any committee representing the public have ever acted or
                     functioned as the Muthawalli of the Andrott Juma Mosque
                     at any point of time......."

                                   "The learned Counsel for the contesting
                     respondents urged before us that there cannot be any
                     hereditary right of Muthawalliship as recognised            by
                     Mohammedan Law. The Hon'ble Supreme Court in the
                     decision reported in Syed Mohd.Salie Labbai and others
                     v.Mohd, Hanifa and others-AIR 1976 SC 1569 dealt with an
                     unfortunate saga of a perpetual strife and struggl, disputes
                     and differences between two sections of the Muslim
                     community of village Vijayapuram (situated in Tiruvarur
                     District in the State of Madras) setting up diverse rights and
                     rival claims over the property which was essentially a
                     religious property originating from a fountain of purity
                     flowing from the life and teachings of a celebrated Saint who
                     was the original founder of the property. Resolving dispute
                     about the hereditary right to act as an Imam of the mosque,
                     the Apex Court held that the Mohammedan Law does not
                     favour the hereditary right of being an Imam because the
                     Imam must possess certain special qualities and certain
                     special knowledge of the scriptures before he can be allowed
                     to lead the prayers, that there is no clear evidence of any
                     usage or custom by which the right to act as Imam is
                     hereditary in this case. In a similar dispute between two
                     families regarding the holding of the post of Muthawalli in
                     the mosque known as Mohiyudheen Mosque of Amini Island,
                     the scope and ambit of the Wakf Act, 1954 was considered by
                     the Division Bench judgement in OP No.15327/1994. In the
                     said judgment produced by the plaintiffs as Annexure A20,
                     paragraph 32 reads as follows:
                            " In our view the case of the petitioner that he was
                     entitled and succeeded to the Muthawalliship of the
                     Mohiyudheen Mosque on the death of his uncle on
                     28.04.1983 is justified, acceptable and consistent with the
                     custom proved on evidence".

                            It was also held in the same paragraph that :-
                            "The    evidence     on  record  thus   suggests   that
                     Muthawalliship      of   Mohiyudheen    mosque    was   being

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998                  -:77:-




                     succeeded to by different Karanavans of Aranakkada
                     Tharawad, which was perfectly consistent with the position
                     in Mohammedan Law".
                            "if   there    was   a   custom     of   succession   of
                     Muthawalliship, then such a custom is not opposed to
                     Mohammedan Law, but very much contemplated by it."

                            We have gone through the passages in Tyabjis Muslim
                     Law, 4th Edition, B.R.Verma on islamic Law, 6th Edition and
                     Mulla's principles of Mohammedan Law, 19th Edition. From
                     the authoritative passages       noticed on Principles of
                     Mohammedan Law, we note that it is a settled principle that
                     Mohammedan Law does not generally recognise hereditary
                     right of Muthawalliship unless there is a custom and usage to
                     that effect. It is an accepted principle of Mohammedan Law
                     that such a custom is not opposed to such law, but the same is
                     contemplated by it. The muthawalliship of Andrott Juma-
                     ath mosque was being succeeded by the members of Pattakal
                     family. It is consistent with the position in Mohammedan
                     Law and therefore has to be recognised as a customary right.
                     The definition of "muthawalli" in the Wakf Act also
                     recognises the holding of the post of muthawalliship as a
                     customary right. The definition of "muthawalli" means and
                     includes"any person who is a muthawalli of a wakf by virtue
                     of any custom to perform the duties of a Muthawalli".
                     Therefore, we hold that Pattakal family is the traditional and
                     customary muthawalli of the plaint schedule mosque........."

                                    "The defendants in OS1/98 and the plaintiffs in
                     the other suit contended that the suit mosque was managed
                     by the public representatives, the Amins and Karanavans
                     and then by an elected committee. According to them the
                     Amins and Karanavans are managing the affairs of the
                     mosque since the inception of that system in the island and
                     after the end of that system in the year 1966, a 14 member
                     committee was elected by the public where Pattakal
                     Koyammakoya         was   made     the     president   of   the
                     committee........."
                                    "A portion of the deposition in Ext.B5
                     extracted in paragraph 54 was relied on by the court below
                     to enter a finding that from 1966 onwards there was a
                     committee till 1972 and that if at all the Pattakkal family was

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998                 -:78:-




                     performing as de facto Muthawallies, that tradition and
                     custom was breached in 1966 upto to 1974. This finding of
                     the court below on the basis of Ext.B5 deposition leads to the
                     ultimate finding that the plaintiffs have failed to prove that
                     they are the traditional and customary Muthawalli of the
                     mosque.     The court below also notices the fact that all
                     throughout i.e. right from ancient times till the date of the
                     suit, the plaintiffs' family was holding the post of
                     muthawalliship. The court below declined the relief sought
                     for in the plaint for the reason that there is a break from
                     1966 to 1974 and that during this period a committee was
                     managing the affairs of the mosque.        The finding was
                     recorded by extracting a portion of Exxt.B5 deposition. The
                     learned Judge ought to have read the entire deposition to
                     understand the meaning and context therein.          Reading
                     Ext.B5 as a whole, it is clear that the deponent had spoken
                     about the committee which is intended for repairs and
                     maintenance.     It is not unusual in constituting such a
                     committee for assisting the manager for the smooth
                     functioning of the work undertaken. We have referred to the
                     other pages in Ext.B5 deposition.      The plaintiffs have a
                     consistent case that they have been functioning as the
                     muthawalli by tradition and custom which continued till the
                     date of filing of the suit. They have adduced evidence-both
                     oral and documentary -which will go to show that the
                     Pattakkal family members are holding the post of
                     muthawalliship as discussed in the preceding paragraphs.
                     The court below also rightly held that though a compromise
                     petition was recorded in OS 10/1974, that had not taken
                     effect, no committee ever had undertaken the management of
                     the mosque after the compromise decree in 1981 till the date
                     of suit i.e. in 1998. The court also noticed the fact that
                     Pattakkal family members were holding the post till the date
                     of suit. The court below also noticed and entered findings
                     that the defendants have failed to prove the existence of the
                     committee managing the affairs of the mosque as muthawalli,
                     that there is no evidence to show that the committee
                     members had performed or acted as muthawallis even after
                     1981 and that the contention of the defendants that the
                     committee elected by the public has been managiong the
                     affairs of the mosque and that committee is the muthawalli of
                     the mosque is unsustainable and unacceptable. We have also

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998                  -:79:-




                     discussed the oral and documentary evidence on record
                     which prove that the representatives of the public or their
                     committee was never constituted to administer the affairs of
                     the mosque. The court below only said that for a limited
                     period of six years there was a committee. The said finding
                     was based on Ext.B5 deposition which will evidently go to
                     show that the committee referred to in the deposition is a
                     committee constituted entirely for a different purpose viz. for
                     the repair of the mosque. We also notice the fact that even
                     the head of that committee is also member of Pattakkal
                     family......"
                                    "It is the case of the plaintiffs that the
                     Pattakkal family members are the muthawalli of the
                     disputed mosque and it is their representative who has to act
                     as the muthawalli of the mosque. The entries in Ext.A3 that
                     "pattakkal family under the supervision of Amins and
                     Karanavans and the entry in Ext.A4 that "pattakkal;
                     Koyammakoya is the muthawalli are not contradictory, but
                     it is complementary.      In the light of the overwhelming
                     evidence adduced by the plaintiffs is support of their case
                     that they are the muthawallies of the mosque right from its
                     inception and continued till date of filing of the suit stands
                     proved. The conclusion arrived at by the court below in
                     paragraph 46 (after entering most of the findings in favour
                     of the plaintiffs) that the contention of the plaintiffs that the
                     de facto muthawalli is chosen by the members of the
                     Pattakkal family or the Amins           and the Karanavans
                     appointed muthawalli in consultation with the family
                     members is not proved by any evidence is without bais and
                     therefore unsustainable.      Therefore, we hold that the
                     plaintiffs have proved their case that they are the traditional
                     and customary muthawalli of the mosque. We also agree
                     with the finding recorded by the court in paragraph 62 of the
                     judgement that the defendants have failed to prove that there
                     is an existing committee to manage the affairs of the mosque
                     and consequently there is a vacancy of muthawalli of the
                     mosque........"

                                    "The defendants failed to prove that the
                     mosque was managed by the committee of the public and
                     that there was an existing committee to manage the affairs of
                     the mosque and that consequently there was a vacancy of

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998                   -:80:-




                      Muthawalli of the mosque. The plaintiffs proved positively
                      the right of their family by evidence of unbreached custom.
                      Therefore, they are entitled to a declaration that they are the
                      Muthawallis of the mosque and that the first plaintiff who is
                      the representative of the family is entitled to hold the office
                      of the Muthawalli. We also hold that Andrott Jama-ath
                      mosque is constructed and dedicated by Saint Ubaidulla, that
                      the members of Pattakkal tharvad are descendants of the
                      Saint and that the Pattakkal family is the customary
                      muthawalli of Andrott Jama-ath mosque........"

                                    "In the result, C.R.P.Nos.460 and 462 of 2006
                      are allowed. A decree is passed in O.S No.1 of 1998 declaring
                      that the office of Muthawalli of the plaint schedule mosque is
                      vested with the Pattakkal tharwad and that the first plaintiff
                      is duly chosen to be the first Muthawalli of the mosque. The
                      defendants in the suit are permanently restrained by the
                      olrder of perpetual injunction from interfering with the
                      rights of the members of the Pattakkal tharvad acting as
                      Muthawallis of the mosque. O.S.No.1 of 2001 is dismissed.
                      There will be no order as to costs......".


       Thus, in the very same Androth Island where even William
Logan had noticed the existence of as many as 30 mosques in the
year 1880,       the hereditary nature of the office of Muthawalli has
been judicially recognized by a Division Bench of this Court after
adverting to various authoritative treatises and precedents. When
a custom or usage regarding a family right or                     inheritance      is
brought to the notice of the Courts           and the Courts have accepted
its existence by taking judicial notice of it, further proof will not be
necessary to establish it in subsequent proceedings.                 (Vide Rama
Rao v. Raja of Pittapur - AIR 1918 PC 81; Achuthan v. O.B.I. -
1960 KLT 147; Raman & Others v. Narayanan and Another - 1990

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998             -:81:-




(1) KLJ 224; Lajpat Rai v. Karam Chand - AIR 1934 Lahore 830;
Banarsi Das        v. Sumat Prasad - AIR 1936 Allahabad - 641;
Suganchand v. Mangibai - AIR 1942 Bombay 185; Jugal Kishore v.
Vizhnu Hari - AIR 1955 Calcutta 419; Valliyamma v. Velu & Others
- (1979 - 85) KUC 448; Audh Bihari Singh v. Gajadhar Jaipuria -
AIR 1954 SC 417 and        Ujagar Singh v. Mst. Jeo - AIR 1959 SC
1041.      Judicial decisions recognising custom, to be relevant and
admissible need not be "inter partes" (Vide Fazle Rab v. Mohd.
Yakeen (2002) 2 SCC 652.

            H. THE FIRST APPELLANTE COURT WAS WRONG

       35.     The learned Appellate Judge was , therefore, wrong in
holding that it was not the plaintiff but it was       the Amin and
Karanavans who were         the Muthawallis in respect of the plaint
schedule mosque, that the Muslim Law did not recognize any
hereditary Muthawalli and that the assumption of office of the
Muthawalli by the plaintiff was by way of trespass.      This intra -
court appeal is not fettered by the rigour of Section 100 C.P.C. and
there is no necessity for the appellant to make out any substantial
question of law for maintaining this appeal. (Vide Venugopalan v.
Malappuram District Co-operative Milk Supply Union Ltd. - 1995
(2) KLT 200 = AIR 1995 Kerala 369 F.B.).      Even if any substantial
question of law was necessary for maintaining this appeal, we have
no hesitation to hold that the findings recorded by the learned
Single Judge not being based on the evidence        on record or are

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998                  -:82:-




even contrary to the evidence on record and the reasoning of the
learned Judge is based on surmises and on a misreading of the
evidence on record, justifying interference even under Section 100
C.P.C. (See paragraph 9           of D.R. Rathna Murthy v. Ramappa -
(2011) 1 SCC 158. We, therefore, hold that :-


                 1)  Both the plaintiff as well as the 4th defendant, namely the

                     Mohiyudheen Palli Committee have failed to prove as to

                     who constructed the mosque .

                 2) the plaintiff has succeeded in proving that the office of the

                     Muthawalli and Sheik of the plaint schedule mosque has

                     been and continues to be          held by     the successive

                     Karanavans or chosen representatives of the Puthiyapura

                     tarwad of the plaintiff. The plaintiff is, therefore, entitled

                     to a mandatory injunction directing the 3rd defendant to

                     amend Ext.B6 notification and consequential registers, if

                     any, so as to show that the Muthawalli and Sheik of the

                     plaint schedule mosque is the Karanavan or the chosen

                     representative of the Puthiyapura tarwad of the plaintiff.

                  3) The plaintiff is entitled to the perpetual injunction as was

                     granted   by the trial court and subject to the restrictions

                     imposed by that Court.

                  4) The plaintiff,    and after his death,      the succeeding

                     Karanavan acting as the Muthawalli and Sheik of the

                     plaint schedule mosque          will be entitled to police

                     protection, as and when any contingency arises, to ensure

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998                 -:83:-




                     that there is no illegal obstruction or interference in such

                     person acting as      the Muthawalli and Sheik of the

                     Mohiyuddin Mosque. But this will not in any way entitle

                     the Muthawalli and Sheik of the Mosque to restrain any

                     islander from worshiping in the mosque or from burying

                     the dead in the cemetery attached to the mosque, as long as

                     the formalities thereto including the remittance of the

                     prescribed fees are adhered to.


       It was conceded before us by the learned Senior Advocate
appearing for the 4th defendant that the finding recorded by the
courts below rejecting the defence contention that the suit was
not maintainable in view of the provisions of the Wakf Act, 1954
and the Wakf Act, 1995, are unassailable. Eventhough one Kunhi
Seethi Koya       who claimed to be the           Karanavan of the second
thavazhi of Puthiyapura tarwad was impleaded in this appeal as
the second appellant, we have not pronounced upon his right, if
any, to act as a joint Muthawalli and Sheik.                 Puthiyapura Syed
Muhammed Jelaludheen Thangal               who was admittedly the senior
most male member of the tarwad alone has been substituted in the
place of the original plaintiff.

                         OUR CONCLUSION

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998                -:84:-




       36.      In the light of the foregoing discussion, the judgment
and decree passed by the learned single judge in appeal are set
aside and the suit will stand disposed of as follows:-


         i)   A declaration is granted to the plaintiff that the office of the
              Muthawalli and Sheik of the plaint schedule mosque known
              as Mohiyudheen Palli and its properties comprised in Survey
              No. 117/11 of Androth Island vests in the Puthiyapura tarwad
              of the plaintiff.

         ii) A declaration is granted that the original plaintiff namely,
              Puthiyapura Sheik Koya Thangal had been and was on the
              date of institution of the suit    and continued to be the
              Muthawalli and Sheik of the aforesaid mosque until his death
              pending this appeal on 27-1-2003.

         iii) A decree for perpetual injunction restraining the defendants
              from causing any obstruction to or interfering in any manner
              in the plaintiff or the succeeding Karanavan or chosen
              representative of the Puthiyapura tarwad holding the office of
              the Muthawalli and Sheik of the aforesaid Mosque, is granted.
              This decree     will not, however, entitle the plaintiff or the
              succeeding     Muthawalli and Sheik    of the said mosque to
              prevent    Muslims irrespective of cast, creed or sect from
              entering the Mosque for worship or for using the cemetery
              attached to the Mosque for burying the dead so long as       the
              Rules in that behalf are adhered to and the prescribed fee is
              paid or remitted.

         iv) A decree for mandatory injunction is granted directing the 3rd
              defendant Lakshadweep Wakf Board to make necessary entries
              in the Wakf Register and other connected records regarding
              the Muthawalli and Sheik of the plaint schedule Mosque in
              terms of the declaration granted as above.

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998                 -:85:-




         v) Defendants 1 and 2 are directed to render necessary police
              aid    to the Muthawalli and Sheik of the plaint schedule
              Mosque,      against any     illegal obstruction or interference
              caused    by others, in case of any contingency but subject to
              the right of the Muslim public mentioned above.

         vi) The declaration prayed for to the effect that the plaint schedule
              Mosque and its properties belong to the Puthiyapura tarwad of
              the plaintiff, is refused.


         Dated this the 10th day of April, 2012.



                                                    V. RAMKUMAR, JUDGE.

ani/


                                                     K. HARILAL, JUDGE.




                             37.     GLOSSARY OF TERMS


    'ADALAT                             :    Rectitude of character

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998    -:86:-




    ARKAN                  :   Eseential elements     (of a juristic
                               act)
    AMANAT                 :   Trust
    AMIN                   :   A Trustee; person in management
                               of a wakf. Before theTerritory
                                                       formation of
                               the
                               Lakshadweep,Union                   of
                               were taken in thejudicial   decisions
                                                 Laccadives group
                               of islands by a local official called
                               "Amin" assisted by elders called
                               "Karanavars" under the provisions
                               of
                               Minicoy Regulation 1 ofIslands
                                    the   Laccadive              and
                                                        1912.
    'AUL                   :   Doctrine of increase
    AYAT                   :   Verses ; signs
    'AYB                   :   Defect
    'AYN                   :   Specific or determinate property
    'AZIMAT                :   Strict law
    BAITH                  :   Hymns sung in praise of saints
                               during Rathib performances.
    BATIL                  :   Void
    BAYAN                  :   Irrevocable repudiation
    DAFF/DUFF              :   A kind of tambourine used for
                               Rathib
    DAFF-KAR               :   People who perform Ratib beating
                               tambourines
    DARU'L ISLAM           :   Territory of safety, a freidly state
    DAWA'                  :   Claim
    DIYAT                  :   Compensation
    FAKEER/FAKIR           :   A Muslim oris Hindu mendicant
                               monk
                               holymanwho         regarded     as  a

    FAQIH                  :   Lawyer
    FARD                   :   Obligatory (act)
    FATWA                  :   Judicial decisions

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998        -:87:-




    GHASAB                     :   Usurpation
    GHASIB                         Userper; trespasser
    HAJJ                       :   Pilgrimage
    HAKIM                      :   Lawgiver:Magistrate:Judge
    HALAL                      :   Proper
    HAQ                        :   Right
    HARABI                     :   Hostile (to the law) alien
    HARAM                      :   Forbidden (act)
    HATIM                      ;   A place where oaths used to be
                                   administered
    HAWALAT                    :   Novation
    HIBA                       :   Gift
    HIBABI SHARTI'L-'IWAD      :   Gift on condition of an exchange
    HIBA BI'L-'IWAD            :   Gift on receiving something in
                                   change
    HIZANAT                    :   Custody
    HUKM                       :   Law; command; decree;order
    HUKMI                      :   Symbolical (possession)
    'IBADAT                    :   Acts of devotion
    'IDDAT                     :   Period of probation
    IJAB                       :   Proposal
    IJARA                      :   Letting and hiring
    IKHTIAR                    :   Volition
    IKARAH                     :   Duress
    ILA                        :   A form of divorce
    IMAN                       :   Faith
    IQRA                       :   Acknowledgment;      declaration of
                                   faith;acknowledgment of legitimacy
    ISHARAT                    :   Gestures or signs
    ISLAM                      :   Muhammadan religion
    JAMAT                      :   Community

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998         -:88:-




    JANAYAT                     :   Torts
    JIHAD                       :   Religious war
    KAFIR                       :   Ungrateful ; a non-Muslim
    KABIRSTAN/KHABARSTHAN       :   Graveyard
    KACHERI/KUTCHERI/KUTCHERY/
    CUTCHERY                    :   Amin's court
    KAFALAT                     :   Suretyship

    KARANI                          A Village Revenue Officer     in the
                                :   Amindivi group of islands
    KARAYMA                     :   A type of escheat lands
    KARNAVAN                    :   The oldest male member in a
                                    Marumakkathayam family.
    KARANAVAR                   :   maternal uncle;who
                                    the
                                    tehsildar in court casesassists
                                          islands    a senior citizenthe
                                                                       of



    KARYAKAR                    :   Agent
    KATHIB                      :   Assistant to Khasi.
    KHALIFA                     :   Person      who      initiates    the
                                    performance of Rathib
    KHATA                       :   Mistake or accident
    KHASI/KAZI                  :   A
                                    Muslim marriageswho
                                        functionary           solemnises

    KHITAB                      :   Speech; a communication from God
    KHULA'                      :   Power
                                    consideration to dissolvewife
                                              given     to            for
                                                               marriage
    KHUTBAH/KUTHUBIYATH         :   The sermon or oration       delivered
                                    on Fridays at the time of zuhr     or
                                    meridian prayer. It is also recited
                                    on the two great festivals ('IDU'L-
                                    FITR, 'IDU'L- AZHA) in the morning
                                    after sunrise .
    KITABAT                     :   Writings
    KOLATHIRI                   :   The      ancient     kingdom       of
                                    Kolathunadu in North Malabar

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998      -:89:-




    KOOTAM/KUTTAM            :   Assembly of citizens called by the
                                 Amin or other chief administrative
                                 officials of the islands
    KOYA                     :   The     highest     caste   of   the
                                 Lakshadweep islands
    LABBUS                   :   A sharp instrument used in the
                                 performance of Rathib
    MADRASA                  :   A school where Muslim religious
                                 education is imparted.
    MANFAAT                  :   Usufruct
    MAHAL                    :   The object to which an act relates
    MAHR                     :   Dowry
    MAL                      :   Property
    MALIK                    :   Owner
    MAPPILA                  :   Malabar Muslim
    MARKAKALYANAM            :   Circumcision ceremony
    MARUMAKKATHAYAM          :   Matrilinear or Matriarchal    system
                                 of inheritance
    MAULOOD/ MAULUD/             Muslim celebration      for the birth
    MOWLID/MAULOOD           :   anniversary of a saint
    MELACCERI/MELACHERI      :   The low caste community of the
                                 Lakshadweep islands
    MOHIYUDEEN               :   One who keeps alive the religion
    MONEGAR                  :   An office or post akin to that of a
                                 Revenue Inspector
    MOOPAN/MUPAN             :   Headman
    MOULAVI/ MUSALIAR        :   Muslim
                                 versed inpreacher theology
                                                       or priest well-
                                               Islamic            and
                                 who calls the faithful for prayers
                                 and leads the prayer
    MUJTAHID                 :   Jurist
    MUKRI                    :   A Muslim priest who calls for
                                 prayer and leads the prayer/The
                                 custodian of mosque property
    MUSHA                        Pre-emption

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998      -:90:-




    MUSI                     :   Testator
    MUTAT                    :   Right to conjugal society; a present
                                 to the wife; temporary marriage
    MUTWALLI                 :   A trustee of a wakf
    NADAPPAL                 :   A last grade employee attached to
                                 the Amin
    NAMAZ                    :   Prayer
    NERCHA                   :   Offerings by devotees during the
                                 Mappila festival in honour of saints
    NIKKAH                   :   Muslim marriage
    NISKARAPURA              :   Prayer house of women
    NIYAT                    :   Motive
    ODAM                     :   Sailing vessel
    ODI                      :   A boat
    PALLI                    :   A mosque
    PIR                      :   Saint
    QABUL                    :   Acceptance
    QAJI/QUAZI               :   A Judge; a Magistrate
    QAZI                     :   Islamic Judge
    QISAMT                   :   Partition
    QUR'AN                   :   The book revealed to Muhammed
    RATTIB/RATIB/RATHIB      :   An Islamic ritual
    RAHN                     :   Pledge
    RASUL                    :   Messenger; Prophet
    RIBA                     :   Usury
    RIDA                     :   Consent
    SAGHIR                   :   Minor
    SAJJADANASHIN            :   Literally means a man who sits on
                                 a sajja or prayer mat. He is the
                                 spiritual and temporal head of a
                                 Muslim religious institution known
                                 as Khanka where derivishers
    SALAH, SALAT             :   Prayers

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998        -:91:-




    SHARI'AT                   :   Legal Code
    STHANAMS                   :   Titles
    SUNNA, SUNNAH, SUNNAT      :   Tradition which records the saying
                                   and actions of the Prophet
    SURAMBI/SRAMBI             :   An outhouse
    TANGAL                     :   The Sayyids of the Mappilas and
                                   Lakshadweep Muslims
    TARWARD                    :   A family
    TAHKIM                     :   Arbitration
    TAHLIL                     :   Consummation        of    marriage
                                   required   for  reunion  with  the
                                   previous husband
    TALAQ                      :   Dissolution   of marriage by the
                                   husband; repudiation;divorce
    THARAWAD, TARAVATU,        :   The joint martilineal family of
    THARAVAD                       Kerala and Lakshadweep
    THAVAZHI, TAVAZHI          :   A branch of a matriarchal family;
                                   a branch of a joint family being
                                   descendants of the same mother.
    THAMAN                     :   Consideration; price
    THIYYA, TIYAN, THEEYAN     :   The
                                   Malabartoddy-drawing    caste   of
                                            coast
    TIKKAR                     :   Thaumaturgical dance of the Sufi
                                   Riffari order of the Lakshadweep
                                   Islands
    TIKKAR-KAR                 :   Persons performing the tikkar
    URUKKU                     :   The amulet or talisman worn as a
                                   charm in the Lakshadweep islands
    VALIYA PERUNAL             :   The big festival; Id-Ul-AdhaId-
                                   Ul-Zuha (Bakrid)
    WASIYAT                        Bequest
    ZAKAT                      :   Contribution of muslims in cash or
                                   kind for charitable purposes/Poor-
                                   rate

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998             -:92:-




                      NOT MERELY A PIOUS WISH


       38.    It is time that the Government of India       focused its
attention on the personal laws applicable to the people of
Lakshadweep Islands.        They are Malayalam speaking Musalmans
enjoying the status of Scheduled Tribes under the Constitution of
India.    While it could be said that there was some justification for
the original migrators to adopt the matrilineal Marumakkathayam
system of inheritance, it has to be examined whether continuance
of the above system         is advantageous     to the people of this
archipelago, particularly when, all the Hindu Joint Family systems
including the Marumakkathayam system stand abolished on the
mother land in Kerala with effect from 1-12-1976.           Even in the
Islands it is the Sheriath law which is followed in respect of self
acquired properties.
              Our decision that the plaintiff in his capacity as the de
facto     Karanavan of the Puthiyapura tarwad, is the customary
Muthawalli of the plaint schedule mosque is based on the evidence
in the case, besides the historical material and judicially noticed
case law.      But the fact remains that the said mosque is a public
mosque in the sense that members of the Muslim public have a
right of worship and the mahalvasis have a right to bury their
dead. The system of Amins and Karanavans being at the helm of
the adjudicatory process has ceased to exist         four decades ago.

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998            -:93:-




Eventhough the Wakf Board there is a statutory body, its statutory
supervision is qualitatively different from people's participation in
the affairs of such public institutions.    Privatization of God and
God's property       and a scramble      for  administration  are all
undesirable trends which in the long run will not be conducive to
the democratic        running of such religious institutions. In the
mundane competition for temporalities and religious supremacy,
everyone concerned should realise that it is the institution itself
which may go into dilapidation and disrepair. What should be
uppermost in the mind of all concerned should be the maintenance
and upkeep of the Mosque and its properties for which        people's
participation is a necessary desideratum. We leave it there for the
authorities to engage their attention to these aspects.
       Dated this the 10th day of April, 2012.



                                             V. RAMKUMAR, JUDGE.

ani/


                                              K. HARILAL, JUDGE.

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998         -:94:-




                                                          V. RAMKUMAR&
                                                           K. HARILAL, JJ.
                          ........................................................
                                                A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998
                         .........................................................

                        Dated this the 10th day of April 2012

                                                                 JUDGMENT

A.F.A. No. 53 of 1998    -:95:-



