
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                PRESENT:

                THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE S.SIRI JAGAN

        FRIDAY, THE 9TH DAY OF NOVEMBER 2012/18TH KARTHIKA 1934

                    Crl.Rev.Pet.No. 23 of 2003 ( )
                     ------------------------------
        CRA.133/1999 of ADDL.SESSIONS COURT (ADHOC)II, KASARAGOD
                    CC.380/1994 of C.J.M.,KASARAGOD

REVISION PETITIONER(S)/APPELLANT/1ST ACCUSED:
--------------------------------------------

         C.A.IBRAHIM S/O. BARIKKAD ABDULKHADER,
         RESIDING AT CHETTUNKUZHI, HIDAYATH NAGAR
         KASARAGOD TALUK

         BY ADV. SRI.M.RAMESH CHANDER

RESPONDENTS/STATE & COMPLAINANT:
-----------------------------------

     1.  STATE OF KERALA, REPRESENTED BY THE
         PUBLIC PROSECUTOR, HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM.

     2.  SUB INSPECTOR OF POLICE, KASARAGOD.

           ADV. SRI. BIJU MEENATTOOR- PUBLIC PROSECUTOR

       THIS CRIMINAL REVISION PETITION  HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD  ON
        09-11-2012, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE FOLLOWING:


acd


                       S. SIRI JAGAN, J.
            -------------------------------------------
                     Crl.R.P. No.23 of 2003
           ----------------------------------------------
          Dated this the 9th day of November, 2012

                             ORDER

     The 1st accused in C.C.No.380/1994 before the Chief Judicial

Magistrate's Court, Kasaragod is the petitioner herein. He was

prosecuted for offences under Sections 498A, 323, 324, 342 and

506 (ii) read with Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code.      The

prosecution case was as follows:- PW1 (the defacto complainant)

was legally married to the 1st accused on 22.2.1988.        After

marriage, both resided at the house of the 1st accused as

husband and wife where the other accused also were residing.

All the accused jointly subjected the complainant to cruelty by

demanding dowry and also they inflicted injuries on her, for not

complying with such demand. Since a complaint filed by PW1

before the police did not evoke any response, she filed a

complaint before the court. That was referred to the police under

Section 156(3) of the Cr.P.C. Crime No.425/1994 was registered

at the Kasaragod Police Station pursuant thereto. On completing

the investigation, charge was laid for the offence alleged against

Crl.R.P.No.23/03                 2

the petitioner.     The prosecution examined PWs 1 to 10 and

marked Exts.P1 to P4 documents. The defence did not adduce

any evidence. After appreciating the evidence adduced by the

prosecution, the Chief Judicial Magistrate convicted the

petitioner under Section 498A of the I.P.C and sentenced him

to undergo simple imprisonment for three months and to pay a

fine of Rs.500/- (Rupees five hundred only) with a default of

sentence of simple imprisonment for 15 days. Accused Nos.2

to 4 were acquitted under Section 248(1) of the Cr.P.C. The

petitioner     filed Criminal Appeal   No.133/99    before  the

Additional Sessions Judge (Adhoc) II, Kasaragod, who

confirmed the conviction and sentence.       The petitioner is

challenging the judgments of the courts below.

      2.     The only contention raised by the petitioner before

me is that there is no acceptable evidence adduced by the

prosecution to prove the offence of the petitioner. According

to him, the appreciation of evidence by the courts below is

perverse.     The learned counsel for the petitioner points out

that apart from the interested testimony of PW1, the wife,

there is no independent evidence to prove the offence against

Crl.R.P.No.23/03                 3

the petitioner. The learned counsel for the petitioner submits

that the evidence of PW1 is riddled with contradictions.

Therefore, it was not safe to convict the petitioner on the basis

of the evidence of PW1 alone, is the contention raised. On

such contentions, the learned counsel for the petitioner argues

for setting aside the judgments of the courts below and

acquittal of the petitioner.

      3.     In answer, the learned Public Prosecutor supports

the judgments of the courts below.        The Public Prosecutor

contends that PW1 has given evidence to the effect that

demanding more dowry the 1st accused has physically and

mentally harassed her, which evidence is cogent and

convincing.     There is no law that such evidence should be

discarded as interested.     He points out that there is no

contradiction as such in the evidence of PW1.        The alleged

contradiction is between the evidence given in court and the

statement given before the Police.      But, the petitioner has

neither cross examined PW1 on such contradiction nor has he

cared to mark any contradiction in respect of the same through

the investigating officer. As such, it is too late in the day for

Crl.R.P.No.23/03                  4

the petitioner to contend that there are contradictions in the

deposition of PW1, is the contention raised.         It is further

pointed out that PW3 had given evidence to the effect that he

had seen the petitioner beating PW1. He did not support in

some other aspects of the prosecution and therefore, he was

declared hostile and in the cross examination by the petitioner

himself, PW3 reiterated that he saw the 1st accused beating

PW1 near the well in the house of the accused. Therefore,

according to the learned Public Prosecutor, the evidence of

PW1 shows that she was being harassed demanding the dowry

and she was physically beaten for not bringing in additional

dowry.      With that evidence, the courts below was perfectly

justified in entering the conviction is the contention raised.

      4.     I have considered the rival contentions in detail.

      5.     As I have already stated, the only ground raised is

regarding sufficiency of the evidence available for convicting

the petitioner. In exercise of my powers under Section 397 of

the Cr.P.C. I cannot re-appreciate the evidence but, can only

consider whether the appreciation of evidence by the courts

below is demonstrably perverse. In this case, PW1 has given

Crl.R.P.No.23/03                5

evidence in graphic detail that the 1st accused had demanded

additional dowry and in the name of additional dowry, PW1

had been physically and mentally tortured. Despite elaborate

cross examination, the petitioner could not bring out any

discrepancies in the evidence of PW1.     Although the learned

counsel for the petitioner strenuously argued that PW1's

evidence before the court is contradictory to the statements

given before the police, PW1 has not been cross examined on

such alleged contradiction nor has such contradiction been

marked through the investigating officer. Without the same,

the petitioner cannot now contend that the evidence of PW1 in

court runs contrary to the statements given by her before the

Police. As rightly pointed out by the learned Public Prosecutor,

PW3, both in chief examination and in cross examination by

the petitioner himself, asserted that he had seen the 1st

accused manhandling the PW1.       It is pertinent to note here

that despite having been declared hostile, he stuck to his

version in the chief examination that he saw the 1st accused

beating the PW1 even in cross examination by the petitioner.

The fact that, that was reiterated in cross examination by the

Crl.R.P.No.23/03                   6

petitioner himself assumes importance in this regard. In view

of the above, I do not find any perversity whatsoever in the

appreciation of evidence by the courts below.       I am satisfied

that the prosecution has proved the guilt of the petitioner

beyond any reasonable doubt and therefore, I am not inclined

to interfere with the conviction entered by the courts below.

      6.     The learned counsel for the petitioner makes a

fervent plea for reducing the sentence of imprisonment. I am

of opinion that the sentence of imprisonment for three months

is not at all excessive calling for interference at my hands.

      In the above circumstances, I do not find any merit in

this Criminal Revision Petition and accordingly the same is

dismissed.




                                       S. SIRI JAGAN, JUDGE


acd

Crl.R.P.No.23/03    7

Crl.R.P.No.23/03    8



