
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                PRESENT:

                THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE S.SIRI JAGAN

      THURSDAY, THE 22ND DAY OF NOVEMBER 2012/1ST AGRAHAYANA 1934

                    Crl.Rev.Pet.No. 2348 of 2012 ()
                    -------------------------------
    CC.67/2011 of JUDICIAL FIRST CLASS MAGISTRATE COURT-I,KOZHIKODE

REVISION PETITIONER(S)/PETITIONERS/ACCUSED:
------------------------------------------

     1.  TAJ SUJAN, S/O.KUNJUMOHAMMED, AGED 38 YEARS
         SEETHA APPARTMENTS, MUTTIL P.O., WAYANAD DT.

     2.  SAMITHA, W/O.JYOTHI,, AGED 36 YEARS
         SEETHA APPARTMENTS, MUTTIL P.O., WAYANAD DT.

     3.  JYOTHI, S/O.RAGHAVAN,, AGED 36 YEARS
         SEETHA APPARTMENTS, MUTTIL P.O., WAYANAD DT.

         BY ADVS.SRI.A.V.JAMES
                 SRI.P.DALBI EMMANUEL

COMPLAINANT(S):
---------------

     1.  THE STATE OF KERALA
         REP. BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR
         HIGH COURT OF KERALA ERNAKULAM.

     2.  STATION HOUSE OFFICER
         CHEVAYOOR POLICE STATION
         KOZHIKODE DISTRICTPIN-573 017
         REP. BY PUBLIC PROSECUTORHIGH COURT OF KERALA
         ERNAKULAM.

                    BY  PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SMT.SUBA M.T.

       THIS CRIMINAL REVISION PETITION  HAVING COME UP FOR ADMISSION
ON  22-11-2012, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE FOLLOWING:



jm


                           S.SIRI JAGAN,J.
                       -----------------------
                  Crl.R.P.No.2348 of 2012
         ----------------------------------------------------
      Dated this the 22nd day of November, 2012

                            O R D E R


      The   petitioners are the accused in CC No.67/2011

before the Judicial First Class Magistrate-1, Kozhikode. The

prosecution was initiated for offences punishable under

Sections 498(A), 406, 323 and 324 read with Section 34 of

the Indian Penal Code as also under Section 40 of the Dowry

Prohibition Act. The petitioners filed an application under

Section 239 of the Criminal Procedure Code for discharge,

as CMP No. 8709/2011. The learned Magistrate dismissed

the same by the order impugned in this Crl.R.P.                The

petitioner is challenging the same. The contention of the

petitioner is that there is no prima facie material for either

the marriage between the first petitioner and the defacto

complainant or for any physical or mental harassment by

the petitioners to the defacto complainant. Therefore, the

initiation of prosecution was without any basis and therefore

the Magistrate went wrong in dismissing the application for

Crl.R.P.No.2348 of 2012
                               2

discharge is the contention raised.

      2. I have heard the counsel for the petitioner and also

the learned Public Prosecutor. The impugned Order reads

thus:

     "1. This is an application filed u/s 239 of Cr. P.C to
     discharge the accused.

                  2.    The averments in the petition can be
     summarised as follows: The petitioners are the accused in
     the aforesaid case for the offences u/s 498 A, 406, 323 and
     324 r/w 34 IPC and sec. 40 of Dowry Prohibition Act. The
     petitioners are absolutely innocent and they have not
     committed any of the offences alleged against them. The
     first petitioner is a Muslim and the defacto complainant is a
     Hindu. The first petitioner and the defacto complainant
     were in love for a long time. The father of the defacto
     complainant was against the marriage between them.
     Finally he consented for the marriage and suggested that a
     marriage under the Special Marriage Act can be registered
     since the first petitioner and the defacto complainant are of
     different religion. Thereafter, a marriage function was fixed
     in an Auditorium at Kozhikkode. But before two days of the
     said function, the father of the defacto complainant
     informed the petitioners and his family that some of the
     technicality for registration under the Special Marriage Act
     is not completed and since the function was fixed, that can
     be conducted just like an engagement function and
     Registration under Special Marriage Act can be done
     subsequently. As such, the function was conducted just like
     an engagement function on 02.04.2006. There was neither
     a registered marriage under the Special Marriage Act nor a
     conventional marriage since the first petitioner and the
     defacto complainant belonged to different religion. It was
     also agreed by both families that the first petitioner and
     the defacto complainant will reside together only after
     registration of their marriage under the Special Marriage
     Act. The same has not been done so far. When enquired by

Crl.R.P.No.2348 of 2012
                               3

     the petitioners, the father of the defacto complainant told
     the petitioners that when they enquired with an Astrologer,
     the opinion given to them by the Astrologer is that the
     horoscope will not match. Because of that reason, they
     were not ready to continue the relationship. Thereafter, the
     defacto complainant was taken by her father to Kozhikkode
     where he is working in BSNL. The first petitioner was not
     allowed to meet or talk to the defacto complainant
     thereafter. The first petitioner has not married the defacto
     complainant so far and he is ready to for a registration of
     Special Marriage Act even now with the complainant. Since
     there is no marriage registered under the Special Marriage
     Act, an offence punishable u/s 498 A IPC will not lie against
     the petitioners. Hence they pray for discharge.
                 3. The learned Asst. Public Prosecutor filed a
     counter statement denying the averments and allegations
     in the petition and contending that the petition is not
     maintainable in law. It is admitted that the first petitioner is
     a Muslim and the defacto complainant is a Hindu. But it is
     not correct to say that they have not married and only an
     engagement function was conducted on 02.04.2006 and
     they have not resided together as husband and wife. In
     fact, the defacto complainant and the first petitioner were
     married to each other on 02.04.2006 at Jaya Auditorium as
     per Hindu rites and ceremonies and had resided as
     husband and wife at the house of the petitioners till 2010.
     The parents of the 1st and 2nd petitioners belong to different
     religion, ie. Father belongs to Muslim community and
     mother belongs to Hindu community and they had agreed
     for   conducting     the  marriage   between     the   defacto
     complainant and the first petitioner as per the customs and
     ceremonies prevailing in Hindu community. The defacto
     complainant and first petitioner had lived together as
     husband and wife for nearly years. Hence she prays for
     dismissal of the petition.
                 4. The only point that arise for determination is
     whether the accused are liable to be discharged under 239
     Cr. P.C.
                 5. The Point:- The offence alleged against the
     petitioner/accused are u/ss 498A, 406, 323 r/w 34 IPC and
     sec. 4 of Dowry Prohibition Act. The prosecution case is
     that the first petitioner married the defacto complainant on
     02.04.2006 at Jaya Auditorium as per Hindu rites and

Crl.R.P.No.2348 of 2012
                             4

     ceremonies and thereafter, they had resided as husband
     and wife in the matrimonial house for about 4 years and
     during that period, the petitioners/accused subjected the
     defacto complainant to cruelty. On the other hand, the
     contention of the petitioners/accused is that there was no
     marriage between the first petitioner and the defacto
     complainant and they never resided as husband and wife
     and hence an offence punishable u/s 498 A IPC will not lie
     against the petitioners/accused. The other offences alleged
     against the petitioners/accused are also will not lie since all
     those offences are directly connected with the alleged
     marriage.
                 6. Admittedly the first petitioner belongs to
     Muslim community and the defacto complainant belongs to
     Hindu community. In the petition on hand, the first
     petitioner admitted that he fell in love with the defacto
     complainant and decided to marry her. But the father of
     the defacto complainant was against the marriage. Later
     on, the father of the defacto complainant changed his
     stand and gave permission to conduct the marriage
     between the defacto complainant and the first petitioner.
     As such the marriage function was fixed at Jaya Auditorium,
     Kozhikkode and after fixation of the said function, the said
     function was converted as engagement function as per the
     request of the father of the defacto complainant. But the
     case of the prosecution is that the marriage was conducted
     on 02.01.2006 at Jaya Auditorium, Kozhikkode and
     thereafter the 1st petitioner and the defacto complainant
     resided together as husband and wife in the matrimonial
     house.
                 7.   The   main   contention   taken     by   the
     petitioners/ accused is that since the first petitioner and
     the defacto complainant belonged to different religion, the
     marriage cannot be conducted under the rites and
     ceremonies prevailing in Hindu community and as such
     there is no legal marriage between them. Hence an offence
     punishable u/s 498 IPC will not lie against them. The
     learned APP submitted that though there is no legal
     marriage, if the first petitioner has undergone some or
     other form of marriage and thereby assumed for himself
     the position of husband to live, cohabitate and exercise
     authority as such husband over another woman. At this
     juncture it is very important to refer the verdict of the

Crl.R.P.No.2348 of 2012
                            5

     Hon'ble Supreme Court reported in Reema Aggarwal Vs.
     Anupam and others (AIR 2004 SC 1418). in the said verdict,
     the Hon'ble Supreme Court held that the obvious obligation
     behind the sec. 498 IPC is to prevent harassment to a
     woman who enter into a marital relationship with a person
     and later on, becomes a victim of the greed for money. The
     Hon'ble Supreme Court further held that "the absence of
     definition "husband" to specifically include such persons
     who contract marriages, ostensibly and cohabitate with
     such woman, in the purported exercise of his roll and
     status as "husband" is not a ground to exclude them from
     the purview of sec. 304 B or 498 A of IPC, viewed in the
     context of the very object and aim of legislations
     introducing those provisions. In A. Subash Babu Vs. State of
     Andhra Pradesh and another (AIR 2011 SC 3031), the
     Hon'ble Supreme Court reiterated the aforesaid law laid
     down in Reema Aggarwal's case. The Hon'ble Supreme
     Court in Reema Agarwal's case after examining the scope
     of section 498 A IPC held that a person who enters into
     marital arrangement cannot be allowed to take shelter
     behind the smokescreen of contention that since there was
     no valid marriage the question of dowry does not arise. In
     view of the aforesaid verdicts of the Hon'ble Supreme
     Court, the contention of the learned defence counsel that
     since there was no legal marriage between the first
     petitioner and the defacto complainant, an offence
     punishable u/s 498 A IPC will not lie against the accused is
     hereby repelled.
                 8. The petitioners have produced certain
     documents to prove that the first petitioner belongs to
     Muslim community. At this juncture it is very important to
     note that the accused has no right to produce documents
     at this stage. Hence those documents cannot be looked
     into. But even as per the prosecution case, the first
     petitioner belongs to Muslim community. All that is
     required at charge framing stage is to see whether a prima
     facie case has been made out or not. The question whether
     the charge framed will eventually stand proved or not can
     be determined only after the evidence is recorded. So at
     the charge framing stage prosecution case on merit cannot
     be decided. I have perused the complaint preferred by the
     defacto   complainant    and    161   statements    of  the

Crl.R.P.No.2348 of 2012
                              6

     prosecution witnesses and satisfied that there is prima
     facie materials to show that the first petitioner married the
     defacto complainant and they resided together as husband
     and wife in the matrimonial house. I am further satisfied
     that a prima facie case has been made out against the
     petitioners/accused to proceed against them u/s 498 A,
     406, 323, 324 r/s 34 IPC and sec. 4 of Dowry Prohibition
     Act.
                 9. In view of the aforesaid law, facts and
     reasons, the petition is liable to be dismissed. I do so.
                 In the result, the petition is dismissed. No
     costs."

All the grounds stated by the petitioners are mere

allegations, without proving which they cannot escape

prosecution. As of now, whether there was a valid marriage

itself is a matter in dispute. The prosecution has alleged

that there was a valid marriage, as per Hindu rights and the

prosecution can prove the same in trial by adducing further

evidence. The petitioners would contend that there could

not have been a valid marriage as per Hindu rights because

the first petitioner is a Muslim.          But there is prima facie

material to show that, the first petitioner was born out of

inter caste marriage between a Muslim father and a Hindu

mother.     The prima facie statements of witnesses are

available to the effect that there was a valid marriage as

Crl.R.P.No.2348 of 2012
                          7

also regarding the mental and physical harassment by the

petitioners to the defacto complainant.          The learned

Magistrate has given elaborate reasons for the said

conclusion as well. In a petition for discharge what the court

has to consider is not whether there is evidence sufficient to

convict the accused but only whether there is prima facie

material to initiate prosecution.    I am satisfied that such

prima facie materials have been discussed by the Magistrate

to come to the conclusion that the petitioners are not

entitled to a discharge now.

      3.Therefore, I do not find any infirmity in the prima

facie satisfaction of the Magistrate that there is sufficient

materials to initiate prosecution.

      Accordingly, the Crl.R.P is dismissed.




                                        S.SIRI JAGAN, JUDGE

jm



