
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                         PRESENT:

                      THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE K.M.JOSEPH
                                              &
                 THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE M.L.JOSEPH FRANCIS

           WEDNESDAY, THE 27TH DAY OF JUNE 2012/6TH ASHADHA 1934

                             Mat.Appeal.No. 184 of 2011 ( )
                                ------------------------------
                      OP.478/2009 of FAMILY COURT, THIRUVALLA

APPELLANT(S)/RESPONDENTS:
----------------------------------

       1. BIJU GOPALAN, S/O GOPALAKRISHNAN,
          AGED 38 YEARS, AASIRVAD HOUSE, V.KOTTAYAM P.O.
          KOTTAYAM VILLAGE, KOZHENCHERY TALUK
          PATHANAMTHITTA.

       2. GOPALAKRISHNAN, S/O NARAYANAN,
          AGED 65 YEARS, AASIRVAD HOUSE, V.KOTTAYAM P.O.
          V.KOTTAYAM VILLAGE, KOZHENCHERY TALUK
          PATHANAMTHITTA.

       3. RAJAMMA, W/O GOPALAKRISHNAN,
          AGED 56 YEARS, AASIRVAD HOUSE, V.KOTTAYAM P.O.
          V.KOTTAYAM VILLAGE, KOZHENCHERY TALUK
          PATHANAMTHITTA.

          BY ADV. SRI.V.PHILIP MATHEW

RESPONDENT(S)/PETITIONERS:
-----------------------------------

       1. K.S.SIVASANKARAN, S/O SANKARAN,
          AGED 72 YEARS, URUMBIL VADAKKETHIL HOUSE
          PARIYARAM P.O., PARIYARAM MURI, ELANTHOOR VILLAGE
          KOZHENCHERY TALUK, PATHANAMTHITTA.686021.

       2. SARASAMMA SIVASANKARAN,
          W/O K.S.SIVASANKARAN, AGED 61 YEARS
          URUMBIL VADAKKETHIL HOUSE, PARIYARAM P.O.
          PARIYARAM MURI, ELANTHOOR VILLAGE
          KOZHENCHERRY TALUK, PATHANAMTHITTA-626021(DIED)

          ADDL.RESPONDENTS 3 TO 6 IMPLEADED

       3. OMANA O.S, 45 YEARS, RAJENDRA BHAVAN,
          KARITHOTTA P.O., MEZHVELI VILLAGE, PATHANAMTHITTA.

      4. SOBHA K.S, 42 YEARS, HOUSE NO.26/30,
        T.I.BUNGLOW ROAD, PODE COLONY,SUBHAJI
        JABALPUR(M.P.)

      5. ANIL O.S, 38 YEARS, S/O.SIVASANKARAN,
        URUMBIL VADAKETHIL HOUSE,PARIYARAM P.O.
        KOZHENCHERRY TALUK, PATHANAMTHITTA.( LRS OF THE
        DECEASED 2ND RESPONDENT ARE IMPLEADED AS ADDL.
        RESPONDENTS 3 TO 5 AS PER ORDER DT.9.8.2011 IN IA NO.2209/2011)

        BY ADV. SRI.N.N.SASI

       THIS MATRIMONIAL APPEAL HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD ON 29-03-
2012, THE COURT ON 27.6L2012 DELIVERED THE FOLLOWING:


           K.M.JOSEPH & M.L.JOSEPH FRANCIS, JJ.
             -----------------------------------------------
                 Mat. Appeal No.184 of 2011
             -----------------------------------------------
                     Dated 27th June, 2012.

                          J U D G M E N T


Joseph Francis, J.

           This appeal is filed by the respondents 1 to 3 in

O.P.478/2009 on the file of the Family Court, Thiruvalla.

Respondents 1 and 2 herein were the petitioners in that O.P.,

which was filed by them under Section 7 of the Family Courts

Act for recovery of an amount of Rs.8,00,000/- towards the

value of gold ornaments and value of movables.

           2. The case of the petitioners in the O.P. is briefly as

follows : Petitioners 1 and 2 are the parents of deceased

O.S.Bindu. The first respondent married Bindu on 3.11.2002 at

Lakshmi Auditorium near the residence of the petitioners, as

per the custom of Ezhava community.              The said Bindu was

working as an L.D. Clerk in the Revenue Department and the

first respondent was working as a teacher. There are no issues

out of the wedlock. Respondents 2 and 3 are the father and

mother of the first respondent respectively. In connection with

the marriage, Bindu was given 408 gms. of gold ornaments, out

of which 280 grams were entrusted to the 2nd respondent on

Mat.Appeal 184/11                 2




the direction of the first respondent.          80 gms. Of gold

ornaments were entrusted to the third respondent on

10.12.2002 as directed by the first respondent which was sold

or pledged, and the amount was used by the respondents. The

ornaments were taken by the respondents on the date of death

of Bindu. On 9.9.2003 Bindu was murdered and was hanged in

the bathroom and it was alleged that she committed suicide. A

crime is registered by the police under Sections 306, 304B and

498A read with Section 34 IPC and is pending before the

Sessions Court, Pathanamthitta as S.C.345/04. At the time of

marriage, apart from the above ornaments, presentation items

worth Rs.25,000/- were also given to deceased Bindu which are

now in the custody of the respondents.          Certain certificates

described in the petition schedule are also in the possession of

the respondents.       On the death of Bindu, petitioners

approached      the  SNDP    Yogam      office  bearers   and   the

Pathanamthitta Union for a mediation to get back the above

articles or its value. But, so far it is not returned. A notice was

also sent on 22.12.2008 but it was refused. Hence, the claim

Mat.Appeal 184/11                 3




for Rs.7,65,000/- as value of ornaments and value of movables

scheduled in the petition and for return of certificates.

            3.    Respondents filed objection, wherein they

contended as follows : The petition is not maintainable. The

petitioners have no right to file such a petition. The marriage is

admitted.     But the claim that she had 408 grams of gold

ornaments is denied. The alleged entrustment of ornaments to

the respondents is also denied.        The allegation that the

ornaments of deceased Bindu was appropriated by the

respondents on her date of death is also denied. The allegation

that it was a murder is also denied. The further allegation that

deceased Bindu was assaulted and was treated cruelly by the

respondents while residing with them is also denied. The crime

registered and the consequent trial before the Additional

Sessions Court as S.C.345/04 ended in acquittal finding that

the allegations against the respondents in connection with the

death of Bindu is false.       The further allegation that the

deceased was given movables worth Rs.25,000/- in connection

with the marriage is also denied. They are not in possession of

Mat.Appeal 184/11                 4




any of the certificates of the deceased. The notice sent by the

petitioners never reached the respondents. They are not liable

to pay any amount as claimed in the petition or to return any

articles as claimed.

            4.   Before the Family Court, on the side of the

petitioners, PW1 to PW4 were examined and Exts.A1 to A3 were

marked. On the side of the respondents, the first respondent

was examined as CPW1 and Exts.B1 to B7 were marked. The

Family Court, on considering the evidence on record allowed

the Original Petition in part directing the respondents to pay

Rs.6,12,000/- to the petitioners towards value of 51 sovereigns

of gold ornaments within one month, failing which the

petitioners will be entitled to recover it with interest at the rate

of 7% per annum from the date of decree till date of realization.

The petitioners were also allowed to get their proportionate

costs in the petition. Against that judgment and decree dated

16.8.2010, respondents 1 to 3 filed this appeal.

            5. Heard the learned counsel for the appellants and

the learned counsel for the respondents.

Mat.Appeal 184/11                 5




      6. At the time of argument, learned counsel for the

appellants raised the following contentions : The court below

ought to have considered the fact that respondents herein were

not having financial ability to raise such funds to purchase the

said 408 grams of gold ornaments. Even during the trial of

S.C.345/04, the respondents averred that their daughter was

having only 40 sovereigns of gold ornaments. The ornaments,

if any, entrusted to the appellants herein are not held in trust

by them and on the death of O.S.Bindu, the cause of action

arose and as the same is not claimed within three years from

that date, it is barred by limitation. The respondents have no

right to seek recovery of gold ornaments or its value, as the

gold ornaments were gifted to the first appellant husband

through late Bindu(wife). The said ornaments come within the

definition of gift under Section 122 of the Transfer of Property

Act, 1882. The gift was given unconditionally and voluntarily

and has been accepted. Therefore, respondents have no right

to claim recovery of the gold. The gold ornaments were never

held in trust. The appellants cannot be treated as trustees. On the

Mat.Appeal 184/11                 6




other hand, they are to be treated as 'donees'. Even if the gold

ornaments are not treated as gift, respondents cannot seek

recovery of the gold as per the provisions of Hindu Succession

Act, 1956. After the death of Bindu, who was the wife of the

first appellant, her gold ornaments and properties devolved on

the first appellant as per Section 15 of the Hindu Succession

Act. So, respondents have no right over the gold ornaments.

Learned counsel for the respondents supported the judgment of

the court below.

            7. The marriage between the petitioners' daughter

O.S.Bindu and the first respondent, son of respondents 2 and 3,

which took place on 3.11.2002 at Lakshmi Auditorium, near the

residence of the petitioners, is not disputed by the respondents.

Ext.A1 is the certificate dated 29.9.2003 issued by K.Balan,

President of the SNDP Branch No.268, Pariyaram, stating that

the above marriage took place on 3.11.2002 and that at the

time of marriage, the bride, O.S.Bindu was wearing gold

ornaments of 51 sovereigns (408 gms.) and that fact is

recorded in the marriage register kept by Pariyaram SNDP

Mat.Appeal 184/11                7




Branch register. PW2, Madhusoodanan Nair, the Secretary of

the SNDP Branch, Pariyaram has produced the marriage

register containing the entries regarding the marriage that took

place on 3.11.2002. Photocopy of page 31 of that marriage

register containing the entries regarding the marriage between

O.S.Bindu and first respondent is marked as Ext.A3. PW3 Balan

was the President of the SNDP Branch at the time of marriage

and he was also an attesting witness to Ext.A3. In Ext.A3, it is

recorded that at the time of marriage of Bindu with the first

respondent, she was wearing gold ornaments of about 408

grams (51 sovereigns).

            8. PW3 deposed that at the time of marriage, Bindu

was wearing 51 sovereigns of gold ornaments and that he

signed in Ext.A3 as a witness and as the President of the SNDP

Branch. PW3 deposed that in Ext.A3, first respondent and his

father had signed. The first petitioner, who is the father of

deceased Bindu was examined as PW1. He deposed about the

facts as stated in the O.P. PW4 Anil is the son of the petitioners

and brother of deceased Bindu.

Mat.Appeal 184/11               8




            9. PW4 deposed that at the time of marriage, 51

sovereigns of gold ornaments were given to Bindu. He further

deposed that the respondents demanded 51 sovereigns of gold

ornaments as the respondents had given that much of gold

ornaments when they conducted the marriage of the daughter

of respondents 2 and 3. PW4 deposed that the fact that 51

sovereigns of gold ornaments were given to Bindu is recorded

in Ext.A3. PW4 deposed that at the time of marriage two pairs

of gold rings weighing 2 sovereigns, five gold chains weighing

17 sovereigns, one necklace having a weight of 3 sovereigns,

21 bangles weighing 21 sovereigns, ten rings having a weight

of 5 sovereigns, one pair of kolussu having a weight of 2

sovereigns and one gold coin having a weight of 1 sovereign

and thus in total, 51 sovereigns of gold were given to Bindu at

the time of marriage and the total weight of gold ornaments

was recorded in Ext.A3, in the presence of respondents 1 and 2

and they had also put their signatures in Ext.A3.

            10.   PW4 deposed that out of 51 sovereigns, 15

sovereigns were purchased before the marriage on different

Mat.Appeal 184/11                 9




occasions and after the engagement, 10 sovereigns of gold

ornaments were purchased from a jewellery at Pathanamthitta

and 20 sovereigns were purchased in the presence of the first

respondent from Bhima Jewellery, Alappuzha and the remaining

gold ornaments were gifted by the relatives of Bindu. PW4

deposed that for purchasing gold ornaments, Rs.2,00,000/- was

obtained by giving rubber trees standing in one acre of their

property for slaughter tapping.     Rs.1,00,000/- was borrowed

from the Pathanamthitta Pinnokka Vikasana Sahakarana

Sangham, Pathanamthitta. PW4 deposed that after one week

of the marriage, as per the direction of the first respondent, the

second respondent, his father, took 35 sovereigns of gold

ornaments from Bindu for the purpose of keeping the same in

Bank locker and within one month, as per the direction of the

first respondent, his mother, the third respondent obtained 10

sovereigns from Bindu and that ornaments were either sold or

pledged.

            11. It is pertinent to note that PW4 was not cross

examined by the counsel for the respondents and the first

Mat.Appeal 184/11                  10




respondent was also present before the Family Court at the

time of chief examination of PW4. Therefore, it is clear that the

respondents are not challenging the testimony of PW4. Ext.A2

is the photograph of deceased Bindu and first respondent which

was taken at the time of marriage, which shows that at the time

of marriage, Bindu was wearing a number of gold ornaments.

In the chief affidavit filed by the first respondent it is stated that

one of the gold chains worn by deceased Bindu at the time of

marriage was produced before the Fast Track Court in

connection with S.C.345/04, which was marked as MO2. In the

written statement and at the time of examination of first

respondent as CPW1, respondents have no case that the

ornaments worn by Bindu at the time of marriage were fake

gold ornaments. When cross-examined, CPW1 deposed that as

stated by the respondents in the written statement and in the

chief affidavit filed by him, they are prepared to give back the

gold ornaments of Bindu to the petitioners. Ext.B1 is the copy

of the deposition given by the first petitioner before the

Sessions Court in S.C.345/04, in which nothing is stated by him

Mat.Appeal 184/11               11




with regard to the quantity of gold ornaments given to Bindu.

Ext.B3 is the copy of the deposition given by the brother of

Bindu, in which it is stated that 51 sovereigns of gold

ornaments were given to Bindu at the time of marriage. Ext.B4

is the copy of the deposition given by the second petitioner in

S.C.345/04.     But, she was not examined before the Family

Court. Ext.B5 is the copy of FIR and F.I. Statement given by

PW4 before the Police, in which, it is stated that 40 sovereigns

of gold ornaments were given to Bindu at the time of her

marriage. Since PW4 is not cross-examined by respondents,

when he was examined before the Family Court, it has to be

held that the respondents are admitting those facts deposed by

him. On appreciating the evidence on record, we are of the

view that the Family Court is fully justified in finding that 51

sovereigns of gold ornaments were given to Bindu at the time

of marriage and that the respondents misappropriated the

same. Since PW4 was not cross examined by the respondents

with regard to the source of money for purchasing the gold

ornaments of Bindu, the appellants cannot at present, contend

Mat.Appeal 184/11                        12




that the petitioners have no financial ability to raise funds to

purchase 51 sovereigns of gold.

            12. In the decision reported in Scariah Varghese

v. Marykutty (1991 (2) KLT 71), it was held :

            "Even if there was no previous demand, the plaint itself can be

            considered as a demand. It is not a correct statement that the

            dowry would only part take the nature of a trust amount. True

            under the Trust Act, there are certain obligations which are in the

            nature of trust and certainly without any other statutory provision

            the amount given as dowry will legitimately assume the character

            and nature of trust in the hands of any person other than the

            person entitled to the amount, viz., the wife. Of course for

            recovery of a trust amount no period of limitation is prescribed.

            By virtue of the Dowry Prohibition Act, the statute itself says that

            the amounts in the hands of the husband or the husband's

            parents for and on behalf of the wife is a trust amount and so

            there is no difficulty to say that the obligation is one under trust to

            return the amount by virtue of the statutory provision and so

            there is no limitation for such a suit."

In the decision reported in Chacko v. Annamma (1993 (1)

KLT 675), it was held :



    Even if the stridhanam property of a married woman, is placed in the

   custody of her husband or in laws they would be deemed to be trustees

   and bound to return the same if and when demanded by her. In the case

Mat.Appeal 184/11                        13




  at hand, we are of opinion that in case S. 10 is not applicable, the only

  Article that is applicable is the residuary Article Art.113.

            13. According to the appellants, the claim should

have been made within three years of the death of deceased

Bindu, which was in 2003.               According to Article 113 of the

Limitation Act, the period of limitation begins to run only when

the right to sue accrues. The right to sue accrues when there is

a demand and consequential refusal. In this case, a written

demand for getting the articles was made by he petitioners on

22.12.2008. That notice was refused by the respondents. The

suit is filed within three years of the written demand.

Therefore, we are of the view that the suit is not barred by

limitation.

            14. Learned counsel for the appellants argued that

there is no pleading in the petition to the effect that the

petitioners gave 51 sovereigns of gold ornaments to deceased

Bindu at the time of marriage as dowry or Stridhanam and as

such the petitioners cannot seek return of gold ornaments on

the basis of proviso to Sub Section (3) of Section 6 of the Dowry

Mat.Appeal 184/11                  14




Prohibition Act, 1961 (for short 'the Act'). It is true that in the

petition it is not stated by the petitioners that 51 sovereigns of

gold ornaments were given to Bindu as dowry. But, it is stated

in the petition that    51 sovereigns of gold ornaments were

given to Bindu in connection with the marriage.          Therefore,

those ornaments given by the petitioners will come under the

purview of "dowry" as defined in the Act.

            15.     In the written statement filed by the

respondents or at the time of examination of first respondent as

CPW1, respondents have no case that 51 sovereigns of gold

ornaments were gifted by Bindu to the first appellant. There is

also no evidence to show that Bindu gifted those gold

ornaments to the first appellant before her death. Therefore,

the appellants cannot now contend that Bindu gifted the gold

ornaments to the first appellant. In the decision reported in

Kunhu Moideen v. Sayed Mohammed (1985 KLT 516), it

was held that if in violation of the provisions of the Act, dowry is

given and received, the consequence is not that the transaction

is invalid, the consequence is that provided for in the Act itself

Mat.Appeal 184/11                       15




in Section 6. In the decision reported in Scariah Varghese v.

Marykutty (1991 (2) KLT 71), it was held :

               The suit is maintainable even if it is streedhanam or dowry

               notwithstanding the Dowry Prohibition Act on the basis that

               "streedhanam is always the property of the woman whoever is

               given custody of the same. Woman can always claim it back

               and enforce the return of it. A suit for recovering this amount

               will not be hit by the Dowry Prohibition Act". A suit by the wife

               is justly maintainable for the return of her dowry from her

               husband or his father or whoever is in custody of the same.

               S.6 of the Dowry Prohibition Act makes it obligatory to repay

               the amount of dowry received by any person other than the

               woman to whom it belongs within a particular period. Further

               it is said that the amount in the hands of `any other person is

               a trust amount by enacting that the person shall hold it' in trust

               for the benefit of the woman. The statute docs not stop there.

               It further says that if any person fails to transfer the dowry as

               required by S.6(l) of the Dowry Prohibition Act it is an offence

               and it is punishable with imprisonment which may extend to six

               months, or with fine which may extend to five thousand

               rupees, or with both; but such punishment shall not absolve

               the person from his obligation to transfer the property as

               required by sub-section (1) of the above Act. So it is clear and

               evident that the husband or the parents of the husband cannot

               keep the dowry when a demand is made by the wife. It has to

               be returned and the statute says that if not returned, it is a

               punishable offence. The Dowry Prohibition Act will not stand in

Mat.Appeal 184/11                     16




               the way of maintaining the suit. The suit is perfectly

               maintainable.

             16. Learned counsel for the appellants submitted

that for getting back the gold ornaments, respondents could

have approached the Dowry Prohibition Officer and a civil suit

for that purpose is not maintainable. That argument cannot be

accepted in view of the principles laid down in the decision

reported in Pratibha Rani v. Suraj Kumar and another (AIR

1985 SC 628). In the said decision, it was held as follows :

            "There are a large number of cases where criminal law and

            civil law can run side by side. The two remedies are not

            mutually exclusive but clearly co-extensive and essentially

            differ in their content and consequence. The object of the

            criminal law is to punish an offender who commits an offence

            against a person, property or the State for which the

            accused, on proof of the offence, is deprived of his liberty

            and in some cases even his life. This does not, however,

            affect the civil remedies at all for suing the wrong doer in

            cases like arson, accident etc. It is an anathems to suppose

            that when a civil remedy is available, a criminal, prosecution

            is completely barred.    The two types of actions are quite

            different in content, scope and import.       It is not at all

            intelligible to us to take the stand that if the husband

Mat.Appeal 184/11                    17




            dishonestly misappropriates the stridhan property of his wife,

            though kept in his custody, that would bar prosecution under

            Section 406, I.P.C. or render the ingredients of Section 405,

            I.P.C. nugatory or abortive. To say that because the stridhan

            of a married woman is kept in the custody of her husband,

            no action against him can be taken as no offence is

            committed is to override and distort the real intent of the

            law."

             17.   According to the petitioners in the O.P., the

respondents committed murder of Bindu, whereas the

respondents contended that Bindu committed suicide. It is an

admitted fact that Bindu died within seven years of her

marriage with first respondent otherwise than due to natural

causes and she had no children in the marriage.

             18. The proviso to Sub Section 3 of Section 6 of the

Act was inserted by amending Act 43 of 1986 which came into

force on 19.11.1986 to the effect that where a woman dies

within seven years of her marriage, otherwise than due to

natural causes, the property in question shall be transferred to

her parents, if she has not left any children. Since Bindu died

issue-less within seven years of the marriage otherwise than

Mat.Appeal 184/11                  18




due to natural causes, the petitioners, who are parents of Bindu

are entitled to get back 51 sovereigns of gold ornaments or its

value from the respondents, who misappropriated it. Therefore,

we are of the view that the Family Court is fully justified in

decreeing the suit for return of the value of 51 sovereigns of

gold ornaments. Accordingly, this appeal is dismissed, as it is

without any merits. The respondents in this appeal are entitled

to get the costs of this appeal from the appellants.



                                                  Sd/-

                                          K.M.JOSEPH, JUDGE.

                                                  Sd/-


                                  M.L.JOSEPH FRANCIS, JUDGE.


tgs


                            (true copy)



