
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                    PRESENT:

                    THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE R.BASANT
                                          &
              THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE K.SURENDRA MOHAN

        FRIDAY, THE 13TH DAY OF APRIL 2012/24TH CHAITHRA 1934

                          WP(Crl.).No. 345 of 2010 (S)
                              ----------------------------

PETITIONER :
-------------

             JUMAILA,AGED 29 YEARS,D/O.ABOOBACKER
             (LATE),MADHURAKKARIYAN HOUSE,THOTTINTAKKARE
             PALATHINKAL PO,MAMPAD , PIN 676 542
            NILAMBUR TALUK, MALAPPURAM DISTRICT.

             BY ADV. SRI.P.SAMSUDIN

RESPONDENT(S):
--------------

         1. ABDUL GAFOOR ,AGED 36 YEARS,
             S/O.MOHAMMED KURIKKAL(LATE),PUNNAPPALA HOUSE
             CHEMBAMKADAVU PO, MAMPAD NILAMBUR TALUK,NOW
             RESIDING AT 17033-21484,IROWA-JEDDAH,SOUDI ARABIA
             (HOLDER OF INDIAN PASSPORT NO.A 8865584).

         2. SAFIYA ERANJIKKAL,W/O.MOHAMMED KURIKKAL,
             PUNNAPPALA HOUSE,CHEMBAMKADAVU,THOTTINTAKKARE
             MAMPAD PO,NILAMBUR TALUK,PIN 676 542.

         3. THE CONSULATE GENERAL FOR INDIA,INDIAN
             EMBASSY,JEDDAH,SAUDI ARABIA.

4. UNION OF INDIA REPRESENTED BY THE
  SECRETARY TO GOVERNMENT, MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL
  AFFAIRS,NEW DELHI.

5. THE STATE OF KERALA REPRESENTED BY THE
  CIRCLE INSPECTOR OF POLICE,NILAMBUR.

  BY ADV. SHRI E.S.ASHRAF, CGC
  R3 & 4 BY ADV. SRI.P.PARAMESWARAN NAIR,ASG OF INDIA
  R2 BY ADV. SRI.K.ABDUL JAWAD
  R5 BY ASAF ALI, STATE PUBLIC PROSECUTOR

 THIS WRIT PETITION (CRIMINAL) HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD
     ON 9-02-2012, THE COURT ON 13-4-2012 DELIVERED THE
FOLLOWING:

                           APPENDIX

EXT.P1: A TRUE COPY OF THE ORDER OF THE FAMILY COURT,
MALAPPURAM DT. 6-1-2009 IN O.P.522/2008

EXT.P2: -DO- OF THE PETITION SUBMITTED BY THE PETITIONER BEFORE
THE 3RD RESPONDENT DT. 6-7-2008

EXT.P3: -DO- OF THE ORDER OF THE FAMILY COURT, MALAPPURAM DT.
15-7-22009 IN O.P150/2009



JJ                         /TRUE COPY/


                                     P.S. TO JUDGE


                                                                CR
                             R.BASANT &
                    K. SURENDRA MOHAN, JJ.
        ------------------------------------------------------------
                  W.P(Crl) NO:345 OF 2010 S
         -----------------------------------------------------------
                Dated this the 13th April, 2012.

                              JUDGMENT

Surendra Mohan, J.

      The travails of a discarded wife to secure the custody of her

two male children from her husband who has forcibly taken them

away and across the borders of our country to Jeddah in Saudi

Arabia form the subject matter of this writ petition. The Family

Court, Malappuram, has decided that the wife should have the

custody of her children. Warrants of arrest have been issued by

competent criminal courts against the first respondent.               His

passport has been impounded but, the efforts to deport him to

our country have failed, at least for the moment, for the reason

that he enjoys the patronage of an obliging employer at Saudi

Arabia.

      2. The petitioner, Jumaila is the mother of Mohammed

Salman aged 12 years and Murad aged 4 = years. She has filed

this writ petition seeking the issue of a writ of Habeas Corpus

directing respondents 2 to 4 to produce her minor children from

the illegal custody of the first respondent. The first respondent,

W.P(Crl.)345/2010            2

Mr. Abdul Gafoor is the father of the children.    The second

respondent is his mother.

      3.    The marriage between the petitioner and the first

respondent took place on 3-4-1996 according to Islamic rites.

Thereafter, the spouses lived together.       The two children

referred to above were born out of the wedlock. According to

the petitioner, respondents 1 and 2 along with Smt. Fousiya,

sister of the first respondent used to harass the petitioner

demanding gold and dowry. She was also blamed for not being

pretty. The first respondent was working at Jeddah in Saudi

Arabia.    Therefore, during May 2007 the petitioner and the

children were taken to Jeddah.      It is the allegation of the

petitioner that even at Jeddah the first respondent used to

manhandle and harass the petitioner, at the instance of his

mother and sister. According to her, after consuming alcohol the

first respondent used to assault her brutally. When the torture

became intolerable, at the intervention of the officials of the

Indian Embassy at Jeddah, the petitioner and the children were

sent back to India during October, 2007. After reaching India

the petitioner complained to the Police and on the basis of her

complaint, the Police registered crime No:345/2008 under

W.P(Crl.)345/2010              3

Section 498A of the Indian Penal Code against respondents 1

and 2 and Smt. Fousiya mentioned above. The case against the

first respondent/husband is still pending before the Judicial

Magistrate's Court, Nilambur.

     4. After the petitioner came back to India as stated above,

the first respondent totally neglected her and her children. He

did not pay them any maintenance. Therefore, the petitioner and

the children were left at the mercy of her relatives. To cap it all,

in the year 2008, the first respondent married another woman

with whom he started living at Jeddah. The petitioner thereupon

filed O.P.522/2008 before the Family Court, Malappuram

claiming an amount of `50,000/- that belonged to her, that was

misappropriated by him.      She also claimed past maintenance

over a period of seven months for herself and her children. The

said petition was allowed by Ext.P1 judgment directing that an

amount of `44,000/- be paid as past maintenance and decreeing

the claim of the petitioner for recovery of the amount of

`50,000/-.     The petitioner had also filed MC 448/2008 under

section 125 of the Code of Criminal Procedure claiming

maintenance from the first respondent. The said petition has

also been allowed directing the first respondent to pay an

W.P(Crl.)345/2010              4

amount of `2,250/- to the petitioner. After coming back to India,

the children were studying at the MES Lower Primary School,

Mampad.

      5. While so, on 4-7-2008, respondents 1 and 2 along with

Fousiya forcibly took away the children from the MES Lower

Primary School, Mampad without the permission of the

petitioner and the first respondent took them to Jeddah without

even informing the petitioner.    The children are now in the

custody of the first respondent and his second wife at Jeddah.

The petitioner has not seen her children thereafter. Though the

petitioner attempted to contact the children over telephone, she

could not contact them due to the intervention of the first

respondent and his wife. The petitioner apprehends that the

separation of the children from her would result in loss of the

intimacy that the children had with her. The petitioner is in a

depressed state of mind due to the loss of her children.

According to the petitioner, she has come know from her cousins

working in Saudi Arabia that the children were not being looked

after well, by their step mother, that they are discarded and

unattended and that due to the lack of motherly care and

attention they are not doing well in their studies.    It is the

W.P(Crl.)345/2010              5

contention of the petitioner that the custody of the children with

the first respondent and his second wife is not at all beneficial to

the children.      Though the petitioner had submitted a

representation to the office of the third respondent, no action

was taken on the said petition. The said petition is Ext.P2. The

petitioner then approached this Court by filing WP(Crl)23/2009.

However, this Court relegated her to the Family Court.

      6. The petitioner thereafter filed OP.150/2009 before the

Family Court, Malappuram under Section 25 of the Guardian and

Wards Act for necessary reliefs. Though the first respondent had

appeared in the said case initially, through his power of attorney

holder, he subsequently remained absent. Therefore, the first

respondent was set ex parte and O.P.15/2009 was allowed as per

Ext.P3 order on 15-7-2009.     According to the petitioner, though

the first respondent is aware of Ext.P3 order, he has not handed

over custody of the children to the petitioner.    Since the first

respondent and the children are in Jeddah in Saudi Arabia, the

petitioner has no means of executing the orders of the Family

Court. The children are under illegal custody in view of Ext.P3

order, and therefore, the petitioner has approached this Court by

filing the above writ petition.

W.P(Crl.)345/2010              6

      7. This writ petition was admitted on 2-9-2010. Notice was

ordered to respondents 1 to 4 by speed post. On 22-9-2010,

respondents 1 and 2 entered appearance. Vakalath was filed on

behalf of the second respondent. The counsel sought time for

filing vakalath on behalf of the first respondent. The case was

thereupon posted for the objections of respondents 1 and 2

to 4-10-2010. On 4-10-2010 the counsel for respondents 1 and 2

submitted that the second respondent had filed a counter

statement wherein the contentions of both respondents 1 and 2

were     set out.  The counsel submitted that though he was

continuing to appear for the second respondent, he had not been

able to secure a vakalath of the first respondent and to file the

same before this Court in time. On his request, further time was

granted and the case was posted to 18-10-2010.

      8. Meanwhile a statement      was    filed  on    behalf of

respondents 3 and 4 on 22-9-2010       wherein it has been stated

that there was marital discord between the first respondent and

the petitioner during their stay at Jeddah and that they had

approached the Consulate General in October 2007 for

intervention and further that it was with the help of the

Consulate that they had gone to India to settle their family

W.P(Crl.)345/2010              7

disputes. It is also stated in the said statement that the first

respondent had produced a receipt for payment of `44,892/-

towards maintenance of the petitioner.              According to

respondents 3 and 4, the first respondent had produced the

children before the Consulate whenever he was asked to do so.

On enquiry, the children had said that they were happy with

their father. The Consulate General of India had also arranged

telephone call facilities to the petitioner and the petitioner had

spoken to her children over the phone in the Consulate on

several occasions.     The first respondent had given another

telephone number over which, according to him the petitioner

could contact the children after 2 p.m on any day. With respect

to the prayer for producing the minor children what is stated is

that since the first respondent who is the sponsor of the children

was not willing, the children could not be sent without the

permission of the sponsor. Though the Consulate had asked the

first respondent to go to India and settle the matrimonial

disputes he had informed the Consulate that the children were

attending School, which would be disrupted, that he had his

family at Jeddah and that his sponsor was not giving him

vacation. Any how, he assured that he would try to go to India as

W.P(Crl.)345/2010              8

early as possible. He also informed the Consulate that he had

engaged a counsel to plead on his behalf before this Court.

      9.    The second respondent filed a counter affidavit on

behalf of both respondents 1 and 2 on 4-10-2010 wherein, after

denying the allegations in the writ petition, she has stated that

the children are living happily with the first respondent at

Jeddah.     It is her contention that the children being in the

custody of their father are not under illegal detention.

According to her, the first respondent is initiating action to set

aside Ext.P3 order passed ex parte. She has further stated that

the first respondent is a law abiding citizen, who respects the

orders of this Court and that he is not able to appear in Court

only because his sponsor was not permitting him to leave the

country for the reason that, he has not discharged a financial

liability that he owed to his employer.

      10. In spite of the stand adopted by the second respondent

in her counter affidavit on 4-10-2010 the counsel for respondents

1 and 2 sought two days time to apprise the court of the precise

date on which the children shall be produced before this Court

or the Family Court. Thereupon, this Court passed an order to

the effect that the children were expected to be produced before

W.P(Crl.)345/2010             9

this Court or the Family Court within a period of ten days.

Thereafter, the case     was    posted  to 20-10-2010. On the

said date, the counsel for respondents 1 and 2 submitted in

Court that he was constrained to report no instructions from

respondents 1 and 2. The children were also not produced.

This Court noted that the children were being kept away from

the jurisdiction of this Court.     However, as a matter of

indulgence, time was granted to respondents 1 and 2 to produce

the children, upto 27-10-2010. It was also ordered that if the

children were not produced, appropriate further directions

would be issued after hearing the submissions of the learned

Govt. Pleader and the Assistant Solicitor General of India on

behalf of respondents 3 and 4. On 27-10-2010, the learned Govt.

Pleader sought time to file a statement on behalf of the fifth

respondent and therefore,       the  matter    was posted     to

3-11-2010. On 3-11-2010, this Court noted that the children

were not produced and also took note of the submission of the

learned counsel for respondents 1 and 2 that the children were

still at Saudi Arabia. Time was granted as a last chance for the

statement of the Police and the matter was posted to 8-11-2010.

      11.    A detailed order was passed by us on 8-11-2010,

W.P(Crl.)345/2010               10

noticing the plight of the petitioner and narrating the

proceedings initiated by her one after another to secure the

custody of her children. Since she could not get any relief in

spite of positive directions issued by the Family Court as well as

initiation of criminal proceedings, she had approached this Court

with     the    present  petition  invoking   the   extraordinary

constitutional jurisdiction of this Court under Art.226 of the

Constitution.     We also noted the conduct of the counsel for

respondents 1 and 2 in submitting before court that he was

appearing for respondents 1 and 2 and after we had acted on his

submissions,      believing that it was the submission of a

responsible counsel, he had conveniently back tracked and

reported no instructions from his clients, when we issued an

order directing production of the children before this Court.

Respondents 3 and 4 as well as the fifth respondent were also

not able to furnish details of the action taken by them.

Therefore, we issued peremptory directions to all the authorities.

The order being a lengthy one, the relevant portion thereof is

extracted hereunder:-

             "6.     Notice  was ordered     to  all the

      respondents.      Respondents 1 and 2 appeared

      before Court. But, later the counsel conveniently

W.P(Crl.)345/2010              11

      reported no instructions when this Court issued

      certain directions to them to produce the children

      before Court.       The fifth respondent has not

      furnished to the Court the details of the action

      taken by the State of Kerala to secure the

      presence of the first respondent as accused in

      Crime No: 345/2008 of Nilambur Police Station.

      We have also not been apprised of the fate or

      action taken in Crime No: 345/2008 of Nilambur

      Police Station.

             7. We have no hesitation to opine that the

      inability of the petitioner to secure custody of her

      children in spite of the proceedings initiated by

      her is a shame on the system and amounts to the

      negation of the concept of rule of law.      If this

      Court cannot wipe her tears invoking the

      jurisdiction under Art.226 of the Constitution of

      India the jurisdiction will be reduced to absolute

      emptiness. Respondents 3 and 4 are represented

      by the Central Government Standing Counsel.

      Fifth respondent is also represented by the

      learned Govt. Pleader. We have not been apprised

      of the fate of proceedings initiated in Crime No:

      345/2008 of Nilambur Police Station where we are

      assured that the presence of the first respondent

      has not been secured so far and he is an

      absconding accused.

W.P(Crl.)345/2010              12

             8. We do think that peremptory directions

      must be issued in the matter to respondents 3 to 5

      to secure the presence of the first respondent and

      two minor children of the petitioner before this

      Court at the earliest.        It is a slur on the

      Constitution and the concept of rule of law that

      the Courts have not been able to give the

      petitioner the relief which she richly deserves.

             9.   We want the learned Asst.Solicitor

      General of India and the learned Director General

      of Prosecutions to appear before us on behalf of

      respondents 3,4 and 5. We want them to explain

      why the presence of the children has not been

      assured before this Court in spite of the specific

      directions issued.    We want to know why fifth

      respondent is not taking necessary interest to

      procure the presence of the first respondent, an

      absconding accused in Crime No: 345/2008 of

      Nilambur Police Station.        The learned Govt.

      Pleader on behalf of the fifth respondent submits

      that the State of Kerala has been attempting

      through its Police officers to contact the first

      respondent and request/direct him to produce the

      children before the Court. But first respondent

      has not done the same so far. We do not expect

      the fifth respondent to merely request the first

      respondent humbly to make the children available.

      Effective action must be taken by respondent No:5

W.P(Crl.)345/2010               13

      to ensure that the absconding accused is brought

      to law and his presence is assured to the Criminal

      Court, when such presence is required. At any

      rate, we expect respondents 3,4 and 5 to take

      necessary action to ensure that the children are

      produced before Court on the next date of posting.

      Call this petition again on 15/11/2010. We want

      the learned DGP and the learned ASGI to appear

      before this Court and file necessary statements to

      explain to the Court the steps taken to secure the

      presence of the first respondent and the children

      before Courts.

             10. We need not specifically mention that it

      must certainly be within the legal jurisdiction and

      competence of respondents 3 and 4 to impound

      the passport of the first respondent, an absconding

      accused and the two minor children who have

      been kept away from the jurisdiction of the Courts

      in India and get them repatriated to India to

      facilitate completion of proceedings against them.

               11. We need only mention that all necessary

      steps must be taken by respondents 3 to 5 and the

      learned DGP and the ASGI must file statements on

      15/11/2010 to apprise the Court of the steps

      taken."



     12. On 15-11-2010 when the case was called, respondents

1 and 2 entered appearance through a fresh counsel and prayed

W.P(Crl.)345/2010             14

for three days time to report to this Court the date on which the

children shall be made available to this Court. We noted that the

children were not made available on the said date also.

However, copies of the statements filed by the Director General

of Prosecutions and the learned Assistant Solicitor General of

India    were directed to be furnished to the counsel for the

petitioner and the case was posted to 23-11-2010. In the above

circumstances, on 23-11-2010 the counsel for respondents 1 and

2 submitted that respondents 1 and 2 shall ensure the presence

of the children before this Court on 13-12-2010. According to

the counsel, time was sought for the reason that the children

were having their examinations till 8-12-2010. Taking a lenient

view, the prayer of the counsel for respondents 1 and 2 was

granted. It has also been noted in the order dated 23-11-2010

that we were accepting the undertaking that the children shall

be produced on 13-12-2010.

      13. In the above circumstances, the case was again posted

to 14-12-2010.      However, the children were not produced.

Faced with the above situation, we passed the following detailed

order:-

             "This order must be read in continuation of

     the earlier orders passed by this Court in the

W.P(Crl.)345/2010             15

     matter, particularly the order dated 8/11/10 passed

     by us.      Subsequently the case was posted to

     15/11/10 and 23/11/10. Respondents 1 and 2 had

     entered appearance before this Court. They were

     represented by a fresh counsel.   On 15/11/10 and

     23/11/10 it was undertaken before this Court by

     respondents 1 and 2 that they shall ensure that the

     children    are   produced   before    this  Court.

     Accordingly, the matter was posted to 13/12/10.

             2.   On 13/12/10, respondents 1 and 2

     unashamedly stated before this Court        through

     their counsel that they are not able to produce the

     children. This Court is disturbed by the manner in

     which respondents 1 and 2 have attempted to take

     this Court for a ride. This Court had acted on their

     undertaking and further steps were not directed

     on 15/11/10 and 23/11/10 when the matter came up

     for hearing only on the basis of the solemn

     undertaking given by respondents 1 and 2 through

     their counsel before this Court.

             3. We have adverted to the facts in detail in

     the earlier order dated 8/11/10.   This Court is to

     appreciate the plight of the helpless petitioner.

     This Court must take note of the machinations of

     respondents 1 and 2 who have defied the law and

     the concept of rule of law by their unjustified

     conduct.       There has been a violation of

     undertaking.    We hence direct that that notice be

W.P(Crl.)345/2010             16

     issued to respondents 1 and 2 to show cause as to

     why       proceedings in contempt should not be

     initiated against respondents 1 and 2. Counsel for

     respondents 1 and 2 take notice.    Statement shall

     be filed by respondents 1 and 2 who shall

     personally appear before this Court on the next

     date of posting i.e.., 23/12/10 to explain why

     proceedings in contempt should not be initiated

     against them for having violated the undertaking

     given before this Court.

             4. The more important duty of this Court is to

     secure the presence of the two minor children of

     the petitioner.    The learned Government Pleader

     submits that the State police has taken all

     necessary steps to secure the presence of the 1st

     respondent. Respondents 3 and 4 are represented

     by the learned Assistant Solicitor General of India.

     The learned Assistant Solicitor General of India

     submits that as the 1st respondent had undertaken

     to produce the children before this Court on

     13/12/10 and this Court had given them time to

     produce the children, the 3rd respondent had bona

     fide released the passports of the children and the

     1st respondent to the 1st respondent to facilitate

     production of the children before this Court. Thus,

     the 1st respondent is now in possession of the

     passports of himself and the children.    Because of

     what transpired after 15/11/10, respondents 3 and

W.P(Crl.)345/2010                17

     4 have not taken any steps to impound the passport

     and to move the authorities concerned for

     cancellation of the Visa. They shall do the needful

     now, if so directed by this Court, submits the

     learned Assistant Solicitor General of India.

             5. We should not lose sight of all the relevant

     facts.      The 1st respondent is an absconding

     accused.      He is a fugitive.      His presence is

     required before the criminal courts in India. He

     faces prosecution in one case.       We are satisfied

     that his passport must be impounded forthwith. We

     direct respondents 3 and 4 to ensure that necessary

     steps are taken to impound the passport of the 1st

     respondent and ensure that the 1st respondent and

     the children are brought back to India at the

     earliest - at any rate, prior to 23/12/10.

             6. Call this petition again on 23/12/10.    We

     command respondents 3 and 4 to ensure that the 1st

     respondent and the two children - Mohammed

     Salman, aged 12 years and Murad, aged 4 = years,

     are produced before this Court on that date.

             7.  Hand over a copy of this order to the

     learned Assistant Solicitor General of India."



     14. The case again came up before Court on 23-12-2010.

On the said date, the second respondent was present in person.

Respondents 1 and 2 were represented through counsel.        The

W.P(Crl.)345/2010              18

counsel submitted that respondents 1 and 2 were still unable to

secure the presence of the children before Court. The learned

Govt. Pleader submitted on behalf of the fifth respondent that

necessary steps were being taken to get the first respondent

extradited to India since he was an absconding accused in a case

registered under Section 498A of the Indian Penal Code pending

before a criminal court. On behalf of respondents 3 and 4, the

Assistant Solicitor General of India submitted that the third

respondent had instructed the first respondent to appear in

Court on 23-12-2010 failing which steps would be taken to

impound his passport. In view of the soft attitude adopted by

respondents 3 and 4 towards the first respondent, this Court

noted its impression that the third respondent was also hand in

glove with the first respondent in his efforts to avoid the process

of Court.      Since the order dated 23-12-2010 also contained

peremptory directions, the same is extracted hereunder:-

               " This order must be read in continuation

        of the earlier order passed by this Court resting

        with the order dated 14.12.2010. Today when

        the case is called, respondent No.2 is present.

        The second respondent has filed an affidavit.

        Respondents 1 and 2 are represented by their

        counsel .     Counsel for respondents 1 and 2

W.P(Crl.)345/2010               19

        submits that respondents 1 and 2 are still unable

        to secure the presence of the children before

        this Court in spite of the specific directions

        issued earlier. The learned Government Pleader

        on behalf of the fifth respondent submits that all

        necessary steps are being taken to get

        extradition of respondent No.1 who is required

        as an absconding accused in a pending case

        registered under Section 498A IPC before the

        criminal court.      Respondents 3 and 4 are

        represented by the learned ASGI. Surprisingly,

        respondents 3 and 4 have not taken any steps to

        impound the passport of the first respondent and

        to get him deported into India. On behalf of

        respondents 3 and 4 , the learned ASGI submits

        that a statement has been filed by respondents 3

        and 4.    The children are available in Saudi

        Arabia. The children can come to India. So far

        as     the  first   respondent   is   concerned,

        respondents 3 and 4 take the interesting stand

        that inasmuch as the employer of the first

        respondent is not relieving the first respondent

        on the plea that amounts are due from him to

        the employer, respondents 3 and 4 have not

        been able to ensure his presence before the

        court today. However, the learned ASGI submits

        that respondent No.3 has instructed respondent

        No.1 to appear before this court today and

W.P(Crl.)345/2010                20

        failing that steps shall be taken to impound the

        passport of the first respondent. We had very

        definitely directed respondents 3 and 4 to

        impound       the      passport    and     ensure

        extradition/deporting of the first respondent.

        The impression is irresistible that respondent

        No.3 is also hand in glove with the first

        respondent and is helping him to avoid the

        process of the court.       Otherwise we fail to

        understand why steps have not been taken to

        impound the passport and to get his visa

        cancelled in which case he will be obliged to

        come to India.

               2. We do however accept the statement of

        the learned ASGI that inasmuch as the first

        respondent has not appeared before the court

        today, steps shall be taken immediately to get

        his    passport    impounded     and    get  him

        extradited/deported into India in accordance

        with law by the next date of posting, i.e. on

        5.01.2011. The fifth respondent must also take

        all necessary steps to get the first respondent

        extradited.

               3. On 5.01.2011, we want respondent

        Nos.3 and 4 to positively inform the court that

        the passport of the first respondent has been

        impounded and that steps have been taken to

        get visa of the first respondent cancelled.

W.P(Crl.)345/2010                 21

               4.   The learned counsel for the first

        respondent submits that the children can be sent

        over to India. He is willing to hand over the

        children to the third respondent, it is submitted.

        He will also arrange to purchase the tickets for

        transportation of the children to India at his

        expense.      He shall entrust the children along

        with the tickets to the third respondent. While

        proceedings for impounding the passport and

        cancellation of the visa of the first respondent

        must continue, we direct the third respondent to

        ensure that the children are sent to India before

        5.01.2011.

               5. Call this petition again on 5.01.2011 . By

        that day, we expect the third respondent to get

        the passport of the first respondent impounded

        and his visa cancelled. The third respondent

        must take necessary steps to get the first

        respondent extradited/deported to India by that

        date. At any rate, the third respondent must

        ensure that the children of the first respondent

        are transported to India before the next date of

        posting , i.e. 5.01.2011.

               The second respondent is present. We

        direct her to appear in person on 5.01.2011.

        The matter shall be reckoned as part heard.

        Furnish copies of the order to the learned ASGI

        and the learned Government Pleader forthwith."

W.P(Crl.)345/2010              22

     15. On 6-1-2011 though the case was posted for production

of the children, they were not produced. However, all concerned

offered to bring the children to India if some more time were

granted. The second respondent even offered to go to Saudi

Arabia to bring back the children. The order dated 6-1-2011 is

also reproduced hereunder:-

                "The petitioner is represented by his

          counsel. Respondents 1 and 2 are represented

          by their counsel.     The 2nd respondent is

          personally present also.       On behalf of

          respondents 3 and 4 a statement has been filed

          to apprise the Court of the steps taken by him

          to ensure the production of the minor children

          before this Court today. That statement is filed

          on behalf of respondents 3 and 4 by the

          Central Government counsel.      Various steps

          have been enumerated in detail.            The

          circumstances under which respondents 3 and

          4 could not assure the presence of the children

          before Court today have been explained. We

          have heard the learned ASGI. We accept the

          request of the learned ASGI for some further

          time to enable respondents 3 and 4 to assure

          presence of the children before this Court.

          The learned counsel for respondents 1 and 2

          submits that respondents 1 and 2 are also

W.P(Crl.)345/2010               23

          taking all efforts to ensure that the children

          are produced before this Court. The statement

          filed on behalf of respondents 3 and 4 reveals

          that the passport has already been impounded

          and necessary action has been taken in

          furtherance of such impounding of passport.

          This Court is further apprised that respondents

          3 and 4 are taking necessary steps to get the

          visa issued in favour of the 1st respondent

          cancelled.   The learned counsel for the 2nd

          respondent submits that if some time is given,

          the 2nd respondent shall herself attempt to

          proceed to Saudi Arabia and bring back the

          children. We need only mention that the 2nd

          respondent,     against     whom      contempt

          proceedings have already been initiated, must

          show her bona fides by complying with that

          submission.

                2.  Call    this   petition    again  on

          19.01.2011.      By    that  day,   we   expect

          respondents 3 and 4 to ensure that the

          children are produced before this Court. We

          expect the 2nd respondent, against whom

          contempt proceedings are contemplated, to

          show    her   bona    fides  by   abiding  her

          submissions that she shall proceed to Saudi

          Arabia and bring back the children personally

          to the Court.

W.P(Crl.)345/2010               24

                3.   We further direct the 3rd respondent

          to file a detailed affidavit explaining to the

          Court the steps taken by it to comply with the

          order of this Court."

      16. In the above circumstances, the second respondent

filed a petition for Special Leave to Appeal (Crl.) No: 48/2011

challenging the order dated 23-12-2010 passed by us directing

that the passport of the first respondent be impounded.

However, the Honourable Supreme Court dismissed the said

petition, as per the following order:-

             "Taken on Board.

             We are not inclined to interfere in this matter.

      In case respondent No:2 produces the children

      within two weeks before the High Court, the High

      Court may reconsider the impugned order.

             In the meanwhile the operation of the

      impugned order is stayed for two weeks.

             The special leave petition is dismissed."

Thus, at the instance of the second respondent, the proceedings

remained stayed for two weeks. Though the matter was posted

on 19-1-2011 thereafter, since the Indian Embassy at Saudi

Arabia was not able to function due to floods, the third

respondent pleaded for time. On behalf of the third respondent,

though a counter affidavit was filed, it was noticed that the same

W.P(Crl.)345/2010              25

was sworn to by one S.D.Moorthy who was not the third

respondent. The Court was informed that the passport of the

first respondent had been revoked by the Consulate General and

that his visa had to be cancelled at the instance of his employer.

This Court ordered the third respondent to personally file an

affidavit as per order dated 28-1-2011.

      17. On 31-1-2011, though time was granted to the third

respondent for production of the children, they were not

produced. On 1-2-2011 the third respondent again prayed for

time. The Court granted time and also wanted to be apprised of

the steps taken by the fifth respondent to secure the presence of

the first respondent and the children before Court. Though the

Director General of Police filed a statement pursuant to the

above order, the children were still not available. The employer

had been addressed to provide an exit permit to the first

respondent to leave the country. Finally, on 15-2-2011, the third

respondent personally filed an affidavit informing the court that

the passport of the petitioner had been revoked, that the

Consulate had requested the Saudi Foreign office to render

assistance and that the employer had also been approached in an

effort to comply with the orders of this Court.

W.P(Crl.)345/2010              26

      18.     On 11-3-2011 counsel for respondents 1 and 2

produced copy of the visa and tickets of the children and

submitted that though they had taken all steps to bring the

children to India, they could not be brought for the reason that

they had taken an adamant stand and had refused to come to

India without the first respondent. On 4-4-2011, the Director

General of Police filed an affidavit informing the Court that

proceedings under Sections 82 and 83 of the Code of Civil

Procedure had been initiated against the first respondent by the

Judicial First Class Magistrate's Court, Nilambur in the case

instituted against him for an offence under Section 498A IPC.

The Assistant Solicitor General of India filed a statement that the

Consulate General of India in Jeddah had met the Director

General of local foreign office twice and had impressed upon him

the seriousness of the matter and requested for their assistance

to deport the first respondent and the minor children to India.

However, it was understood from the authorities that they could

not force a private company to deport an employee when the

said employee has financial obligations to the company.

      19. Meanwhile, the Court was informed that the second

respondent had undertaken a trip to Jeddah during the court

W.P(Crl.)345/2010             27

vacations in an attempt to bring the children back to India.

Since she was not able to return, time was granted for her

appearance.      In the above circumstances on 6-6-2011 the

counsel for the second respondent informed the court that the

second respondent had already conveyed to him, her inability to

bring back the children.    The counsel also filed a memo dated

21-6-2011 reporting that he had no instructions from the first

respondent and relinquished his vakalath.    On 28-6-2011 it was

submitted on behalf of the fifth respondent that the crime

registered against respondents 1 and 2 under Section 498A read

with Section 34 IPC had been charge sheeted and taken on file

by the Judicial First Class Magistrates Court, Nilambur as

C.C.No: 321/2008 and that after trial the co-accused had all been

acquitted. The trial was conducted after splitting up the charge

against the first respondent.   A warrant has thereafter been

issued against the first respondent. On the request of the Circle

Inspector of Police, steps under Sections 82 and 83 of the Code

of Criminal Procedure were initiated against the first respondent

and proclamation was also issued. Regarding the complaint of

the petitioner that related to the forcible taking away of her

children, though a crime had been registered, the same had

W.P(Crl.)345/2010              28

been referred as mistake of fact. Therefore, she preferred a

protest complaint against the same. On 28-6-2011, the learned

Assistant Solicitor General was directed to ascertain whether an

extradition treaty was in existence between India and Saudi

Arabia and to inform the court as to what action had been taken

under the said treaty if such a treaty was in existence.

      20. Though the above developments were all taking place,

there was no prospect of the children being produced before us.

Neither the parties before us nor the respective counsel were

able to offer any indication as to when the children could be

produced.       Though we had issued peremptory directions and

also initiated action in contempt against the respondents 1 and

2, a solution for the cardinal problem of securing the presence of

the children before us was still eluding us.   The counsel for the

petitioner was reminding us of the agony of the petitioner, a

helpless mother who has been deprived of her children. Since

the situation before us was unique in many respects and

required a dispassionate approach and analysis as well,        we

appointed Shri. S.Sreekumar, senior Advocate as amicus curae

to assist us. The matter was thereafter posted for hearing. All

the parties were directed to file any further affidavits that may

W.P(Crl.)345/2010             29

be necessary. Thereafter, the matter was heard.

      21. A number of statements and affidavits have been filed

on behalf of the respondents in this case, at various stages of the

proceedings. The statements and affidavits filed on behalf of

respondents 1 and 2 clearly evidence their shifting stands. The

various steps taken and action initiated by respondents 3 to 5 are

evident from their statements. The statements and affidavits

shall be referred to as and when reference thereto becomes

necessary.

      22. We have heard Adv. P.Shamsudin who appears for the

petitioner, Adv. K.Abdul Jawad for the second respondent, Adv.

E.S.Ashraf,      Central Government       counsel     and    Shri.

P.Parameswaran Nair, Assistant Solicitor General of India for

respondents 3 and 4        and Shri. T.Asaf Ali, State Public

Prosecutor for the fifth respondent.      Senior Advocate Shri.

S.Sreekumar who was appointed as Amicus curae in this case

also made his submissions in detail.     We place on record our

deep appreciation for the assistance rendered by the learned

Amicus curae.

      23.      According to the counsel for the petitioner,

respondents 1 and 2 were hand in glove with each other. The

W.P(Crl.)345/2010               30

second respondent, an aged lady with very little education and

the mother of the first respondent was only acting according to

the directions of the first respondent before this Court. The first

respondent is a person who has scant respect for the law, a

person who has been evading the judicial process at all levels.

On 22-9-2010, the second respondent has filed a counter

affidavit in this case alleging that the petitioner has filed the

present writ petition with ulterior motives/malicious intentions

and suppressing/distorting material facts.             As per the

statements in the said affidavit, her son, the first respondent had

come back to India in the year 2008 with the intention of taking

back the petitioner and children. However, since the petitioner

refused to accompany him, the first respondent had returned

with his children to Jeddah. According to her, since then the

children are residing with the first respondent happily and they

are attending school regularly. The children are residing with

their father out of their free will and wish.        Therefore, the

children are not under any illegal custody. Though the first

respondent is aware of the above proceedings before this Court,

he is not in a position to appear before this Court in person since

he requires the consent of his sponsor to come down to India.

W.P(Crl.)345/2010              31

He has some financial liability with the employer and therefore,

his sponsor is unwilling to relieve him until he discharges the

said liability. For the above reasons,    it is contended that the

petitioner was not entitled to any of the reliefs claimed.

      24.    The first respondent was adopting a similar tactic

before the criminal court also.        Crime 345/2008 that was

registered under Section 498A IPC was split up. Since the first

respondent could not be apprehended the trial was not effective

and all the other accused except the first respondent were

acquitted by the Judicial First Class Magistrate's Court,

Nilambur. In the said case, the first and second respondents as

well as their sister Fousiya had been granted bail by order dated

20-6-2008 by the Sessions Court, Manjeri. However, the first

respondent did not comply with the conditions imposed by the

Court for the grant of bail and therefore, a warrant is pending

execution against him.

      25. The first respondent has got married to another lady

and has a child in her.     Since   he was not maintaining the

petitioner, she had filed M.C.448/2008 before the Family Court

under Section 125 of the Code of Criminal Procedure claiming

maintenance.     The petition was allowed directing the first

W.P(Crl.)345/2010              32

respondent to pay maintenance to the petitioner at the rate of `

2250/- per month. The said order is not being complied with by

the first respondent. The petitioner had also filed O.P.522/2008

before the Family Court, Malappuram for the recovery of an

amount of `50,000/-, being the amount misappropriated by the

first respondent as well as for past maintenance.       The said

petition has also been allowed by the Family Court as per Ext.P1

order. According to counsel for the petitioner none of the above

orders have been complied with by the first respondent. Apart

from the above violations of law committed by the first

respondent, he has also removed the minor children of the

petitioner forcibly from the custody of the petitioner.

       26. It is also contended by the counsel that the children

are not being looked after well by their step mother and for the

above reason, they have become backward in their studies. The

petitioner has been denied the custody of her children in spite of

orders issued by the competent courts. The children have also

been deprived of the care, attention and love of their mother by

the machinations of the first respondent. The counsel contends

that the first respondent is fully aware of the above petition as

well as the day to day proceedings of this Court, being apprised

W.P(Crl.)345/2010               33

thereof by the second respondent. However, he has not cared to

comply with the orders of this Court or to submit to the

jurisdiction of this Court. The conduct of the first respondent is

an affront to the authority of this Court. The second respondent

who is acting at his behest has been aiding and facilitating the

illegal acts of the first respondent. The shifting stands adopted

by them in these proceedings betray their utter lack of sincerity

to the commitments and undertakings made in Court, on their

behalf. Though the second respondent had offered to travel to

Saudi Arabia to bring back the children, she has done precious

little to honour her commitment. Consequently, the petitioner

has been left to bear the searing agony of the loss of society of

her children, all alone.      Therefore, she seeks the issue of

necessary coercive orders to compel respondents 1 and 2 to obey

the orders of the Courts and to produce the children.

      27. It is contended on behalf of the second respondent that

she is an unnecessary party to these proceedings. The children

had gone with her son and were happily residing with him of

their own free will. Though she had tried to bring them to India

in obedience to the orders of this Court, she could not succeed

because the children refused to accompany her to India. Her son

W.P(Crl.)345/2010             34

has not been able to appear before this Court with the children

because his sponsor was not willing to relieve him for the reason

that, he has incurred some financial liability from his employer.

      28. The Assistant Solicitor General of India submitted that

all efforts have been made to secure the presence of the children

before this Court but the children could not be brought because

they refused to travel in the company of the embassy officials.

Attempts were made to have the first respondent and his

children deported to India. However, the Saudi Government was

not willing. The first respondent could not be deported because

the policy of the Saudi Government was not to interfere in cases

where the employer was against such deportation.      Since   the

Government       of India  has   entered     into an   extradition

treaty with the Saudi Government, steps have been initiated for

the first respondent to be extradited to India. Action in this

regard is stated to be progressing. The fifth respondent has also

put forward more or less the very same contentions.

      29.     Senior Advocate Shri. S. Sreekumar, the learned

amicus curae has taken us through the provisions of the

Extradition Act, 1962. According to the counsel, respondents 3,4

and 5 are duty bound to initiate action under the provisions of

W.P(Crl.)345/2010               35

the Extradition Act and to have the first respondent extradited to

India. It is pointed out that there could be no difficulty in getting

the first respondent extradited since there is an extradition

treaty in existence between the two countries.         A concerted

effort on the part of respondents 3 to 5 would certainly yield the

desired result, it is submitted. We have considered the rival

contentions of the counsel appearing for the contesting parties,

anxiously.

      30. We have already adverted to and noticed the plight of

the petitioner, a hapless mother and a discarded wife, who has

been knocking at the doors of various courts, trying to obtain the

custody of her children, through the process of law. However

her efforts have not yielded any results so far. The crucial facts

of the case are not in dispute.       The marriage between the

petitioner and the first respondent is admitted. The further fact

that the two children, Mohammed Salman and Murad were born

out of the wedlock is also admitted.       Both the children are

minors. The first respondent was working at Jeddah in Saudi

Arabia. He had taken the petitioner and the children to Jeddah

in May 2007. However, marital discord forced them to approach

the Consulate General who intervened and the petitioner, the

W.P(Crl.)345/2010              36

first respondent and the children were sent back to India in

October, 2007 to settle their disputes. However, the disputes

were not settled. On reaching India, the children were admitted

to a local school.     Meanwhile, the first respondent married

another woman.        The first respondent also took away the

children from their school on 4-7-2008 and transported them to

Saudi Arabia. The children have been remaining there ever

since.

      31.    The petitioner had submitted Ext.P2 to the Indian

Ambassador of Saudi Arabia requesting him to take action

against the first respondent to hand over the custody of the

children to her. According to her, there was no response to the

said complaint.     Meanwhile the petitioner had submitted a

complaint to the Nilambur Police alleging an offence under

Section 498A IPC against respondents 1 and 2 and Fousiya,

sister of the first respondent. A crime was registered as Crime

No:345/2008 in which the first respondent was granted bail as

per order dated 20-6-2008 by the Sessions Court, Manjeri.

However, the first respondent did not comply with the conditions

stipulated in the said order. He also did not appear before the

Judicial First Class Magistrate's Court, Nilambur in the said

W.P(Crl.)345/2010             37

criminal case. Therefore, the case against him was split up, the

other accused were acquitted after trial and an arrest warrant

has been issued against the first respondent. The said warrant is

pending execution against him.

     32. The petitioner had also filed MC 448/2008 before the

Family Court, Malappurm under Section 125 of the Code of

Criminal Procedure claiming maintenance.            In the said

proceedings also the first respondent did not appear. An order

has been passed by the Court in the said case directing the first

respondent to pay maintenance to the petitioner at the rate of

Rs.2250/- per month. It is not disputed that the said order is also

not being complied with by the first respondent.

     33. When the children were taken away from the custody

of the petitioner, she had approached this Court by filing WP(crl)

No: 23/2009.      However, the same was withdrawn, without

prejudice to her right to approach the Family Court. Accordingly

she filed O.P(GW)150/2009 claiming custody of her children. In

the said case, though the first petitioner initially appeared

through his power of attorney holder, he remained absent

thereafter. Therefore he was set ex parte and as per Ext.P3

W.P(Crl.)345/2010             38

order the petition was allowed directing the first respondent to

hand over custody of the children to the petitioner.

      34. The petitioner had earlier filed O.P522/2008 for the

recovery of amounts due to her as well as past maintenance. The

petition was allowed as per Ext.P1 order. The said petition was

contested by the first respondent through his power of attorney

who was also examined as a witness in the case. As per the said

order, the petitioner was held entitled to recover an amount of

`50,000/- from the first respondent with interest at the rate of

9% per annum. An amount of `44,000/- was ordered to be paid

as past maintenance to her. The said order has also not been

complied with by the first respondent.        It is in the above

background that the conduct of the first respondent in the

present case requires to be considered.

      35. We have already referred to the day to day proceedings

of the above case       The contradictory stands adopted by

respondents 1 and 2 are clearly discernible from the said

proceedings.      The second respondent in her counter affidavit

dated 22-9-2010 has stated in paragraph 1 itself that the facts of

the case were known to her as instructed by the first respondent.

She has denied the entire allegations made by the petitioner in

W.P(Crl.)345/2010             39

this writ petition. According to her, the first respondent came

back to India in the year 2008 with an intention to take back the

petitioner and the children. However, she declined to return.

Therefore, according to her "the first respondent had to return

with his children to Jeddah......." "Since then, the children are

residing with the first respondent happily and they are attending

school regularly."      The counter affidavit of the second

respondent shows that the first respondent is fully aware of the

orders passed against him by the Family Court in the various

proceedings referred to above. It has also been stated that he

was taking necessary steps to set aside the ex parte order passed

against him.     According to the second respondent, the first

respondent is a law abiding citizen who has no intention at all to

disregard or disrespect the orders of this Court. He has not

appeared before this Court only for the reason that his employer

was not permitting him to be relieved.

      36. On 18-10-2010 the counsel for respondents 1 and 2,

Shri. P.Venugopal sought two day's time to apprise this Court of

the precise date on which the children shall be produced before

this Court or if so directed, before the Family Court within a

period of ten days. On the basis of the above submission, we

W.P(Crl.)345/2010              40

granted time and posted the case to 20-10-2010. However, on

20-10-2010 the counsel reported that he had no instructions

from respondents 1 and 2. Nevertheless, we indulgently granted

time till 27-10-2010 to produce the children. It was in the above

circumstances that the detailed order dated 8-11-2010 already

extracted hereinabove was passed, directing that the passport of

the first respondent be impounded and all efforts be taken to

ensure the presence of the children before us, by the official

respondents 3 to 5.

     37. When the case was taken up on 23-11-2010 the learned

counsel for respondents 1 and 2 submitted that the presence of

the children before this Court would be ensured on 13-12-2010.

The said order reads as follows:-

            "The learned counsel for respondents 1 and 2

    submits that respondents 1 and 2 shall ensure that the

    presence of the children before this Court is made

    available on 13-12-2010. It is submitted      that   the

    children      have their examinations till 8-12-2010 and

    it is hence that such a request is being made. We take

    a lenient view. We grant the prayer for respondents 1

    and 2. We accept their undertaking that the children

    shall be produced before this Court on 13-12-2010.

    Call on 13-12-2010".

W.P(Crl.)345/2010              41

     38. However, on 13-12-2010, the counsel for respondents 1

and 2 submitted that they are not able to produce the children.

We were disturbed and distressed at the manner in which the

party respondents were conducting themselves in the above

case. Therefore, we again passed a detailed order on 14-12-2010

expressing our displeasure and ordering the issue of notices to

respondents 1 and 2 directing them to show cause why action in

contempt should not be initiated against them for violation of the

undertaking. On 23-12-2010, the second respondent filed an

affidavit on behalf of respondents 1 and 2. In paragraph 4 of the

said affidavit, they have stated as follows:-

              "These respondents had undertaken to produce

        the children before this Hon'ble Court with bonafide

        intention and we have made all our sincere efforts to

        comply with the same. But the children are adamant

        on their stand that they will not come before this

        Hon'ble Court without the first respondent."

The second respondent has also narrated the efforts made by the

first respondent to have the children sent to India for the

purpose of being produced before this Court.         The second

respondent has further stated in paragraph 13 of her affidavit as

follows:-

W.P(Crl.)345/2010              42

             "It is further submitted that second respondent

      is even ready to go abroad and bring the children

      before the Court in order to comply undertaking."

     39. Meanwhile, respondents 3 and 4 were found not to

have initiated any steps to impound the passport of the first

respondent. Therefore, further directions were issued to them

directing them to comply with the said order. On 6-1-2011 when

the case came up, respondents 1 and 2 again submitted that they

were taking all efforts to ensure the presence of the children

before this Court. The second respondent also submitted that if

some time were given she would herself proceed to Saudi Arabia

and attempt to bring back the children. We have expressed our

expectation that she would abide by her submissions and fulfill

her undertaking. On 1-2-2011 we were told by the Assistant

Solicitor General of India that only two weeks time was required

to ensure presence of the children before the Court.

Therefore, time was granted. However, on 1-3-2011 we were

informed by the Assistant Solicitor General that respondents 3

and 4 were not able to comply with the direction to produce the

children. Though the case was again posted on various dates

thereafter, on 23-5-2011 we were informed that the second

respondent had undertaken a trip to Jeddah during the court

W.P(Crl.)345/2010              43

vacations, in an attempt to get the children to India and that she

had not returned. Therefore      we again      granted    time. On

6-6-2011 the counsel for the second respondent informed us

that it was not possible for her to bring the children to India.

Though it was represented on behalf of respondents 3 and 4 that

steps were in progress to get the first respondent extradited,

they were not in a position to inform us or to give us any idea as

to the time required for completing the said proceedings. It was

in the above circumstances that we have proceeded to finally

dispose of the matter.

      40. It is clear from the conduct of respondents 1 and 2 that

they have only been trying to protract these proceedings on one

pretext or the other.     Though initially the same Lawyer had

appeared for both respondents 1 and 2, it was submitted by the

said counsel that he had not been able to file any vakalath for the

first respondent. Though the same submission was repeated by

the counsel on 20-10-2010, on subsequent verification, we find

that the counsel had filed his vakalath for the first respondent as

early as on 22-9-2010. He has subsequently relinquished his

vakalath on 21-6-2011. Thereafter, for the second respondent,

there were change of vakalaths twice.        Subsequently, it was

W.P(Crl.)345/2010              44

submitted on behalf of respondents 1 and 2 that the children

would be produced and time for the above purpose was sought.

Though time was granted on a number of occasions, ultimately

they retracted from their commitments.       We had also been

assured that the children would be produced on 13-12-2010 after

the completion of their examinations on 8-12-2010. After taking

time for the said reason, it was later on submitted that it was not

possible to produce the children. The over all conduct of the

first respondent is far from satisfactory. He has deliberately

kept away from the various proceedings initiated before the

criminal courts and the family courts against him.         We are

thoroughly dissatisfied with the conduct of respondents 1 and 2.

Considering the extent of indulgence shown by us to them,

respondents ought to have reciprocated by co-operating with the

proceedings, if they had any respect for the Rule of Law or the

legal system of our country.

      41. We are aware that the children are both males. The

older one, born on 13-12-1997 is now more than 13 years old.

The younger son who was born on 1-6-2003 is about 9 years old.

The petitioner was deprived of their custody more than three

years ago. The long period of separation from their mother,

W.P(Crl.)345/2010             45

during the impressionable stages of their lives        would have

resulted in a considerable erosion of the affection and

attachment that they would have had for her.             That was

apparently the intention of the first respondent also. Obviously

the first respondent is now waiting for them to be old enough to

testify before Court that they do not want the company of their

mother or to be in her custody. We do not know to what extent

the minds of the children have been influenced by the first

respondent and his present wife to turn them against their own

mother, the petitioner. In this context, the following statement

in  paragraph      8   of the second respondent's affidavit dated

23-12-2010 assumes significance.

             "Thereafter the first respondent made all

      possible efforts to convince the children about the

      necessity of their presence before the Court. The

      first respondent even produced the children before

      the embassy officials at least on 3 occasions to get

      them ready to go India. But their efforts were also

      went in vain and children were adamant on their

      stand as they were afraid of the character of the

      petitioner."

It appears from the above statement that the hostility of the

children towards their mother has been influenced by stories

W.P(Crl.)345/2010              46

about her bad character.     If what respondents 3 and 4 submit

are true, it appears that the attitude of the children towards

their mother has undergone a drastic change over the past few

years.    Therefore, they are adamant that they do not want to

come back to their mother. Being the mother and the natural

guardian of the children the rights of the petitioner are

inviolable and sacrosanct.    The conduct of respondents 1 and 2

have deprived the petitioner of the fruits of her motherhood.

The mandate of our          Constitution that envisages special

protection for women and children compel us to hold that all

efforts must be made to set at naught the attempts of persons

like respondents 1 and 2 to deprive a helpless mother of her

children by adopting such devious methods as in the present

case. We have no hesitation to conclude that the statements

made in the affidavits filed by the second respondent in this case

regarding the respectability of the character and conduct of the

first respondent are only hollow rhetoric intended to appease

us.   Therefore, we are convinced that peremptory orders and

directions to produce the children are necessary to be issued.

In the event of non-compliance with the directions of this Court

to produce the children, action in contempt shall be initiated

W.P(Crl.)345/2010              47

against respondents 1 and 2 and others for non-compliance with

the said direction as well as for the violation of their solemn

undertaking given to this Court.

     42. We remind us that the provisions of our Constitution

mandates special protection to both women and children. The

conduct of respondents 1 and 2 in depriving the petitioner of her

children in open defiance of the lawful orders passed by the

competent courts of our Country only aggravates the culpability

thereof. Words are inadequate to describe the agony suffered by

the petitioner, of being deprived of her children for all these

years.      The impressionable minds of her children have been

polluted in such a manner and to such an extent that they have

been persuaded      to turn against their mother. Consequently,

she has been robbed of even the solace of the affection of her

children.     Therefore, the conduct of respondents 1 and 2

requires to be viewed seriously. We are conscious of the fact

that the injury suffered by the petitioner is not capable of being

compensated in terms of money but money would certainly

soften the severity of the injury caused to the petitioner, at least

to a limited extent. In a similar situation, where a litigant was

found guilty of persistent contumacious conduct, the Hon'ble

W.P(Crl.)345/2010              48

Supreme Court has held that award of exemplary costs should

follow as a rule. In Ila Vipin Pandya v. Smita Ambalal Patel

{AIR 2007 SC 2404} the Hon'ble Supreme Court has summed

up the position as follows:-

             "We have advisedly given the detailed history of

     this litigation to emphasize that those who attempt to

     take court proceedings lightly or try to subvert the

     judicial process to their advantage, do so at their peril.

     The imposition of exemplary costs must, as a

     consequence, follow."

In tune with the above dictum, it is only appropriate that

exemplary costs are awarded in this case also. We feel that

award of an appropriate amount of costs is necessary also as a

deterrent.       Therefore, we hold that in the facts and

circumstances of this case respondents 1 and 2 shall pay an

amount of Rs.5 lakhs each as costs to the petitioner.

     43. For the above reasons, this writ petition is allowed as

follows:-

     i) Respondents 1 to 4 are directed to produce the minor

children of the petitioner, Mohammed Salman, aged 12 years

and Murad aged 4 = years from the illegal custody of the first

respondent before this Court.

W.P(Crl.)345/2010              49

     ii) The children shall be produced in accordance with the

above direction, as expeditiously as possible and at any rate

within a period of three months from this day.

     iii) In the event of non-compliance with the directions in (i)

and (ii) above, action in contempt shall be initiated against

respondents 1 and 2 and others, inter alia, for the violation of

their solemn undertaking given to this Court as well.

     iv) Respondents 1 and 2 shall pay an amount of ` 5 lakhs

each to the petitioner as costs. If the amount of costs ordered to

be paid is not paid within three months from this day, the fifth

respondent shall recover the same from the assets of

respondents 1 and 2 by initiation of Revenue Recovery

proceedings against them.

     v) We direct the fifth respondent State of Kerala to take all

necessary steps to ensure that the first respondent is extradited

to India in accordance with law.

     Hand over copies of the judgment to the learned Director

General of Prosecution and the learned Assistant Solicitor

General of India forthwith. Call this petition again on 16th July,

2012 before the Bench dealing with Habeas Corpus Petitions for

appropriate further action.     Respondents 3,4 and 5 shall, if

W.P(Crl.)345/2010             50

children are not produced before Court within three months,

appear in person before the Court and file affidavits before Court

explaining the steps taken by them to implement the directions.


                                                   Sd/-
                                             R.BASANT
                                                Judge


                                                  Sd/-
                                       K. SURENDRA MOHAN
                                                 Judge

jj

                          /True copy/

                                                P.S.to Judge

W.P(Crl.)345/2010    51

W.P(Crl.)345/2010    52

W.P(Crl.)345/2010    53




