
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                      PRESENT:

                         THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE P.BHAVADASAN

             THURSDAY, THE 9TH DAY OF FEBRUARY 2012/20TH MAGHA 1933

                                       Crl.Rev.Pet.No. 1526 of 2011 ( )
                                              --------------------------------
            CRA.190/2010 OF ADDITIONAL SESSIONS COURT-I, MAVELIKKARA
        MC.36/2008 OF JUDICIAL FIRST CLASS MAGISTRATE COURT-II, HARIPAD
                                                       ................

REVISION PETITIONERS/APPELLANT/COUNTER PETITIONER:
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

             GOPALAKRISHNAN NAIR, AGED 38 YEARS,
             S/O. PARAMESWARAN NAIR, PONGOTTU HOUSE,
             KARUVATTA NORTH. P.O., KARUVATTA.

             BY ADV. SRI.S.KRISHNAMOORTHY.


RESPONDENTS/RESPONDENTS/PETITIONER:
-------------------------------------------------------------------

          1. SREELATHA, AGED 28 YEARS,
              D/O. RADHAMANI, AMBALATHINTE VADAKKETHIL,
              KARUVATTA NORTH. P.O., PIN-690 554.

          2. STATE OF KERALA,
              REP. BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR,
              HIGH COURT OF KERALA,ERNAKULAM-682 031.


          R2 BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SMT.SEENA RAMAKRISHNAN.


           THIS CRIMINAL REVISION PETITION HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD
           ON 09-02-2012, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE FOLLOWING:


rs.

Crl.Rev.Pet.No. 1526 of 2011




                               APPENDIX


PETITIONER'S ANNEXURES:-


ANNEXURE I COPY OF THE JUDGMENT IN OP(HMA) NO.1/2008 DATED 15/03/2010
             OF THE FAMILY COURT, ALAPPUZHA.




RESPONDENT'S ANNEXURES:-           NIL.




                                         //TRUE COPY//




                                         P.A. TO JUDGE

rs.


                        P.BHAVADASAN, J.
           ----------------------------------------------------
                   Crl. RP No.1526 of 2011-A
           ----------------------------------------------------
           Dated this the 9th day of February 2012

                                 Order


           This revision petition is filed by the counter

petitioner in MC No.36/08 before the JFCM Court-II,

Haripad, who suffered orders under Sections 18, 19 and

20 of the Protection of Women from Domestic Violence

Act, on an application filed by the wife of the revision

petitioner under Section 12 of the said Act.

           2. The marriage between the petitioner before

the court below and the counter petitioner therein took

place on 6.12.1998 at Sreekrishna Swami Temple

Karuvattamkulangara as per the Hindu religious rites. It

is claimed in the petition that at the time of marriage, the

petitioner was given 25 sovereigns of gold ornaments and

Rs.65,000/- in cash. After the marriage, the petitioner

was living with her husband in the matrimonial house.

The husband is alleged to have sold her gold ornaments

CRRP 1526/11-A                   2

and utilised the money given at the time of marriage, for

putting up a building in the property owned by him. In

addition to the amount of Rs.65,000/-, the parents of the

petitioner had given an amount of Rs.25,000/- to the

counter petitioner at the time of construction of the house.

According to the petitioner before the court below, the

counter petitioner used to consume alcohol and create

problems in the house, causing mental and physical torture

to the petitioner.    She makes mention of an incident

occurred on 2.12.2007 when she was manhandled by the

counter petitioner and was expelled from the matrimonial

house. Subsequently, at the intervention of mediators, the

matter was compromised and the petitioner continued to

live in the matrimonial house.     Again, on 5.2.2008, the

counter petitioner battered the petitioner, which caused a

fracture on her wrist and later, she was again expelled from

the matrimonial house. Thereafter, she took up residence

in her paternal house. It is pointed out that the counter

petitioner is a welder by profession and is earning more

CRRP 1526/11-A                 3

than Rs.18,000/- per month. The petitioner contends that

she has no independent means of livelihood and she has

to depend upon her husband for maintenance. She,

therefore, claimed maintenance @ Rs.2,000/- per month.

She also prayed for an order directing the counter

petitioner to return an amount of Rs.90,000/- to her which

was given to him by her parents at the time of marriage and

construction of the house and also to return 20 sovereigns

of gold ornaments.       She further prayed for an order

restraining the counter petitioner from alienating the

properties having an extent of 4.05 ares comprised in

Survey No.285/13 of Karuvatta village.

           3. The claim was resisted by the respondent. He

denied having received the gold ornaments and cash, as

alleged in the petition. However, he admitted that she was

given 8 sovereigns of gold ornaments at the time of

marriage. According to him, the amount of Rs.65,000/- was

deposited in the name of the petitioner in post office and he

has not taken any amount from that deposit and it still

CRRP 1526/11-A                      4

remains in the post office deposit. The building in the

property had been put up jointly by him and his brother by

availing loans from the Housing Board, Life Insurance

Corporation of India and K.S.F.E. He disputed the various

allegations in the petition. He also denied the allegation

that he is a drunkard and he used to manhandle the

petitioner. It is contended that he has spent huge amounts

for the infertility treatment of the petitioner and frustrated by

the same, the petitioner had even tried to commit suicide.

It is claimed by the counter petitioner that he has always

been a loving and caring husband. He would also say that

on 9.12.2007, the relatives of the petitioner trespassed into

his house, manhandled him and caused damage to the

household articles. He claimed that his monthly income is

only Rs.3,000/- and he does not have any regular income.

It is also contended that the petitioner is running a dairy

farm from which she gets Rs.3,000/- per month. On the

basis of the above contentions, it was pointed out by the

counter petitioner that the petitioner is not entitled to any

CRRP 1526/11-A                     5

reliefs in the petition.

            4. Evidence was called for. Evidence consists of

the testimony of PWs 1 and 2 from the side of the

petitioner. Counter petitioner examined DWs 1 to 4 and

had Ext.D1 marked. Exts.X1 and X2 third party exhibits

were also marked.

            5. On an appreciation of the evidence in the

case, the trial court found that charges against the counter

petitioner are proved and passed an order, which reads as

follows :

            "15. Point No.6 - In the result,

            1.This petition is allowed in part.

            2.The counter petitioner shall not commit any

              acts    of  domestic    violence  against the

              petitioner.

            3.The counter petitioner is directed to pay

              Rs.1,500/- per month as maintenance to the

              petitioner.

            4.The counter petitioner is restrained form

CRRP 1526/11-A                  6

             dispossessing the petitioner from the shared

             house situated in 4.05 ares of land comprised

             in Survey No.285/13 of Karuvatta village.

           5.The counter petitioner shall not transfer or

             alienate or otherwise encumber the properties

             comprised in the above mentioned survey

             number.

           6.Considering the facts and circumstances of

             the case, petitioner is also allowed to realise

             the cost of the mpetition from the counter

             petitioner.

           7.The other reliefs sought for in the petition are

             refused.

           6. The counter petitioner before the trial court

preferred an appeal as Criminal Appeal 190/10 before the

Sessions Court, Mavelikara. The lower appellate court,

after an indpendent consideration of the evidence in the

case, concurred with the trial court, confirmed the order

and dismissed the appeal.

CRRP 1526/11-A                  7

           7. The learned counsel for the revision petitioner

pointed out that both the courts below have not adverted to

the evidence in the proper manner and has drawn wrong

conclusions based on misappropriation of evidence in the

case. It is also contedned that since the wife has obtained

a divorce, a petition under Section 12 of the Protection of

Women from Domestic Violence Act is not maintainable. In

support of the said contention, the learned counsel for the

revision petitioner relied on the decision in Surendran v.

State of Kerala (2009(3) KLT 967). It is also pointed out

that there was no relief sought for by the wife regarding a

place of residence for her and her claim was confined to

seeking an injunction against the counter petitioner,

restraining him from alienating the property. It is also

poined out that subsequently, there was a partition suit

between the members of the family of the counter petitioner

before the trial court and in that suit, a decree has been

passed whereby half of the property and the building has

CRRP 1526/11-A                  8

been set apart to the brother of the counter petitioner. It is

further pointed out that the court below was not justified in

granting Rs.1,500/- to the petitioner as maintenance

without assessing the actual income obtained by the

counter petitioner. For the above reasons, the learned

counsel pointed out that the order of the courts below is

clearly unsustainable and has to be set aside.

           8. Both the courts below have come to the

conclusion based on the evidence of Pws 1 and 2 and Dws

2 and 4 that domestic violence has been committed.

Though both the courts below have observed that Dws 2

and 4 have supported the petitioner's case, on going

through the evidence of Dws 2 and 4, there is nothing in

their evidence to support the plea of domestic violence in

the form of assault, as alleged by the petitioner. Physical

assault and cruelty are spoken to only by Pws 1 and 2. No

doubt, their evidence may be sufficient to hold that there is

physical violence.    The incident which happened on

02.12.2007 is specifically narrated by the petitioner when

CRRP 1526/11-A                   9

she was physically assaulted and thrown out of the

matrimonial house. She says, she is unable to live with the

counter petitioner    who is highly alcoholic and used to

assault her. It is, therefore, necessary to consider whether

the evidence of PWS 1 and 2 will be sufficient.

           9. Next is the question regarding alienation of

the shared house. Both the courts below have come to the

conclusion that the counter petitioner has no consistent

case in this regard at all. At one point of time, he took the

stand that the house was constructed by him. Thereafter,

he says that the house was put up jointly by him and his

brother. At the time of evidence, he took the stand that the

house was put up by his brother.         These inconsistent

views, along with the evidence of Pws 1 and 2 persuaded

the courts below to come to the conclusion that the counter

petitioner has right over the building and that in all

probability, the petitioner might also have contributed

towards the construction of the house.

CRRP 1526/11-A                   10

            10. As far as the maintenance aspect is

concerned, the amount awarded seems to be just and

reasonable.

            11. However, another aspect needs to be

considered. The court has injuncted the respondent before

it from dispossessing the petitioner from the shared

household situated in 4.05 ares of land comprised in

Survey No.285/13 of Karuvatta village.

            12. The learned counsel for the revision

petitioner pointed out that at the relevant time, she was not

residing in the shared household and there was no

question of dispossession, as ordered by the court below.

Emphasis is laid on the decision in Surendran v. State of

Kerala (supra) to contend that since divorce has already

been ordered, the petitioner before the court below is not

entitled to any reliefs under the provisions of the Protection

of Women from Domestic Violence Act.

CRRP 1526/11-A                  11

           13. The facts of the case in Surendran v. State

of Kerala (supra) show that the wife sought for a

declaration that the marriage is null and void and she

obtained a decree in her favour. It was thereafter that she

approached the court under the provisions of the

Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act. After

considering the various aspects, this court had occasion to

hold as follows :

            "3. Under S.12 of the Act, an aggrieved person

            or a Protection Officer or any other person on

            behalf of the aggrieved person is entitled to file

            a petition seeking one or more reliefs provided

            under the Act. S.18 provides for protection

            order, S.19 for residential order and S.20 for

            monetary reliefs. An aggrieved person is defined

            under cl(a) of S.2 as any woman who is or has

            been    in  domestic    relationship  with   the

            respondent and who alleges to have been

CRRP 1526/11-A                    12

            subjected to any act of domestic violence by the

            respondent. Domestic relationship is defined

            under cl.(f) of S.2 as relationship between two

            persons who live or have, at any point of time,

            lived together in a shared household, when they

            are related by consanguinity, marriage or

            through a relationship in the nature of marriage,

            adoption or are family members living together

            as a joint family. Domestic violence is defined

            under cl(g) of S.2 as the same meaning

            assigned to it in S.3."

            14. However, in the decision in Priya v. Shibu

(2008(3) KLT 1),         almost a similar question was

considered. That was a case where the wife had moved for

a divorce and she got a declaration in that regard with

effect from 13.5.2005. The petition under the provisions of

the Protection of Women under the Domestic Violence Act

was filed subsequently. A contention was taken that the

petition is not maintainable. But, this court, after construing

CRRP 1526/11-A                    13

the various provisions of the Act, held that at least to the

extent of getting monetary benefits, the petition may be

maintainable.    It was observed in the said decision as

follows :

           "5. I am afraid that I cannot agree with the above

           submissions. It is true that on 11.1.2007, when

           the revision petitioner, Priya approached the

           Magistrate under S.12(1) of the Act, she was

           already a divorced wife, her divorce having been

           declared with effect from 13.5.2005 by the

           Family Court, Alappuzha. But the main relief

           prayed for in the application was for return of the

           sum of Rs.59,000/- paid in cash and 40

           sovereigns of gold ornaments allegedly given as

           dowry. This is a claim which can be made under

           S.19(8) of the Act even by a divorced wife.

           Likewise, a claim for maintenance under S.125

           Cr.P.C. is a monetary relief which can be

           claimed under S.20 of the Act. It cannot be

CRRP 1526/11-A                  14

           gainsaid that even a divorced wife is entitled to

           claim maintenance under S.125 Cr.P.C.

           6. The further question is as to whether the

           applicant should continue to be in a domestic

           relationship with the respondents on the date of

           preferring the claim and whether the persons

           who are related by consanguinity, marriage or

           any of the relationship referred to in S.2(f) of the

           Act should continue to be in that relationship on

           the date of filing the petition. In other words,

           whether the employment of present perfect

           continuous tense in Ss.2(a), 2(f), 2(q) and 2(s)

           renders it obligatory on the part of the applicant

           to be in a domestic relationship on the date of

           preferring the application. I am not inclined to

           accept the contention made on behalf of the

           respondents that the present perfect continuous

           tense used is to indicate the continuance of the

           relationship even on the date of preferring the

CRRP 1526/11-A                  15

           application. On the contrary, the words 'has

           been' and the words 'have lived' are employed

           for the purpose of showing the past relationship

           or experience between the parties concerned

           and they cannot be so construed as to mean

           that unless the 'domestic relationship' continues

           on the date of application, the applicant will have

           no locus standi to move the Magistrate. The

           existence of the present status as a wife cannot

           be read into those provisions to hold that the

           application filed by he revision petitioner before

           the Magistrate was not maintainable. The view

           taken by the learned Sessions Judge is clearly

           wrong. The judgment sought to be revised is

           accordingly set aside and the order dated

           11.1.2007 passed by the Magistrate is restored."

           15. Before this court, as already noticed, the

revision petitioner has produced the order dated 15.3.2010

in OP(HMA) No.1/2008 to show that in a petition moved by

CRRP 1526/11-A                     16

the revision petitioner herein for divorce, the court declared

the marriage between the revision petitioner herein and the

party respondent as dissolved with effect from the date of

decree. Unlike in the decision cited above, in the case on

hand, the divorce was during the pendency of the

proceedings. So, the impact of the decree for divorce will

have to be determined with reference to the prayer sought

for in the petition. However, as observed in the decision in

Priya v. Shibu (supra), prima facie, monetary claims are

sustainable. If that be so, the maintenance awarded @

Rs.1,500/- shall be continued to be paid till the matter is

determined afresh.

            In the result, this revision petition is allowed. The

impugned order is set aside and the matter is remanded to

the trial court for fresh consideration in accordance with law

and in the light of what is stated above, subject to the

condition that the petitioner continues to pay Rs.1,500/- to

the first respondent herein as monthly allowance and also

deposits the entire arrears till date before the court below

CRRP 1526/11-A                   17

within a period of two months from today subject to the

condition that the deposit and payment as ordered will be

subject to the final orders to be passed after remand.




                                      P.Bhavadasan, Judge

sta

CRRP 1526/11-A    18



