
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

PRESENT:

THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE M.SASIDHARAN NAMBIAR
&
THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE N.K.BALAKRISHNAN

TUESDAY, THE 16TH DAY OF OCTOBER 2012/24TH ASWINA 1934

CRL.A.No. 1518 of 2008 ( )
--------------------------
SC.1819/2002 of II ADDL. SESSIONS COURT, KOLLAM

APPELLANT(S):
------------

         VAIDYAR @ BIJU,
         S/O.SOMAN,
         CONVICT NO.8651,
         CENTRAL PRISON,
         THIRUVANANTHPAURAM.


         BY ADVS.GEORGE MATHEWS
                 SMT.CELINE JOSEPH

RESPONDENT(S):
--------------

         STATE OF KERALA REP.BY
         PUBLIC PROSECUTOR, HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM.

         BY  PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SRI.GIKKU JACOB


       THIS CRIMINAL APPEAL  HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD  ON  8-10-2012,

THE COURT ON 16.10.2012  DELIVERED THE FOLLOWING:


            M.SASIDHARAN NAMBIAR &
             N.K.BALAKRISHNAN,JJ.
       ================================
        Crl.Appeal No.1518 of 2008
       ================================


    Dated this the 16th day of October,2012


                   JUDGMENT

Sasidharan Nambiar,J.

    Appellant was convicted and sentenced to

imprisonment for life and a fine of Rs.50,000/-

and in default simple imprisonment for two

years for the offence under section 302 of

Indian Penal Code by II Additional Sessions

Judge, Kollam in S.C.1819/2002.  The conviction

and sentence is challenged in this appeal.

    2. Appellant married deceased Shylajakumari

in 1992.  It was a love marriage. As agreed by

the parents, the marriage was registered under

Ext.P2 agreement dated 30.6.1992. They have two

sons. PW1 Leela is the mother, PW2 Sajeendran

is the brother and PW5 Pushpa is the sister of

deceased     Shylajakumari. Appellant with the

Crl.A.1518/2008              2

deceased wife were originally living with PW1 for

some time.        Later when three cents of land was

assigned in favour of the appellant by Government,

appellant        put up a hut and started residing

therein. Prosecution case is that though at the

time     of    marriage  two  sovereigns  of  gold  and

Rs.2000/- was paid as dowry, appellant demanded

Rs.2000/- as additional dowry.       PW1 could not pay

the same.       Hence appellant took Shylajakumari and

their two children       to the house of PW1 and left

them there.         Later due to the intervention of

mediators Shylajakumari started living with the

appellant in the same hut, constructed in the said

three      cents  property.    Appellant  was  treating

Shylajakumari with cruelty. On the afternoon of

11.4.2004      appellant   and  deceased  Shylajakumari

alone were there in the house.         Appellant poured

kerosene on the body of Shylajakumari and set fire

using        a   matchstick.    Sustaining       burns,

Shylajakumari ran into the house of PW4 Arifa.      She

was engulfed in fire.       She ran out of the house of

Crl.A.1518/2008              3

PW4 and fell on the backside of the house of the

appellant. PW6 Sreedevi who found the deceased

running and falling        and the appellant standing

near Shylajakumari and thereaftrer running away

from the spot,      went to PW1 and informed her that

Shylajakumari is lying on the backside of their

house sustaining burns.       PW1 was at that time in

the house of her neighbour PW3 Radha.       PW1 rushed

to the spot, followed by PW3.      Pws.1 and 3 fetched

the     autorikshaw  of   PW10  Latheef  and  took the

injured       to   District  Hospital,  Kollam.   PW12

Dr.Binod examined her and found         burns all over

her body except the scalp and foot.        He prepared

Ext.P6 wound certificate and admitted her in the

hospital       as an  inpatient.    PW12  recorded the

alleged cause of injury as disclosed by the injured

Shylajakumari      in  Ext.P6   as    "husband   poured

kerosene and set fire."      Shylajakumari died on that

night itself due to the burns.           PW1 furnished

Ext.P1       First Information   Statement.    It   was

recorded by the Sub Inspector of Police, Kundara

Crl.A.1518/2008              4

Police       Station   who   was  not   available   for

examinatiion as he died before his evidence could

be recorded in court. He recorded Ext.P10 FIR and

registered crime for the offences under sections

302 and 304B IPC.           PW13   ASP took over the

investigatiion as an      offence under section 304B of

IPC is also involved.         He prepared Ext.P7 scene

mahazar and instructed PW14 Circle Inspector of

Police to conduct the inquest.      PW14 conducted the

inquest       and   prepared  Ext.P3  inquest   report.

Requisition(in the presence of PW8 Hasheer) was

submitted       for  conducting  the  autopsy.     PW9,

Dr.Prathapan, District Police Surgeon conducted the

autopsy and prepared Ext.P4 postmortem certificate

finding that death was caused due to the burns

sustained.       PW13 seized Ext.P2 registered marriage

agreement of the appellant with Shylajakumari,when

it     was     produced  by  PW7  Sajeer,  brother   of

Shylajakumari under Ext.P8 mahazar.       Finding that

an offence under section 304B is not involved as

the death was after 8 years from the date of

Crl.A.1518/2008              5

marriage,       PW13 submitted a   report deleting the

offence under section 304B IPC and handed over the

investigation to PW14.       PW14 arrested the accused

at 6 a.m on 18.4.2004.       Material objects were sent

for      chemical    analysis  and   obtained   Ext.P11

certificate of chemical analysis.      After completing

the investigation      charge was laid for the offences

under sections 302 and 498A of Indian Penal Code.

      3.     Judicial  First  Class  Magistrate  Court,

Kollam      committed  the   case  to  Sessions  Court,

Kollam.       Learned Sessions Judge made over the case

for trial to Additional Sessions Judge.       Appellant

was defended by a counsel of his choice.           When

charge for the offences under sections 302 and 498A

IPC was framed and read over, appellant pleaded

not guilty.       Prosecution examined 14 witnesses and

marked      11  exhibits  and  identified  13  material

objects.       After closing the  prosecution evidence,

appellant was questioned under section 313 of the

Code of Criminal Procedure.        Appellant denied the

incriminating evidence, put to him and contended

Crl.A.1518/2008              6

that he is innocent. He additionally stated that

on 11.4.2004 he returned to the house by noon and

after taking bath appellant was changing his dress

and Shylajakumari was then in the house.     Appellant

was tying cadjen leaves on the western side of the

house. By about 2 p.m,       he asked Shylajakumari to

prepare tea        Shylajakumari went into the house.

Appellant heard a cry from the eastern side of the

house.        He looked there and found Shylajakumari

running from the south of house of PW4 Arifa

engulfed in fire. She came near to the place where

appellant was standing.        Appellant took   water,

which was there       on the northern side and poured

over her body and made her sit on the side of the

house and ran to Mampuzha junction to fetch an

autorikshaw.       Appellant fetched the autorikshaw

driven by PW10.       The autorikshaw could reach only

up     to    the  house  of   Sivankutty.    When  the

autorikshaw       stopped, Sajeendran(PW7) the brother

of Shylajakumari forcibly pushed the appellant out

of      the autorikshaw and manhandled him and took

Crl.A.1518/2008               7

Shylajakumari       in  that  autorikshaw  leaving  the

appellant there.        Somebody took the appellant to

District Hospital, Kollam.         Kundara Police came

there and arrested him.         Learned Sessions Judge

finding that it is not a case without any evidence

connecting the appellant with the offences, called

upon the appellant to enter on his defence and

adduce evidence.       Appellant then examined DW1 the

mother of PW4.

      4.       Learned Sessions Judge on the evidence

found the appellant guilty.        He was convicted for

the     offences    under  section 302  and  498A  IPC.

Appellant       was  sentenced  for the  offence  under

section 302 IPC as stated earlier.         No separate

sentence was awarded for the offence under section

498A IPC.       Appellant is challenging the conviction

and sentence in this appeal preferred from prison.

Appellant is defended by a counsel of his choice.

      5.      Learned senior counsel appearing for the

appellant argued that learned Sessions Judge should

not have relied on the evidence of Pws.1 and 3, to

Crl.A.1518/2008              8

hold that deceased had made a dying declaration.

It was argued that the evidence of PW4 would

establish that       deceased Shylajakumari entered the

house of PW4 engulfed in fire and went out of the

house and fell on the back side of the house of the

appellant and       evidence of DW1 the mother of PW4

would establish that appellant poured water and put

out the fire and ran for fetching the autorikshaw

and     it    is thus  clear  that  appellant  was  not

responsible        for   the    burns   sustained    by

Shylajakumari.       Learned senior counsel argued that

evidence established that it was a colony, where

several houses exist close       to each other and the

house of PW1, PW3,      PW4 and PW6 are situated nearby

and if there was a quarrel between the appellant

and      the    deceased  and   the  appellant   poured

kerosene       , it   would  have  been  heard  by  the

neighbours      and the fact that none heard   any such

quarrel established that the prosecution has not

disclosed       the true facts. It was argued that the

evidence of PW1 that the deceased made a dying

Crl.A.1518/2008            9

declaration      cannot be believed because as per

Ext.P1 First Information Statement it was made

before the injured was taken to the hospital and at

the time of evidence the claim was that the dying

declaration was made from the hospital and if any

such declaration was made, PW3 would have heard it

and PW3 did not claim that she heard any such

disclosure to PW1 and it is thus clear that there

was no dying declaration.     Learned senior counsel

also argued that the evidence of PW12 that the

injured made disclosure as to the cause of injury

recorded in Ext.P6 can never be true as with the

serious burns sustained, she could not have made

any such disclosure.       It was argued that the

alleged cause might    have been disclosed by PW1 who

has no personal knowledge and in such circumstances

based on Ext.P6 wound certificate or the evidence

of PW12 appellant cannot be convicted.        Learned

senior counsel also      argued that though Ext.P1

shows that appellant      forcibly removed the ear

rings of his wife and thereafter poured kerosene,

Crl.A.1518/2008              10

the evidence of PW14 with Ext.P3 inquest report

establish that the ear ornament was there on the

body and therefore the prosecution case cannot be

accepted.       It was argued that in any case there is

reasonable doubt as to the genesis of the incident

and how the deceased sustained the burns and in the

light of the evidence of DW1 that appellant poured

water and put out the fire, appellant is at least

entitled to the benefit of doubt and therefore      the

conviction is not sustainable.

      6.      Learned Public Prosecutor submitted that

the evidence of PW12 the doctor with Ext.P6 wound

certificate         conclusively     establish     that

Shylajakumari disclosed to PW12 that she sustained

the burns when her husband poured kerosene on her

body and set fire.        It was pointed out that the

evidence of PW3 Radha, who took the injured to the

hospital along with PW1,and present when the doctor

examined         Shylajakumari,    corroborated    that

disclosure recorded in Ext.P6 and hence it can only

be found that appellant poured kerosene and set

Crl.A.1518/2008             11

fire on his wife and caused her death.          Learned

Public Prosecutor also argued that presence of the

appellant near the deceased, when she sustained the

burns, is proved by the evidence of PW6 who also

deposed that she found the appellant running away

from the spot and it       established that it was the

appellant who poured kerosene and set fire on her.

Learned Public Prosecutor also pointed out that

appellant while questioning under section 313 of

the     Code    of  Criminal  Procedure  admitted   his

presence in the house and when appellant and the

deceased alone were there in the house and his wife

died due to the burns sustained, appellant has a

duty to explain how she got fire and instead of

explaining it, appellant set up a false case, and

on the evidence it can only be found that appellant

poured kerosene and set fire to her and             the

conviction is perfectly legal and correct.

      7.     The fact that deceased Shylajakumari, wife

of the appellant sustained burns on 11.4.2004 and

was taken to the District Hospital, Kollam from

Crl.A.1518/2008             12

where PW12 the doctor examined her and prepared

Ext.P6 wound certificate is not disputed.          The

evidence of PW12 with Ext.P6 wound certificate

establish that Shylajakumari sustained burns all

over her body except the scalp and foot and she was

admitted in the hospital as an inpatient and she

succumbed to the burns on the same     night by 8 p.m.

The evidence of PW9, the      doctor who conducted the

autopsy        with  Ext.P4   postmortem   certificate

conclusively establish that her death was due to

the burns sustained.      Ext.P4 with the evidence of

PW9      establish    that   Shylajakumari   sustained

superficial to deep burns all over her body except

the scalp and soles of the feet and the death was

caused due to the said       burns.  That evidence of

PW9      was    not even   challenged.     Prosecution

therefore conclusively established     that the death

of    Shylajakumari   was  caused  due  to  the  burns

sustained.

      8.      Then the question is whether it was a

homicide, suicide or an accidental fire.     Appellant

Crl.A.1518/2008             13

has no case that it was a suicide.      From the nature

of    the     burns and  the  fact  that  the   injured

Shylajakumari made a disclosure to PW12 as to how

she sustained the burns the case of suicide or

accidental fire could be ruled out. PW12 doctor

examined her at 3.30 p.m on 11.4.2000 and prepared

Ext.P6 wound certificate.       Evidence of PW12 with

the     relevant    entry  in  Ext.P6  establish   that

Shylajakumari disclosed to PW12 that she sustained

the burns, when her husband poured kerosene and set

fire on her.        The evidence of PW4 and DW1 prove

that sustaining the burns Shylajakumari ran into

their house and theafter came out of the house and

ran towards        the back side of the house of the

appellant and fell down.       There is absolutely no

iota of evidence       to show that it was a   suicide.

No circumstance was also brought out to show that

it was an accidental fire.      From the nature of the

burns, it is clear that it cannot be the result of

an accidental fire as her body was doused in

kerosene        In such circumstances we have no  doubt

Crl.A.1518/2008              14

to hold that      death of Shylajakumari was homicide.

      9.     The question then is who poured kerosene on

the deceased and set fire and thereby caused her

death.        The fact that the burns was sustained

after kerosene was spread over her body was not

disputed at the time of evidence and it is clear

from     Ext.P4   postmortem  certificate  and   Ext.P11

certificate of chemical analysis.         There was no

dispute on that fact.

      10.     When appellant and the deceased alone were

there in the house at the time when Shylajakumari

sustained      the  burns,  appellant  has  a  duty   to

explain how she sustained the        fire.  The attempt

of the appellant at the time of questioning under

section 313 of the Code of Criminal Procedure was

to make it appear that he was not aware of that

fact at all.       After admitting that deceased was in

the house and appellant had asked the deceased to

prepare tea, appellant contended that he heard a

cry and found his wife running from the house of

PW4,      with fire all over her body, and came near

Crl.A.1518/2008              15

him and he poured water and put out the fire.      The

evidence of PW6, the neighbour who informed Pws.1

and 3,       that the deceased is lying on the backside

of the house      sustaining burns,  deposed that while

eating food from her house which is close to the

house of the appellant she looked there and      found

Shylajakumari with fire all over her body running

from the house of PW4 and reaching the back side of

the house of the appellant and falling there.      PW6

deposed that appellant was there at that time and

he     ran away from the spot.    PW6 did not make any

attempt to falsely implicate       the appellant.  The

fact that PW6 found the appellant there near the

injured Shylajakumari was not even challenged in

cross examination.        The argument of the learned

counsel       is  that  appellant  ran   to  fetch  an

autorikshaw as stated by the appellant at the time

of his examination under section 313 of the Code of

Criminal       Procedure   and  the   evidence of  DW1

establish that appellant had already put out the

fire by pouring water on her.       It was argued that

Crl.A.1518/2008             16

there is no reason to disbelieve the evidence of

DW1 to that effect.        As stated earlier PW6 is a

natural and trustworthy witness.      She deposed what

was seen from the moment she heard the cry of

Shylajakumari till she fell down near the back side

of the house of the appellant.          She saw    the

appellant running away from the spot.      If appellant

had poured water, it would have been definitely

witnessed by PW6.        PW6 did not see the appellant

pouring water on his wife. When PW6 was cross

examined       there was not even a suggestion that

appellant poured water on his wife,       in order  to

put out the fire.      Even PW4 daughter of DW1 has no

such case.      The evidence of PW4 also shows that she

witnessed the injured entering their house and

theafter getting out of their house and falling on

the back side of the house of the appellant.       PW4

also did not see appellant pouring water.       If the

evidence of DW1 is true, PW4 and 6 would have

definitely seen it.      In the light of the evidence

of PW4 and 6,       the evidence of DW1 that appellant

Crl.A.1518/2008              17

poured water on the wife can never be believed.

      11. The evidence of PW12 with Ext.P6 wound

certificate conclusively establish that when the

doctor examined Shylajakumari though she sustained

burns all over her body except the scalp and the

foot,      she   was  conscious   and  was  capable   of

speaking.       PW12 deposed that the  injured disclosed

to him that she sustained burns when her husband

poured kerosene over her body and set fire on her.

That evidence of PW12 is corroborated by the entry

in Ext.P6 wound certificate.        Though PW12 did not

specifically record in Ext.P6 that the alleged

cause of injury was disclosed           by the injured

herself,PW12 deposed that if it was not disclosed

by the injured but by the bystander or the person

who brought her, it would have been specifically

shown.        When the injured is capable of disclosing

the     alleged    cause  of  injury,  the  doctor  who

prepares       the  wound  certificate  is  expected  to

record the alleged cause of injury as stated by the

injured.       The evidence of PW12 is that the  injured

Crl.A.1518/2008             18

was conscious and was capable of speaking and

disclosing how she sustained the injuries and the

alleged cause in Ext.P6 was recorded as stated by

the injured.         In addition PW3 Radha, who was

present there with the injured when PW12 examined

her also deposed that the injured disclosed to the

doctor that her husband poured kerosene and set

fire.       We find absolutely no reason to disbelieve

the     evidence    of PW12  as  corroborated by  the

evidence of PW3 and Ext.P6 wound certificate. The

learned senior counsel argued that even if the

alleged cause was stated by the injured, it would

have been as prompted by PW1 or PW3 or the brother

of    the     injured.   On  the  evidence  we  cannot

agree.When PW1 or PW3 was examined, they were not

asked about any such prompting by PW1, PW3 or by

the     brother   of  the  deceased.    If  there  was

prompting as canvassed, it means that the injured

could speak and if so the evidence of PW1 or PW3

that the deceased told them that appellant poured

kerosene and set fire is to be accepted.      From the

Crl.A.1518/2008             19

evidence it is     conclusively proved that it was the

appellant who poured kerosene and set fire on the

deceased.

      12. It was argued that    the evidence of PW1 on

the     dying   declaration  is  contradicted  by  her

statement in Ext.P1 First Information Statement and

it was argued that if the deceased had made any

disclosure to PW1, it would have been heard by PW3

and        when  PW3  had  no  such  case   the  dying

declaration spoken to by PW1 cannot be believed.

True when the dying declaration alleged in Ext.P1

is from the scene of occurrence while what was

deposed from box was from the hospital and hence

the dying declaration sworn to by PW1 can only be

disbelieved. So also the evidence of PW3 that the

deceased disclosed from the hospital to her that

she sustained burns when appellant poured kerosene

is     not trustworthy.   But these are not  material,

in the light of the dying declaration proved by the

evidence of PW12 and recorded in Ext.P6 wound

certificate.     On proper appreciation of the entire

Crl.A.1518/2008              20

evidence,       we find no reason to interfere with the

findings of the learned Additional Sessions Judge

that it was the appellant who poured kerosene and

set fire on deceased Shylajakumari and caused her

death.       The  intention  to  cause  her   death  is

absolutely clear.       Hence the offence could only be

under section 300 of Indian Penal Code.        None of

the exceptions to Section 300 of Indian Penal Code

is attracted.        The proved offence is therefore

punisbale under section 302 of Indian Penal Code.

The conviction of the appellant for the offence

under       section  302IPC   is  therefore   perfectly

correct.       The evidence of  PW1 the mother with PW5

and 7, brothers of the deceased establish that

appellant was subjecting Shylajakumari to cruelty

by wilful      conduct, which is of such a nature as is

likely to cause danger to her life.            In such

circumstances      though   no  separate  sentence  was

awarded for the offence under section 498A of

Indian       Penal  Code,  which  is  not   legal,  the

conviction for that offence is proper.          On the

Crl.A.1518/2008          21

materials available we find no reason to interfere

with the sentence also.

      Appeal is dismissed confirming the conviction

and sentence passed by the II Additional Sessions

Judge, Kollam in S.C.1819/2002.



                               M.SASIDHARAN NAMBIAR
                                        JUDGE




                                 N.K.BALAKRISHNAN
                                        Judge



tpl/-

M.SASIDHARAN NAMBIAR &
  N.K.BALAKRISHNAN,jj.




 ---------------------
  Crl.A. No.1518/2008
 ---------------------




          JUDGMENT




   16th October,2012

M.SASIDHARAN NAMBIAR, J.




   ---------------------
        W.P.(C).NO. /06
   ---------------------


           JUDGMENT




         SEPTEMBER,2006



