
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                 PRESENT:

          THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE HARUN-UL-RASHID

  WEDNESDAY, THE 4TH DAY OF APRIL 2012/15TH CHAITHRA 1934

                          AS.No. 721 of 2000 (B)
                            ----------------------
            OS.47/1992 of ADDL.SUB COURT, IRINJALAKUDA

APPELLANTS/PLAINTIFFS:
---------------------------
1.     KUMARAN, S/O.RAVUNNI, KOOVAKKATTIL HOUSE,
       71 YEARS, THUMBOOR, KOTTANALLUR VILLAGE,
       THRISSUR DIST.

2.     DEVAKI, W/O.1ST APPELLANT,
       -DO-            -DO-           -DO-

   BY SRI.RENJITH THAMPAN, SENIOR ADVOCATE.
            ADV.SRI.V.M.KRISHNAKUMAR

RESPONDENTS/DEFENDANTS:
--------------------------------
1.     SREENIVASAN, S/O.MAMAN,
       KIZHAKKANADAN HOUSE, ARIPPALAM DESOM,
       POOMANGALAM VILLAGE, IRINJALAKUDA (VIA)
       THRISSUR DIST.

2.     THE STATE OF KERALA, REPRESENTED BY
       THE DISTRICT COLLECTOR, THRISSUR.

   BY ADV. SRI.V.BINOY RAM FOR R1.
       GOVERNMENT PLEADER SRI.P.P.PADMALAYAN

 THIS APPEAL SUITS HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD ON 04-04-2012,
THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY DELIVERED THE FOLLOWING:


                       HARUN-UL-RASHID, J.
                        ------------------------
                        A.S.No.721 Of 2000
                         ----------------------
                Dated this the 4th day of April, 2012.

                           J U D G M E N T


      Plaintiffs are the appellants. The appeal is directed against

the judgment and decree in O.S.No.47/1992 on the file of the

Additional Sub Court, Irinjalakuda. Suit was filed for mandatory

injunction, to direct the 1st defendant to return the remaining 5

sovereign gold or in the alternative realisation of its value

estimated @ Rs.4,250/- per sovereign of gold with interest and

Rs.15,000/- as pecuniary compensation for the mental agony and

loss sustained on account of the death of Geetha. The trial court

disallowed the claim and dismissed the suit. Parties hereinafter

are referred to as the plaintiffs and defendants as arrayed in the

suit.

      2.   The 1st defendant is the son-in-law of the plaintiffs.

The 2nd defendant is State of Kerala, represented by the District

Collector, Thrissur. Suit was filed by the appellants against the

husband of their daughter by name Geetha alleging that Geetha

committed suicide unable to bear the ill-treatment of the husband

                               ::2::

A.S.No.721/2000


and in-laws on account of insufficiency of dowry, claiming return

of ornaments or in the alternative its value.      Plaintiffs also

claimed compensation for mental agony and suffering for the

premature death of their daughter.

      3.   The 1st defendant married Geetha on 22.1.1989.

Marriage was registered with the Bhaktha Paripalana Sangam at

Thumpur.     A female child was born in their wedlock.        On

22.8.1991, the dead body of Geetha was found hanging in a rope

tied to the beam of a well situated in a neighbouring uninhabited

property near her marital home and dead body of the child was

found on a desk in a desolate state. The matter was reported to

the police.    The appellants registered a case noticing the

unnatural death.    Subsequently, the case was registered as

against the 1st defendant and his sister under Section 498A r/w

Section 34 IPC.    Ext.B2 is the copy of the judgment in the

Criminal Case. The case ended in acquittal.

      4.   The 1st plaintiff was examined as PW1 and two

witnesses as PWs 2 & 3. The 1st defendant was examined as

DW1.

                                ::3::

A.S.No.721/2000


     5.    Exts.A1 and A2 are the copies of the inquest reports.

Exts.A3 & A4 are the copies of the postmortem certificates and

Exts.A5 & A6 are the copies of list of properties recovered from

the dead bodies. Ext.A5 & A6 show that 74.910 gms. of gold

sovereigns were recovered from the dead bodies. The trial court

noticed that during the investigation stage, plaintiffs were given

possession of 9.368 sovereigns of gold so recovered from the

dead bodies. Receipt of 9.368 sovereigns of gold recovered from

the dead bodies is not disputed by the plaintiffs. In paragraph 10

of the plaint it is averred that the plaintiffs had received 7=

sovereigns of gold found in the dead body of their daughter. The

prayer is for recovery of the balance 5 sovereigns of gold.

     6.    Plaintiffs examined PWs 1 to 3 and produced Exts.A1

to A9 in order to prove that at the time of marriage 12=

sovereigns of gold was given to the 1st defendant. It has come

out in evidence that the marriage of their daughter with the 1st

defendant was registered with the Ayyappankavu Datha

Paripalana Samajam, Thumpur, and the payment of gold was

entered in the marriage register maintained by the Samajam.

Ext.A9 is the attested copy of the marriage register.       In the

                                ::4::

A.S.No.721/2000


register it is endorsed that 12= sovereigns of gold was given at

the time of marriage as gift. Ext.A9 copy of marriage register

was marked through PW3, the present Manager of the Samajam.

The 1st defendant as DW1 admitted that at the time of marriage

gold ornaments were given to his wife, at the same time he

testified that the exact weight of gold ornaments given at the

time of marriage is not known. He has no idea about the exact

sovereigns of gold given at the time of marriage. He also denied

the presentation of 1= sovereigns of gold to the child as spoken

by PW1. The trial court believed the entries in Ext.A9 and held

that there is sufficient evidence for the gift of 12= sovereigns of

gold at the time of marriage. The trial court also noticed that the

plaintiffs were given 9.368 sovereigns of gold recovered from the

dead bodies of the deceased as per the orders of the criminal

court. On evidence, trial court held that there is no independent

evidence whatsoever forthcoming on the side of the plaintiffs to

prove that the deceased Geetha was subjected to cruelty from

the 1st defendant and his family members and observed that

unless there is anything to show that the 1st defendant and his

family members were in anyway responsible for the suicide, the

                                ::5::

A.S.No.721/2000


1st defendant cannot be answerable for the same. The court also

held that the unnatural cause envisaged and contemplated under

Section 6 of the by the Dowry Prohibition Act should be

attributable to the active or passive acts of the husband or his

relations.   The trial court on materials found that the 1st

defendant is not in any way responsible for the death of his wife

and therefore he cannot be directed to transfer the gold

ornaments to the plaintiffs.

      7.   In this case the evidence of PW3, who is the Secretary

of the Samajam is very important. He deposed before the court

that the entries in the register is made on the basis of the

information furnished by the bride's people without any further

enquiry. The findings of the trial court that 12= sovereigns of

gold was given as dowry at the time of marriage was solely based

on the endorsement made in Ext.A9 register. Apart from the

entries in Ext.A9 register, there is no evidence to show the exact

weight of the gold ornaments given at the time of marriage.

Now, the plaintiffs received 9.368 sovereigns of gold which was

recovered from the dead body of the deceased. In the absence

of any concrete evidence to prove the exact sovereigns of gold

                                ::6::

A.S.No.721/2000


entrusted at the time of marriage, the 1st defendant is not liable

to return the balance gold ornaments.

     8.     The claim for recovery of damages of Rs.15,000/- was

also disallowed by the court below. The court rejected the claim

fining that there is no evidence to show that the plaintiffs were in

any way dependent on their daughter who was already given in

marriage. Therefore, the court held that there cannot be any loss

or deprivation of service and 1st defendant cannot be answerable

for the amount under the head damages. The contention of the

plaintiffs, their claim for mandatory injunction and for damages

was considered in detail. The claim was negatived on the basis of

the facts, circumstances and evidence on record. I agree with

the findings recorded by the court below on the basis of the

evidence. I find that no sustainable grounds are made out by the

appellants to interfere with the decree and judgment passed by

the court below.

     In the result, the appeal fails and accordingly dismissed. No

order as to costs.

                                              HARUN-UL-RASHID,
                                                     Judge.
bkn/-



