
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                       PRESENT:

               THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE V.K.MOHANAN

         FRIDAY, THE 25TH DAY OF MAY 2012/4TH JYAISHTA 1934

                   CRL.A.No. 1979 of 2009 ( )
                   --------------------------
(AGAINST THE ORDER IN CC.527/2007 of J.M.F.C.-II, KANNUR, dtd.23.5.2009)

APPELLANT(S)/PETITIONER/COMPLAINANT:
-----------------------------------

         P.SUHARA, W/O.E.C.ABOOBACKER,
         AGED 33 YEARS, ASSYA MANZIL, MANIYOOR AMSOM DESOM
         P.O.CHEKKIKULAM, VIA.KOODALI, KANNUR.

         BY ADV. SRI.M.V.AMARESAN

RESPONDENT(S)/RESPONDENT(S)/ACCUSED & STATE:
--------------------------------------------

     1.  E.C.ABOOBACKER, S/O.ERJAD,
         RAMIAN VALAPANNATHU HOUSE, KANNOTH MUKKU
         CHERUPAZHASSI DESOM, P.O.CHERUPAZHASSI, KANNUR.

     2.  STATE OF KERALA,
         REPRESENTED BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR
         HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM.

         BY ADV. SRI.C.A.JOSEPH
                 SMT.LALIZA T.Y., PUBLIC PROSECUTOR

       THIS CRIMINAL APPEAL  HAVING COME UP FOR ADMISSION  ON
        25-05-2012, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY DELIVERED THE FOLLOWING:

ami/


                        V.K.MOHANAN, J.
                ----------------------------------------
                   Crl.A. No. 1979 of 2009
                ----------------------------------------
             Dated this the 25th day of May, 2012.

                         J U D G M E N T



     The present appellant is the complainant in a private

complaint based upon which C.C.No. 475 of 2001 is instituted

in the Judicial First Class Magistrate-II, Kannur. She preferred

this appeal challenging the judgment dated 23.5.2009 of the

learned Magistrate in the above Calendar Case acquitting

the sole accused under section 248(1) Cr.P.C.

     2. Originally, the complaint was filed against 5 persons,

out of which A1 is the husband of the complainant and A2 to

A4 are brother and sisters of A1. A5 is the mother of A1.

According to the complainant, A1 married the complainant

on 26.4.1998 and after that she resided along with A1 in her

house. In the month of July 1998, A1 returned to Gulf country

connected with his        employment.        It is the case of the

complainant that,       at the time of marriage, A1 was given

Rs.1,00,000/- (Rs.one lakh) as dowry. 40 sovereigns of gold

ornaments and 23.5 cents of property with a shop room were

                                  -:2:-

Crl.A. No. 1979 of 2009


also    given     to A1.   According to the complainant,   gold

ornaments were taken away by A1 when he went to Gulf.

According to the complainant, after return of A1 to         gulf

country, the complainant used to visit       the house of the

accused and         while so, A2 to A5 used to ill-treat her by

demanding 50 sovereigns of gold ornaments and also by

saying that the dowry          given    was not up to      their

expectation.       According to the complainant, A1 used to sent

letter to the complainant in which he had also mentioned

that dowry given was inadequate. It is also averred that

the father of the complainant availed a loan from the bank

and purchased         a gold chain weighing 2 = sovereign and

given to A5. In December 2000 A1 sent two basket full of

articles      to the complainant from gulf and on       getting

information about this, A2 to A5 have become more hostile

towards the complainant. It is also the grievance of the

complainant that          though A1 returned from Gulf on

14.4.2001, he did not visit the house of the complainant.

According to the complainant, on enquiry, A1 informed her

that he would not come to her house unless the property is

                                 -:3:-

Crl.A. No. 1979  of 2009


assigned        in his name.     Therefore, according to the

complainant, on 23.4.2001, 35 cents of property was given

as per an agreement, but even thereafter, A1 did not come

to the house of the complainant.        Thus, according to the

complainant, on 18.5.2001, she went to the house of the

accused         along with   her brother.    According to the

complainant, on seeing her , the accused abused her and

A2 beat on the back of her chest with a chapel, and thus,

the complainant returned to her house.       Thus according to

the complainant, the accused have committed the offence

punishable under section 498A read with Section 34 of the

Indian Penal Code.

       3.    After conducting   an enquiry under section 202

Cr.P.C.,     the complaint was originally taken on file as C.C.

No.475/2001. As A1 was absconding, the trial against the

other accused was proceeded and finally culminated in

their acquittal and thus the case against A1 was split up

and        refiled as    C.C.No.527/2007.   Subsequently, A1

surrendered and the trial was proceeded and during which

PWs 1 to 3 were examined and Exts.P1 and P2 were also

                                   -:4:-

Crl.A. No. 1979 of 2009


marked.         The trial court finally found that the evidence

available      on     record  is   not   sufficient to   convict

the     accused- the husband of the complainant- for the

offences alleged against the accused and accordingly, the

accused is found not guilty and thus he is acquitted under

section 248(1) Cr.P.C. It is the above finding and order of

acquittal challenged in this appeal.

       4.    I have    heard   Sri. M.V.Amaresan,   the learned

counsel appearing for the appellant and I have perused the

judgment of the trial court.

       5. The learned counsel for the appellant vehemently

submitted that even though the complainant has stated

that    the    accused     has  not    physically assaulted the

complainant, still, section 498A is attracted since in Ext.P1

letter sent by the accused to the complainant contained

demand         of the accused        for more money from the

complainant towards         the    dowry.    But the trial court

miserably failed to consider the above             evidence and

material and came into a wrong conclusion that there are

no sufficient evidence to prove the offence alleged against

                                   -:5:-

Crl.A. No. 1979 of 2009


the accused.

       6. In the light of the contention advanced by the

learned counsel for the appellant and in the light of the

findings of the court below and in the light of the evidence

and materials        referred to above, the only question to be

considered is whether the appellant has succeeded in

making out a prima facie case against the accused and to

interfere with the acquittal of the accused. At the outset, it

is to be noted that the complainant has not filed any

appeal against the judgment in C.C.No.475/2001 by which

the learned Magistrate acquitted the other accused and in

effect, the complainant has accepted the acquittal recorded

by the trial court against the other accused. On a perusal of

the impugned judgment, it can be seen that the learned

Magistrate refused to accept the case of the complainant and

came        into   the conclusion that    there is no sufficient

evidence to prove the allegation against the accused on the

ground of admission of PW1 in the         complaint during her

cross examination. According to the learned Magistrate, the

appellant/complainant          has admitted     during    cross

                               -:6:-

Crl.A. No. 1979 of 2009


examination that the accused has not subjected her to any

cruelty. In the impugned judgment, the learned Magistrate

has extracted the above portion of the admission of PW1

which reads as :

        "A1                .                
                                        ".


In the light of the above admission of PW1, the complainant,

what requires is to acquit the accused.       Therefore, the

complainant has miserably      failed to prove the essential

ingredient of Section 498A against the accused.

       7. The learned counsel for the appellant vehemently

submitted that in Ext.P1 letter, the accused has demanded

for properties and money, that will amount to cruelty as

contemplated under section 498A IPC.            The learned

Magistrate in his judgment, assigned sufficient reason for not

acting upon Ext.P1 letter. The learned Magistrate has pointed

out that PW1 has miserably failed to produce the entire

letter and what produced before the court is only one page

of a letter. So According to the learned Magistrate, without

knowing the full content of Ext.P1 letter, the complainant

                                    -:7:-

Crl.A. No. 1979 of 2009


cannot be permitted to rely some portion of the letter alone

which is favourable to her. The learned Magistrate              has

assigned acceptable reasons for not acting upon Ext.P1

and such reason according to me is correct. In the absence

of full text of Ext.P1, some sentences or portion of the

sentence cannot be isolated from the entire letter so as to

fix the criminal liability upon the accused. Therefore, there

is no evidence to prove that the accused has committed the

offence       punishable      under section 498A        against the

complainant.        In this juncture it is relevant to note that the

complainant is in effect accepted the acquittal recorded by

the trial court in favour of A2 to A5. That being the position,

according to me, even if the appeal is entertained, there is

no scope for any interference with the order of acquittal

recorded by the trial court. In the light of the admission of

PW1 that the accused has not inflicted any bodily injury

against PW1,        and in view of the reason        given   by the

learned Magistrate for not acting upon Ext.P1, it cannot be

said that the reason given by the learned Magistrate is

perverse or illegal.

                                 -:8:-

Crl.A. No. 1979 of 2009


       In the result,    According to me, the appellant has

miserably failed to make out a prima facie       case and

accordingly, the above appeal is dismissed as the same is

devoid of any merit.




                                           V.K.MOHANAN,
                                                 JUDGE.

kvm/-



