
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                            PRESENT:

            THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE C.T.RAVIKUMAR

     WEDNESDAY, THE 1ST DAY OF AUGUST 2012/10TH SRAVANA 1934

                Crl.Rev.Pet.No. 1072 of 2012 ()
                 -------------------------------
            CC.107/2012 of J.M.F.C. - II, MAVELIKKARA


REVISION PETITIONER(S)/ACCUSED:
------------------------------

     1. JAYSON VARGHESE
         S/O.THOMAS VARGHESE, ALUMMOOTTIL JAYA VILLA, MANGAD
         ELAMANNOR.P.O., PATHANAMTHITTA DISTRICT.

     2. THOMAS VARGHESE
         ALUMMOOTTIL JAYA VILLA, MANGAD, ELAMANNOR.P.O.
         PATHANAMTHITTA DISTRICT.

     3. ANNAMMA VARGHESE
         W/O.THOMAS VARGHESE, ALUMMOOTTIL JAYA VILLA, MANGAD
         ELAMANNOR.P.O., PATHANAMTHITTA DISTRICT.

     4. JESSEY SHIBU
         ALUMMOOTTIL JAYA VILLA, MANGAD, ELAMANNOR.P.O.
         PATHANAMTHITTA DISTRICT.


         BY ADVS.SRI.BECHU KURIAN THOMAS
                SMT.TINA ALEX THOMAS


RESPONDENTS/STATE AND COMPLAINANT:
-------------------------------------

     1. STATE OF KERALA
         REPRESENTED BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR
         HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM.

     2. ANSU ACHANKUNJU
         D/O.ANNI ACHANKUNJU, PALAVILAYIL PUTHENVEEDU
         KARIMULACKAL, KOMALLOOR.P.O., CHUNAKKARA VILLAGE
         PIN-690 505.

         BY ADV. SRI.R.PADMAKUMAR-R2
         BY ADV. SRI.P.ARAVIND
         PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SMT.SEENA RAMAKRISHNAN-R1

THIS CRIMINAL REVISION PETITION  HAVING COME UP FOR ADMISSION ON
01-08-2012, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE FOLLOWING:


                                                            "C.R"

                        C.T. RAVIKUMAR, J.
                  ==========================
                     CRL.R.P. No.1072 OF 2012
                  ==========================
                  Dated this the 1st day of August, 2012


                                 ORDER

       This revision petition is directed against the order of the Court

of    Judicial    First    Class     Magistrate-II,   Mavelikkara    in

CMP.No.408/2012 in C.C.No.107/2012. At the very outset, I may

state that it is the non-reflection of the procedures followed by the

learned Magistrate, at least in succinct, in the said order that paved

way to this, otherwise avoidable, legal proceedings. An encapsulation

of facts is necessary for the disposal of this case as also for

understanding the raison d'etre for the said remark.




      2.     The revision petitioners are arraigned as accused in the

said case. The second respondent herein filed a private complaint

viz., C.M.P.No.40/2012 alleging commission of offences under

Crl.R.P.1072 of 2012                2



sections 3, 4 and 6 of the Dowry Prohibition Act against the revision

petitioners. That was taken on file as C.C.No.107/2012 by the learned

Magistrate and, accordingly, ordered to issue summons under section

204 of the Code of Criminal Procedure for the attendance of the

revision petitioners as per the impugned order.




      3.    The revision petitioners contended that the impugned

order was passed by the learned Magistrate without conducting an

enquiry by either himself or by causing an investigation by a police

officer or by such other person as he thinks fit, for the purpose of

deciding whether or not sufficient ground exists for proceeding with

the complaint. It is also contended that being persons residing outside

the jurisdiction of the learned Magistrate, it was mandatory to conduct

such an enquiry or investigation under section 202 Cr.P.C. Taking

into account the said specific contention of the revision petitioners

that no enquiry under section 202 Cr.P.C was conducted despite they

being residents of a place beyond the area in which the learned

Crl.R.P.1072 of 2012                3



Magistrate exercises his jurisdiction, this Court issued notice and

stayed all further proceedings in C.C.No.107 of 2012 as per order in

Crl.M.A.No.3729 of 2012 in the captioned revision petition. Pursuant

to the receipt of notice, the second respondent appeared through

counsel. The learned counsel for the second respondent assertively

submitted that an enquiry as contemplated under section 202 Cr.P.C

was, in fact, conducted by the learned Magistrate before ordering

issuance of summons under section 204 Cr.P.C. In the circumstances,

this Court called for a report from the learned Magistrate, through the

Registry.   Consequently, such a report was received. It is evident

from the said report that CMP.No.408 of 2012 was filed by the second

respondent herein on 6.2.2012 alleging commission of offences

punishable under sections 3, 4, and 6 of the Dowry Prohibition Act

against the revision petitioners and evidence from the complainant

and two witnesses were taken oath as part of the enquiry under section

202 Cr.P.C. on that day itself. Thereupon, on 14.2.2012, the case was

taken on file as C.C.No.107 of 2012 for offences punishable under

Crl.R.P.1072 of 2012               4



sections 3, 4 and 6 of Dowry Prohibition Act in view of the enquiry

conducted under section 202 Cr.P.C. As already noticed hereinbefore,

the core contention of the revision petitioners is that the impugned

order was passed by the learned Magistrate without conducting an

enquiry or investigation under section 202 Cr.P.C though it is

mandatory to conduct such an enquiry in view of the fact that they are

residing at a place beyond the area of jurisdiction of the learned

Magistrate. In view of the aforesaid report, the said contention will

not survive any further. When faced with such a situation, the learned

counsel for the petitioners contended that the impugned order is not a

speaking order inasmuch as no reason has been explicitly given

thereunder. Obviously, it is an order passed under section 204 Cr.P.C

ordering for issuance of process. But the question is whether section

204 mandates the learned Magistrate to explicitly state the reason for

ordering issuance of summons. That question is no more res integra

in view of the Apex Court's decision in Nupur Talwar v. Central

Bureau of Investigation reported in 2012 (3) KLT S.N.8 (C.No.10)

Crl.R.P.1072 of 2012                 5



SC. In Nupur Talwar's case, the Hon'ble Apex Court held:-

          "Section 204 Cr.P.C does not mandate the
          Magistrate to explicitly state the reasons for
          issuance of summons. It clearly states that if in
          the opinion of a Magistrate taking cognizance of
          an offence, there is sufficient ground for
          proceeding, then the summons may be issued.
          This section mandates the Magistrate to form an
          opinion as to whether there exists a sufficient
          ground for summons to be issued but it is no
          where mentioned in the section that the explicit
          narration of the same is mandatory, meaning
          thereby that it is not a pre-requisite for deciding
          the validity of the summons issued."

The Hon'ble Apex court further held as hereunder:-

            "The matter can be examined from another
           perspective. The Code of Criminal Procedure
           expressly delineates irregularities in procedure
           which would vitiate proceedings. S.461 thereof,
           lists   irregularities   which     would     vitiate
           proceedings. S.461 thereof, lists irregularities
           which would lead to annulment of proceedings.
           In the list of irregularities indicated in S.461 of
           the Code of Criminal Procedure, orders passed
           under S.204 thereof, do not find a mention. In a
           situation, as the one in hand, S.465(1) of the
           Code of Criminal Procedure, protects orders
           from errors, omissions or irregularities, unless
           "a failure of justice" has been occasioned
           thereby."

Crl.R.P.1072 of 2012                6



      4.    In the circumstances, I have no hesitation to hold that the

order impugned does not call for any interference on the aforesaid

ground especially, in the light of the decision in Kacheru Singh v.

State of Uttar Pradesh reported in AIR 1982 SCC 784. It was held

therein that summons issued to an accused by a Magistrate need not

be quashed by a High Court for the reasons that if eventually the

Magistrate comes to the conclusion that no offence was made out

against the accused, he himself can pass an order of discharge or

acquittal. In view of the said position, the second contention of the

revision petitioners must also fail.




      5.    The learned counsel for the second respondent as also the

learned Public Prosecutor submitted that to avoid recurrence of such

situations as in this case, this Court may look into the question

regarding the quintessential element that is desirable to be reflected in

an order issued under section 204 Cr.P.C for evidencing application of

mind by learned Magistrates for proceeding further with a complaint

Crl.R.P.1072 of 2012                 7



and adherence with the mandatory procedures under the Code.

Issuance of process under section 204 Cr.P.C is a preliminary step in

the stage of trial contemplated in Chapter XX of the Code. True that

going by the said section, it is not imperative on the Magistrate to

state explicitly the reason for issuing summons. Still, it cannot be lost

sight of the fact that an order passed thereunder is revisable, though

this Court will be loath to interfere with such an order. Hence, it is

preferable to state succinctly the reason/material that enabled the

Magistrate for forming the opinion that the complaint is worth

proceeding with. I am fortified in my view by the decision of the

Hon'ble Apex Court in Nupur Talwar's case (supra). In that case, the

Hon'ble Apex Court considered the term 'sufficient ground to proceed'

and held that the said term is different and distinct from the term

'sufficient to prove and establish guilt'. In other words, existence of

sufficient grounds for proceeding with the complaint in the opinion of

the Magistrate concerned alone is required to pass an order for

issuance of process under section 204. I am of the view that that the

Crl.R.P.1072 of 2012                 8



expression 'in the opinion of a Magistrate' employed in the section

means and can only mean that the Magistrate has to merely form an

opinion as to the sufficiency of grounds for proceeding against the

accused person/persons and it does not require him to record any

reason for his doing so. At the same time, the requirement of a brief

order indicating the application of mind is expected of him at that

stage. The expressions "opinion" and "sufficient ground" give an

indication that it is only desirable and proper to show on what

material, if not all the materials, he has issued the process as it would

reveal application of mind. It will be suffice to indicate about perusal

of final report, statements under section 161 or 164 Cr.P.C if

cognizance is taken and decided to issue process upon a report made

by a police officer but, if it was done pursuant to the receipt of a

complaint of facts constituting such an offence by indicating at least,

whether or not an enquiry or investigation has been made.            The

Hon'ble Apex Court in Nupur Talwar's case (supra) found that in

circumstances explained thereunder, narration of what had prompted

Crl.R.P.1072 of 2012               9



the Magistrate to summon the complainant as an accused is necessary.

I am of the view that narration of reason/material in brief that

prompted issuance of summons is desirable in respect of orders which

are revisable as it would give an opportunity to the revisional court to

view the matter after realising the manner of understanding of the

Magistrate of the matter. Such an indication would certainly avoid a

litigation like the case on hand.     During these days of docket

explosion, it is only desirable and proper to do anything and

everything legally permissible and possible to avoid multiplication of

legal proceedings. In this case, as already noticed, this Court called

for a report and that report when obtained revealed that an enquiry

under section 202 Cr.P.C was conducted and it is in view of the said

enquiry conducted that the court took the case on file as C.C.No.107

of 2012 after forming the opinion that the complaint is worth

proceeding with and ordered to issue process under section 204. An

indication as to the conduct of enquiry as contemplated under section

202 Cr.P.C in the impugned order would have and could have desisted

Crl.R.P.1072 of 2012                10



the revision petitioners from filing this revision petition and they

would have resorted only to the remedies available to them before the

learned Magistrate. Having perused the report referred above, I do

not find any illegality, error or impropriety in the impugned order and

in the said circumstances, it did not invite interference invoking the

revisional jurisdiction. This revision petition is liable to fail and

accordingly, it is dismissed.




                                                      Sd/-
                                             C.T. RAVIKUMAR
                                                     (Judge)

spc

Crl.R.P.1072 of 2012               11




                 ==========================
                    CRL.R.P. No.1072 OF 2012
                 ==========================
                 Dated this the 2nd day of July, 2012


                               ORDER




      Fate of this revision petition depends upon the question

whether an inquiry as contemplated under Section 202 of the Code of

Criminal Procedure was contemplated prior to the issuance of process.

The learned counsel for the revision petitioners submitted that no such

inquiry was conducted whilst the learned counsel for the respondents

assertively submitted that such an inquiry was conducted.




      2.    In the circumstances, call for a report from the Judicial

Crl.R.P.1072 of 2012              12



First Class Magistrate Court-II, Mavelikkara as to ascertain whether

an inquiry as    contemplated under Section 202 of the Code of

Criminal Procedure was conducted in C.C.No.107 of 2012 in

C.M.P.No.408 of 2012, within a period of two weeks from today.

Crl.M.A.No.3729 of 2012

      The interim order shall stand extended by three weeks.


                                     C.T. RAVIKUMAR
                                          (Judge)

kvr/

Crl.R.P.1072 of 2012    13




                           C.T. RAVIKUMAR, J.




                           JUDGMENT

                           September,2010

Crl.R.P.1072 of 2012    14



