
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                PRESENT:

              THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE PIUS C.KURIAKOSE
                                   &
             THE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE BABU MATHEW P.JOSEPH

      WEDNESDAY, THE 14TH DAY OF NOVEMBER 2012/23RD KARTHIKA 1934

                     OP (FC).No. 3058 of 2012 (R)
                      ----------------------------
                 OP.1254/2012 of FAMILY COURT,ERNAKULAM

PETITIONER(S)/PETITIONER:
------------------------


         PRAMOD VIDYANDHAR PANICKER, AGED 37 YEARS,
        S/O.VIDHYADHARAN PANICKER, SHILEDAR BUILDING,
        NEAR S G VIDYALAYA, GANDHI NAGAR, KOPARGAON
        AHMEDNAGAR

         BY ADV. SRI.MARTIN G.THOTTAN

RESPONDENT(S):
--------------

     1.  BINDU  PRAMOD PANICKER, AGED 25 YEARS
         W/O.PRAMOD PANICKER, CHEMBANSSERITHARAYIL,NEELIKULAM
         VAVVAKAVU, K.S.PURAM,KOLLAM DIST
         FORMERLY HAVING ADDRESS AT PLOT NO.23,
         SUNDAR HOUSING SOCIETY, SECTOR NO 3 E
         KALAMBOLI DIST, RAIGAD, MAHARASHTRA
         AND NOW R/A.THITTAYIL HOUSE, MORARJEE ROAD
         VAZHAKKALA, KAKKANAD WEST P.O.,KOCHI-30

     2.  ASSINI KUMARI
         CHEMBANSSERITHARAYIL, NEELIKULAM, VAVVAKKVU
        K.S.PURAM, KOLLAM DIST
         FORMERLY HAVING ADDRESS AT PLOT NO23
         SUNDAR HOUSING SOCIETY, SECTOR NO 3E
         KALAMBOLI DIST, RAIGAD, MAHARASHTRA
         AND NOW R/A.THITTAYIL HOUSE, MORARJEE ROAD
         VAZHAKKALA, KAKKANAD WEST P.O.,KOCHI-30

           BY ADV.SRI.SHAJ
          ADV.COMMISSIONER      BY ADV. SRI.LATHEESH SEBASTIAN

       THIS OP (FAMILY COURT)  HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD  ON  14-11-
2012, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY DELIVERED THE FOLLOWING:

O.P.(FC) NO.3058/2012




                              APPENDIX




 PETITIONER(S) EXHIBITS

EXT.P1:-   TRUE COPY OF THE ORIGINAL PETITON NO 1254 OF 2012 FILED
BEOFRE THE FAMILY COURT,

EXT.P2:-   TRUE COPY OF THE PRELIMINARY OBJECTION FILED BEFORE THE
FAMILY COURT,ERNAKULAM

EXT.P3:-   TRUE COPY of the DISCHARGE CERTIFICATE ISSUED FROM THE
SHADABDI SUPER SPECIALITY HOSPITAL, NASIK DTD 19/3/2012

EXT.P4:-   TRUE COPY of the DISCHARGE CERTIFICATE ISSUED FROM THE
SHADABDI SUPER SPECIALITY HOSPITAL, NASIK DTD 6/4/2012

EXT.P5:-   TRUE COPY OF THE ORDER DTD 4/9/2012 PASSED BY THE FAMILY
COURT ERNAKULAM  IN OP NO 1254 OF 2012


 RESPONDENTS' EXHIBITS     NIL

                             /TRUE COPY/     P.A TO JUDGE.


                                                      CR
                       PIUS C.KURIAKOSE &
                      BABU MATHEW P.JOSEPH JJ.
                       ------------------------
                       O.P.(F.C) . NO. 3058 OF 2012
                       ------------------------
          Dated this the 14th     day of November, 2012



                            JUDGMENT


Pius C.Kuriakose,J




      This original petition under Article 227 is directed against

Ext.P5 order passed by the Family Court, Ernakulam holding that

Ext.P1 Original Petition (O.P.No.1254/2012) on the files of that

court filed by respondents 1 and 2 is maintainable in law before

that court. Ext.P1 original petition was filed under Section 7 of

the Guardian & Wards Act of 1890 read with Section 7 of the

Family Courts Act 1984 for a declaration that the 2nd respondent-

grand mother of a minor child Jhanvi Pramod Panikkar, the

daughter of the petitioner and the first respondent,        is the

Guardian of the person of the above said minor.      According to

Ext.P1, the first respondent, the mother of the child, is presently

under treatment at Life Care Clinic at Palarivattom within the

territorial limits of the Family Court, Ernakulam.   She is being

 O.P.(FC) No. 3058 /2012        2

treated for Hypoxic ischemic brain injury sustained as a result of

near hanging. As the first respondent is immobilised, bed ridden

and not in a position to sign or verify the petition, she is

represented by the 2nd respondent,her mother as next friend. It

is alleged that the present state of the first respondent is the

result of the attempt made by the petitioner and his parents to

murder the first respondent. It is also alleged that the petitioner

failed to give proper care and treatment to the first respondent

and hence the     first respondent was brought from Nasik and

admitted at Brain and Spine Hospital at Vaikkom. From there

she was discharged and shifted to Life Care Clinic at

Palarivattom.    The Doctor who treated the first respondent at

Vaikkom is visiting    the Palarivattom clinic as a    consultant

psychiatrist.  The 2nd respondent is always by the side of the

first respondent giving her constant care and treatment. She is

assisted by her parents in the matter. The first respondent is

slowly       gaining recovery and there is good response to

treatment.     The Doctor advised that the patient requires

maximum sensory and emotional stimulation to her brain for her

fast recovery for which presence of her own child will be very

 O.P.(FC) No. 3058 /2012         3

useful. It is then alleged that the child is presently under the

care of one Bindu at Mumbai who is a distant relative of the

petitioner herein.   The   parents of the petitioner herein are

allegedly a aged and totally incapable of looking after the child.

They are not interested in looking after the child at all.     The

petitioner has no time to take care of her child.     The present

residence of the child in such an atmosphere will hamper the

growth of the child and will    retard her personality.    Various

requests by the first respondent for getting the custody of the

minor child were not heeded to by the petitioner and hence

Ext.P1 is filed.

      2. The petitioner entered appearance and filed preliminary

objections.    A separate application seeking exemption from

producing the child was also filed. The contention raised in the

preliminary objection is that the Family Court, Ernakulam lacks

in jurisdiction to entertain Ext.P1 original petition as the child

does not ordinarily reside within the limits of that court.    The

child has been residing ever since its birth at Mumbai. The child

is under care and protection of the petitioner and his parents and

one maid servant also has been employed to look after the child.

O.P.(FC) No. 3058 /2012             4

The allegation that custody of the child is entrusted to Bindu, a

distant relative of the petitioner,      herein is denied.    Bindu

resides very close to the petitioner's house         and on certain

occasions when the petitioner and his parents were in the

hospital only, the custody of the child was entrusted to Bindu for

a very short while.       The child is healthy and happy under the

protection of the petitioner. The Family Court at Ernakulam has

no jurisdiction over Ext.P1 and in the preliminary objection the

allegations regarding the harassment,           cruelty, attempt to

murder etc. are stoutly denied, raising the preliminary issue as

to whether the        original petition is maintainable for want of

territorial jurisdiction of the Family Court, Ernakulam.

      3.    By Ext.P5,      it is held   that the Family Court has

jurisdiction. To come to such a conclusion , the learned court has

placed reliance on the decisions such as Ganrav Nagpal v.

Sumidha Nagpal (2009 Kerala High Court 4035),               Vasu v.

Muraleedharan ( 2009 (1) KLT 480) . The learned court has

proceeded to distinguish the        judgment in   Chandy v. Mary

Baneena ( 1988 (1) KLT 611) and              Himanshu Mahajan v.

Rashu Mahjan and others ( AIR 2008 Himachal Pradesh

O.P.(FC) No. 3058 /2012           5

38) which were relied on by the petitioner herein.

      4. Ext.P5 is challenged on various grounds and we have

heard the submissions of Sri.Martin G.Thottan learned counsel

for the petitioner and those of Sri.K.Shaj learned counsel for the

respondents.     Upon the conclusion of the arguments, as we felt

that it is necessary to have an idea     as to the present physical

and mental condition of the first respondent, we deputed

Advocate Latheesh Sebastian as commissioner to visit her and

to file a report.    The report submitted by the commissioner is

very short.     The essentials of the report submitted     by the

commissioner is as follows;

                   "The present physical and mental
            condition of Mrs.Bindu Panicker.
                   At the time of my visit Mrs. Bindu
            Panicker was laying in the hospital bed. She
            is fully bed ridden, unable to make a move of
            her own.     Her mouth and eyes were open.
            She is able to move iris on both directions.
            Mrs. Bindu can move her head on both
            directions. From the appearance it is found
            that she is not responding to the sound or
            sensing the movements in the room and is not
            identifying/recognizing visitors.   But she is
            responding by expressing shocks in the face, if
            one touches on the nails of both the legs and
            the feet foot. Mrs. Bindu did not make any
            sound/noice at the time of my visit and is not
            in a position to answer any questions, though

O.P.(FC) No. 3058 /2012         6

           I asked some questions.
                 Mother and doctor, who are attending
           Mrs.Bindu Panicker expressed that there is
           improvements in the physical condition of Mrs.
           Bindu Panicker and she is taking food orally, if
           fed through spoon. But I have not seen the
           same .
                 Since    Mrs.Bindu    Panicker   is   not
           responding to any of the questions, I am not
           in a position to report about the mental
           condition of Mrs.Bindu Panicker. "

     5. Relying on the judgment of the supreme Court in

Jeewanti. v.Kishan Chandra ( AIR 1982 Supreme Court 3 ), it

was argued by Sri.Martin G.Thottan that residence should mean

actual   place of residence and not legal or          constructive

residence. The judgment of the Hon'ble Mr. Justice Thomas as a

Judge of this court in Chandy v. Mary Baneena (Cited supra)

was also relied on by the learned counsel.

     6.   Relying on the decision reported in Poonen v. Rathi

Varghese ( 1966 KLT 454 (FB) Advocate Sri.Martin G. Thottan

argued that place of residence does not mean places of casual

residence and transitory residence. The residence of the first

respondent at Life Care Clinic at Palarivattom is only a transitory

residence, so submitted Mr.Martin G. Thottan.      Relying on an

early judgment of this Court reported in Sarada Nayar v.

 O.P.(FC) No. 3058 /2012         7

Vayankara Amma (1957 KLT 466) Mr.Martin argued that the

expression "where the minor ordinarily resides" has been

intentionally used in the statute for excluding places to which the

minor may be removed at or about the time of filing of the

application for the enforcement of the guardianship and custody

of the minor. The legislature intended to avoid inconveniences to

the minor. The interest of the minor has been uppermost in the

mind of the legislature while using the above expression and the

legislature has conferred jurisdiction only upon the Court where

the minor has been residing for a reasonably long period . The

minor in this case, it was pointed out, has never seen the soil of

Kerala. Referring to the judgment of the Division Bench of this

Court reported in Vasu v. Muralidharan (cited supra) where

the Court took the view that when the spouses are living

separately the places of residence of the minor children will be

the place of residence of either of the spouses, counsel submitted

that the above judgment strikes a different note and hence

requires to be considered. According to the learned counsel even

if it is  assumed     that the said decision lays down the law

correctly, the Family Court, Ernakulam cannot have jurisdiction in

 O.P.(FC) No. 3058 /2012        8

this case as the first respondent cannot be said to be ordinarily

residing at Palarivattom which is only a place of transitory

residence for her. Ordinary and permanent residence of the first

respondent is at Mumbay.

       7. Meeting the arguments of Mr. Martin G. Thottan,

Sri.Shaj, learned counsel for the respondent supported the

impugned judgment of the Family Court. He would place strong

reliance on the judgment in Vasu v. Muralidharan and submit

that the first respondent/mother of the child has been residing

at Palarivattom for a long period and now considering her

present health condition she will have to remain hospitalized for

still longer periods.  Reliance was placed by Sri.Shaj on the

judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court reported in Nil Ratan

Kundu v. Abhijit Kundu (2008) 9 S.C.C. 413) to argue the

preposition that in parens patriae jurisdiction the paramount

consideration which governs custody of a minor child is the

welfare of the child and not the rights of the parents.     The

Hon'ble Supreme Court in unmistakable terms laid down that

what is required in such matters is a human touch. Referring to

the judgment of the Full Bench of this Court in Poonen v. Rathi

O.P.(FC) No. 3058 /2012          9

Varghese (1996 KLT 454), the learned counsel submitted that

to constitute 'residence', it is not necessary that the party or

parties must have his or their own house and the stay need not

be permanent. It can also be temporary, so long as there is

animus manendi or an intention to stay for an indefinite period.

In view of the present condition of the first respondent it is

obvious that first and 2nd respondent will have to remain at

Palarivattom for an indefinite period.    Learned counsel would

draw our attention to the certificate issued on 19.6.2002 by

Dr.Biju Ravindran, Consultant Physiatrist visiting Life Care Clinic

regularly in which it is stated that the first respondent needs

maximum sensory and emotional stimulation to the brain for

her fast recovery and that presence of the child is absolutely

necessary for the fast recovery of the first respondent.

     8. We have given our anxious consideration into the rival

submissions addressed at the Bar. Section 9 of the Guardians

and Wards Act confers jurisdiction to deal with matters pertaining

to guardianship and custody of the children only on that court

within whose territorial limits the child ordinarily resides.   The

Hon'ble Supreme Court in        Jeewanti v.Kishan Chandra (cited

 O.P.(FC) No. 3058 /2012        10

supra) dealing with the concept of 'residence' within the meaning

of Section 19 clause (ii) of the Hindu Marriage Act, held that in

order to give jurisdiction on the ground of 'residence' something

more than a temporary stay is required. It must be more or less

of a permanent character, and of such a nature that the court in

which the respondent is sued, is his natural forum.   Stating that

the word 'reside' is by no means free from all ambiguity and is

capable of a variety of meanings according to the circumstances

to which it is made applicable and the context in which it is

found, their Lordships go on to say that in the ordinary sense

'residence' is more or less of a permanent character.         The

expression 'resides' means to make an abode for a considerable

time: to dwell permanently or for a length of time: to have a

settled abode for a    time.    Justice K.T.Thomas as a Judge of

this court in Chandy v. Mary Neena (cited supra) relied on the

above decision of the Supreme Court and in the context of

Section 9 of the Guardians and Wards Act held that             the

expression "ordinarily resides" connotes a regularly settled home

and not a place of study where the children are obliged to dwell

by force of circumstances or compulsion of parents employment.

O.P.(FC) No. 3058 /2012           11

A Division Bench of this court in      Sarada Nayar v. Vayankara

Amma      & others (cited supra)       held that the expression in

Section 9 of the Guardians & Wards Act "where the minor

ordinarily resides" appears to have been deliberately used to

exclude places to which the minor may be removed, at or about

the time of the filing of the application for the enforcement of the

guardianship and custody of the minor. It is laid down that the

phrase"ordinarily resides" indicates ordinary residence even at

the time of the presentation of presentation of the application.

It is pointed out that emphasis is undoubtedly on the minor's

ordinary place of residence.

      9. The judgment of the Supreme Court in Nil Ratan Kundu

And Another v. Abhijit Kundu (cited supra) does not expressly

deal with the concept of 'ordinary residence" under Section 9 of

the   Guardians and Wards Act . It has only reiterated the well

known proposition that in parens patriae jurisdiction the issue

has to be resolved with a human touch and that due weightage

must be given to the child's ordinary comfort, contentment,

health, education, intellectual development and favourable

surroundings as well as physical comfort and moral values. It is

 O.P.(FC) No. 3058 /2012          12

also laid down that the court should ascertain the           child's

preference.   The Full Bench of this court in       Poonen v.Rathi

Varghese (cited supra) dealing with Section (3) clause (3) of the

Divorce Act 1869, explained 'Reside or last resided together'

and held inter alia that the      main factors to be considered in

deciding the question where the parties last resided together are

(1) to constitute 'residence', it is not necessary that the party or

parties must have his or their own house:(2) to constitute

'residence' the stay need not be permanent it can also be

temporary, so long as there is animus manendi or an intention to

stay for an indefinite period; (3)"residence" will not take in a

casual stay in, or a flying visit to a particular place; a mere

casual residence in a place for a temporary purpose, with no

indention or remaining, is not covered by the word 'reside'; (4)

"residence" connotes, something more than stay: it implies some

intention to remain at a place, and not merely to pay it a casual

visit: (5) by staying in a particular place, in order to constitute

"residence" the intention must be to make it his or their abode or

residence, either permanent or temporary (6) the expression

"last resided" also means the place where the person had his last

O.P.(FC) No. 3058 /2012         13

abode or residence, permanent or temporary; (7) where there

has been residence together of a more permanent character, and

a casual or brief residence together it is only the former that can

be considered as      "residence together" for determining the

jurisdiction" (8) the question as to whether a particular person

has chosen to make a particular place His abode, is to be

gathered from the particular circumstances of each case. Strong

reliance was placed by the learned counsel for the respondent in

a Division Bench of this court in      Vasu v.Muralidharan (cited

supra) which takes the view that ordinary residence of child can

be the ordinary residence of either of the parents where both the

parents are living apart- if one of the spouse is not living,

necessarily the only other place having jurisdiction is the place

where the spouse living resides.   It will be seen on a reading of

this judgment that their Lordships were following an earlier

judgment of this court in Prabhu v. Rajani (2007 (2) KLT SN

38).

     10. We have gone through the full text of the judgment in

Prabhu's case. The observation made by the Bench in the

beginning of paragraph 5 of the judgment that "the ordinary

O.P.(FC) No. 3058 /2012         14

residence of the child can be the ordinary residence of either of

the parents as well in a situation where both parents are living

apart" is made by the Bench as a general observation without

referring to any precedent. Interestingly in that case the Bench

did not accept the case of the mother that as she and the child

are residing at Tripunithura and as the child is admitted to a

school in Tripunithura, the Ernakulam court has jurisdiction. This

Court remitted the matter back to the Family Court to decide the

question whether the mother who came to reside in Tripunithura

recently can be said to be ordinarily residing at Tripunithura. The

facts in Vasu v.Muralidharan (cited supra) will now have to be

noticed.   That was a case where the dispute was between the

maternal grand parents of the child with whom the child was

residing at the time of presentation of the application and father

of the child whose ordinary place of residence was at Palakkad.

The respondent in that case, the mother of the child had

committed suicide and the police had in fact charge sheeted the

father of the child for dowry death. Nevertheless the trial court

found that place of ordinary residence of the child is not the place

where the child was residing at the time of presentation of the

O.P.(FC) No. 3058 /2012          15

application - place of residence of its maternal grant parents, but

the same is Plakkad, the residence of the father of the child.

The Division Bench referred to Prabhu v. Rajani (cited supra)

and held that that the principles laid down in Prabu v. Rajani's

case will apply also to cases where both the parents are living

and living apart.    In that view of the matter, the       Division

Bench held that it is the court at Palakkad, the place of residence

of the father, which is having jurisdiction under Section 9 of the

Guardians and Wards Act.           The Division Bench however,

elsewhere in the judgment      has stated that the question as to

the ordinary residence of a minor is always a question to be

decided on the facts and particulars of each case. According to

us, the judgment in Vasu v. Maralidharan can apply only to the

cases where the fact situation is identical to that case.

      11. Coming to the present case, the child in question was

born in the State of Maharastra.      It is being brought     up at

Mumbai and it is given pre primary education at Mumbai          The

child is not old enough to form an intelligent preference.   It was

never seen the soil of Kerala, the home state of its parents. The

materials available will show that the child is staying with his

O.P.(FC) No. 3058 /2012          16

father and paternal grand parents.         The allegation that the

custody of the child is given to a distant relative is emphatically

denied.    Materials available show that since it's birth the child

has been residing at Mumbai only. The respondents do not have

a case that the child has ever resided at Palarivattom, the place

within the jurisdiction of the Ernakulam Family Court or for that

matter anywhere else in Kerala. The court below was relied on

the Judgment in Vasu v. Muralidharan(cited supra) to take the

view that as the mother of the child, who is living separately

from her husband, is ordinarily residing at Palarivattom, the

Family Court at Ernakulam has the jurisdiction.

      12.   It is very difficult to accept the contention of the

respondents that the first respondent herein, the mother of the

child, is ordinarily residing at Palarivattom, the place where the

hospital in which she is now admitted is situated.        The first

respondent's family house is at Kollam and her             ordinary

residence, assuming that she has no other place of residence in

Maharastra, is Kollam.     But, we find that the first respondent's

parents including the 2nd respondent her mother and power of

attorney holder were also having ordinarily stay at Raigar in

 O.P.(FC) No. 3058 /2012         17

Maharastra.

      13. When the concept of ordinary residence is analysed in

the context of the various decisions referred to herein before

especially the judgment of the Supreme Court in Jeewanti v.

Kishan Chandra (cited supra), Sarada Nayar v. Vayankara Amma

& others (cited supra) and also the judgment of the Full Bench

Poonen v. Rathi Varghese (cited supra) it will be seen that the

first respondent, mother, is not ordinarily residing at Palarivattom

within the limits of the Ernakulam Family Court. On the contrary,

it can be very easily found that the child is ordinarily residing at

Mumbai along with its father. There is yet another aspect which

cannot go unnoticed. The principle that a minor child can be

considered to be ordinarily residing at the place of ordinary

residence of either of its parents is based on the theory that the

parents will always provide shelter to the child. In this particular

case, where the first respondent mother is lying in a semi coma

condition in the hospital at Palarivattom, the above principle

cannot have any application.

      14. The result is that the original petition stands allowed.

The impugned order is set aside. It is held that Ext.P1, original

O.P.(FC) No. 3058 /2012            18

petition is not maintainable before the Family Court, Ernakulam

for want of territorial jurisdiction. The Family Court is directed to

return Ext.P1 to the respondents so as to enabling them to

present the same before appropriate Court.

        We record the assurance given to us on behalf of the

petitioner by his counsel Sri.Martin G. Thottan that the petitioner

will bring the child Jhanvi Pramod Panickar over to the Life Care

Clinic, Palarivattom, where the first respondent is being treated,

so that the respondents can see the child and be with the child

for reasonable periods of time during school vacation/long

holidays.

                                        Sd/-


                                   PIUS C.KURIAKOSE,
                                             Judge.
                                        Sd/-


                             BABU MATHEW P.JOSEPH,
                                            Judge.




dpk/ul/kns.

O.P.(FC) No. 3058 /2012   19



