
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                              PRESENT:

          THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE N.K.BALAKRISHNAN

  FRIDAY, THE 16TH DAY OF NOVEMBER 2012/25TH KARTHIKA 1934

                  Crl.Rev.Pet.No. 2209 of 2004 (A)
                --------------------------------
    CRA.199/2000 of ADDL. SESSIONS JUDGE,FAST TRACK COURT-I,
                            ALAPPUZHA
     SC.134/1990 of PRINCIPAL ASST. SESSIONS JUDGE, ALAPPUZHA

REVISION PETITIONER(S)/APPELLANT/ACCUSED::
-----------------------------------------

        KESUKUTTAN @ KESU, S/O. KESAVAN,
        PADINJAREKATTIL VEEDU, AMBALAPPUZHA, ALAPPUZHA.

        BY ADV. SRI.S.SHANAVAS KHAN

COMPLAINANT(S)/RESPONDENT/COMPLAINANT::
---------------------------------------

        THE STATE OF KERALA,
        REPRESENTED BY THE PUBLIC PROSECUTOR
        HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM.

      BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SRI. ROY THOMAS

      THIS CRIMINAL REVISION PETITION HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD
ON    16-11-2012, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE
FOLLOWING:


                     N.K. Balakrishnan, J.
            .................................................
                Crl.R.P. No. 2209 of 2004
            ..................................................

                    Dated: 16-11-2012

                               ORDER

     The accused was concurrently held guilty and

convicted of the offence         punishable under Sec. 304B of

I.P.C., and was sentenced to undergo R.I. for seven years.

This Revision Petition is directed against the                   said

conviction and sentence passed against him.

     2.   The case of the prosecution is that deceased

Bindu Kumari, the wife of the accused was subjected to

cruelty with a view to coerce her to meet his unlawful

demand for dowry. Because of the cruel treatment she was

subjected to, she committed suicide by consuming/eating

cerbera odollam. Hence, the prosecution contends that the

accused committed the offence of dowry death punishable

under Sec. 304B of I.P.C.

Crl.R.P. No. 2209 of 2004   -:2:-


     3.   P.Ws1 to P.W.4 were examined and Exts. P1 to

P10 were marked on the side of the prosecution.

     4. The learned Asst. Sessions Judge, after thoroughly

scanning the evidence found that the prosecution could

establish that the accused committed the offence under

Sec. 304B and thus he was convicted and sentenced.    The

learned Addl. Sessions Judge re-appreciated the evidence

and concurred with the conviction and sentence passed

against him.

     5.   The fact that Bindu Kumari was married by the

accused on 15.06.1995, is not disputed. The courts below

have found that Bindu Kumari consumed or ate Cerbera

Odollam on 17.07.1998      and because of the poisonous

effect, she died on 18.07.1998. It is not in dispute now.

The evidence given by PW1 the mother of the deceased,

PW2 the maternal uncle, PW3 the brother of the deceased

would unmistakably prove that the accused had subjected

his wife Bindu Kumari to such harassment with a view to

Crl.R.P. No. 2209 of 2004   -:3:-


coerce her to meet his unlawful demand for dowry.

     6.    The evidence would show that the amount agreed

to be paid to the accused as dowry was Rs.10,000/-.

Besides, gold ornaments to the possible extent was also

agreed to be given. Out of the amount so agreed, Rs.3,000/-

was paid. 13 grams of gold ornaments were also given at

the time of marriage. It is in evidence that subsequent to

the marriage, another sum of Rs.1,000/- was also paid to the

accused. The evidence would also show that the accused

used to harass the deceased by making persistent demand

for the balance amount of dowry. The evidence given by

PWs1 to 3 would show that the accused tortured the

deceased by beating her when she refused to bring the

balance amount of dowry.

     7.   There is also evidence to show that the deceased

had gone to her parental house on 11.07.1998 and till

14.07.1998 she stayed in that house. On those days, the

accused had gone to that house and demanded for the

Crl.R.P. No. 2209 of 2004    -:4:-


balance dowry amount. As the amount was not paid, she

was beaten up by the accused from there also. The cruelty

shown to her was intolerable as could be gathered from the

evidence on record. There is also evidence to show that

because of the unbearable treatment, PW1 had borrowed

Rs.1,500/- from her neighbour on 13.07.1998 and she paid

the same to the accused towards the balance dowry. That

fact was not effectively controverted by the defence.

      8.    PW4 and PW5 are the neighbours of PW1. They

also deposed that the accused used to quarrel with Bindu

Kumari and that they had actually seen the accused beating

or assaulting deceased Bindu Kumari. They also stated that

the deceased used to tell them about the harassment and

cruel treatment meted out her at the hands of the accused.

     9.  The learned counsel for the petitioner has argued

with vehemence that the persons residing in the nearby

house of the accused have not been examined to prove that

the accused used to ill-treat or harass the deceased.

Crl.R.P. No. 2209 of 2004     -:5:-


According to the learned counsel, if the accused had caused

physical torture to the deceased then it would have been

witnessed by the persons residing in the nearby house of

the accused. It is quite natural that when the wife residing

in the house of       her husband, will not divulge to the

neighbours    the cruel treatment or harassment with which

she was subjected to. PW1 to PW3 are the most competent

witnesses to speak       regarding the harassment or cruel

treatment of the accused towards the deceased.        Their

evidence does not suffer from any infirmity on the other

hand it appears to be the unvarnished truth. Their evidence

gets further corroboration from PW4 and PW5, the

neighbours of P.W.1.       Hence, the evidence on record is

sufficient to hold that the accused harassed his wife,

deceased Bindu Kumari, in order to coerce her to meet his

unlawful demand for dowry or part of the amount payable

as dowry.

     10. Deceased Bindu Kumari committed suicide within

Crl.R.P. No. 2209 of 2004         -:6:-


seven years from the date of marriage. In order to attract

the presumption under Sec.113B of the Evidence Act it

must be shown that soon before the death, such woman

had been subjected by such person to cruelty or harassment

for, or in connection with, any demand for dowry.

Sec.304B reads:

    "304 B. Dowry death - (1) Where the death of a woman is caused by
    any burns or bodily injury or occurs otherwise than under normal
    circumstances within seven years of her marriage and it is shown that
    soon before her death she was subjected to cruelty or harassment by
    her husband or any relative of her husband for, or in connection with,
    any demand for dowry, such death shall be called "dowry death", and
    such husband or relative shall be deemed to have caused her death.

          Explanation - For the purpose of this sub-section, "dowry"
    shall have the same meaning as in Section 2 of the Dowry Prohibition
    Act, 1961 (28 of 1961).

          (2)   Whoever commits dowry death shall be punished with
    imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than seven years but
    which may extend to imprisonment for life.

    11.     The words "soon before" in Sec.113B is to be

determined by the courts depending upon the facts and

circumstances of each case. It is argued by the learned

counsel for the petitioner that for three days; that is from

11.07.1998 to 14.07.1998, when Bindu Kumari was staying

Crl.R.P. No. 2209 of 2004    -:7:-


in her parental home, the accused was also there and later

the deceased accompanied her husband to his house on

14.07.1998 and so according to the learned counsel, it is

unbelievable that she was         subjected   to cruelty    or

harassment by the husband. But there is ample evidence to

show that the deceased had at first expressed her

reluctance to go along with the accused and she had in fact

told her mother that it is unbearable for her to stay with the

accused. But the mother (PW1) directed her to accompany

her husband. Therefore, it is not a case where the deceased

willingly accompanied her husband but only because of the

compulsion or persuasion      of P.W.1    she    went to her

husband's house. Therefore, that is not a conduct which

would run counter to the plea of harassment put forward by

the prosecution.

      12.    The evidence given by PW1 to PW3, which is

further corroborated by PW4 and PW5 was rightly accepted

by the courts below to hold that soon before her death the

Crl.R.P. No. 2209 of 2004     -:8:-


husband (accused) had subjected the deceased to cruelty or

harassment for, or in connection with the         demand for

dowry. Therefore, the presumption under Sec.113B of the

Indian Evidence Act also is available to the prosecution to

sustain the charge against the accused, the prosecution

contends.

    13. The evidence would clearly show that the death

of  Bindu Kumari occurred otherwise than under normal

circumstances within 7 years of marriage. There is also

evidence to show that soon before the death she had been

subjected to cruelty and harassment in connection with any

demand for dowry.       As these ingredients are seen fulfilled,

the accused     being the husband of Bindu Kumari who is

proved to have subjected Bindukumari to such harassment

can be presumed to be guilty of the offence under Section

304 B of I.P.C. Here the prosecution could prove that the

cruelty or harassment related to the demand for dowry.

The word "dowry"        mentioned in Sec. 304B     has to be

Crl.R.P. No. 2209 of 2004   -:9:-


understood as is defined in Sec. 2 of the Dowry Prohibition

Act.

     14.     The learned counsel for the petitioner would

submit that it is not enough that the harassment or cruelty

was caused to the woman with a demand for dowry at some

point of time but it should have happened soon before her

death. But so far as the case on hand is concerned there is

evidence in abundance to show that soon before her death

she was subjected to such cruelty or harassment demanding

the balance amount payable to him towards dowry and that

she was physically and mentally tortured by the accused.

Therefore, the proximity to her death which is the pivot

indicated by    the expression soon before death is   fully

established in this case. (See the decision of the Supreme

Court in Satbir Singh v. State of Punjab - AIR 2001 SC

2828). In the instant case the evidence which has been

found acceptable by the trial court and the appellate court

is that the accused subjected his wife Bindu Kumari to

Crl.R.P. No. 2209 of 2004    -:10:-


such cruel treatment and harassment      which led her to

commit suicide which was a death "otherwise than under

normal circumstances". To attract the provisions of Sec.

304B    I.P.C. one of the main ingredients of the offence

which is required to be established is that soon before her

death she was subjected to cruelty and harassment in

connection with the demand for dowry. There is evidence

to show that the     accused had demanded for the balance

amount and though Rs. 1500/- was paid by P.W.1 after

having obtained it from a neighbour          the accused's

(husband) was not satisfied and he still persisted for the

balance amount. Though the deceased was reluctant to

accompany the accused to his house,        because of the

persuasion made by her mother,       she had to leave her

parental home. She went to her husband's house and later

committed suicide because of the intolerable treatment. It

was the harassment and cruelty meted out to her by the

accused which forced her to commit suicide.

Crl.R.P. No. 2209 of 2004    -:11:-


     15.       In these circumstances,     there can be no

difficulty to hold that the presumption under Sec. 113B of

Evidence    Act squarely applies to the facts of this case.

Even other wise, there is unimpeachable evidence given by

P.W.1 to 3, and other witnesses (P.W.4 and P.W.5) that

the accused had subjected his wife Bindu Kumari to such

cruelty and harassment in order to coerce her to meet his

unlawful demand for       the balance amount     payable as

dowry.     See also the decision in K.Prema S. Rao and

Another      v. Yadla Srinivasa Rao - AIR 2003 SC 11.

      16.    The Courts below have thoroughly scanned the

evidence and rightly came to the conclusion that the

accused subjected his wife deceased Bindu Kumari to such

cruelty and harassment in order to coerce her to meet his

unlawful demand for dowry.         See also the decision in

Yashoda and Another         v. State of Madhya Pradesh

(2004) 3 SCC 98 and Kailash v. State of M.P. AIR

2007 SC 107.

Crl.R.P. No. 2209 of 2004         -:12:-


      17.   I have gone through the judgments and also the

evidence       on record.         I am fully convinced that the

findings entered by the two courts below are perfectly

correct. I find nor reason to interfere with the conviction

entered against the petitioner. He was sentenced only to

rigorous imprisonment for 7 years which the minimum

prescribed under Sec. 304 B of I.P.C. As such the sentence

awarded by the courts below also does not require any

interference.

     In the result, this Crl. R.P. is dismissed confirming the

conviction and sentence passed against the petitioner.

     The learned Asst. Sessions Judge will take steps to

execute the sentence forthwith.

     Dated this the 16th day of November, 2012.




                                               N.K. Balakrishnan,
                                                           Judge.



ani.



