
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                PRESENT:

              THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE V.K.MOHANAN

    THURSDAY, THE 8TH DAY OF NOVEMBER 2012/17TH KARTHIKA 1934

                       CRL.A.No. 161 of 2010 (A)
                      -------------------------
                   CRLP.908/2009 DATED 22-01-2010
                  CC.415/2002 of J.M.F.C.,MATTANNUR

APPELLANT/PETITIONER/COMPLAINANT:
-----------------------------------
       P.T.MINI, D/O.THANKAPPAN PILLAI,
       PUTHIYA VEETTIL HOUSE, MUNDAYAMPARAMBA.P.O, IRITTY
       THALASSERY.

       BY ADVS.SRI.V.V.ASOKAN
              SRI.P.P.RAMACHANDRAN

RESPONDENTS/ACCUSED:
----------------------
     1. M.G.SUBHASH, S/O.GOPINATHAN,
       KALPANA HOUSE, ULIKKAL.P.O, THALASSERY.

     2. GOPINATHAN,
       RETIRED HEAD MASTER, KALPANA HOUSE, ULIKKAL.P.O
       THALASSERY.

     3. BHARGAVI,
       RETIRED HEAD MISTRESS, W/O.GOPINATHAN, KALPANA HOUSE,
       ULIKKAL.P.O, THALASSERY.

     4. NISHAMOL, D/O.GOPINATHAN,
       KALPANA HOUSE, ULIKKAL.P.O, THALASSERY.

     5. STATE OF KERALA,
       REPRESENTED BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR,
       HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM-682 018.

       R1 TO 4 -   BY ADV. SRI.C.P.PEETHAMBARAN
       R5-  BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SMT.S.HYMA

      THIS CRIMINAL APPEAL HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD ON
08-11-2012, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY DELIVERED THE FOLLOWING:

CRL.A.No. 161 of 2010 (A)

                              APPENDIX

PETITIONER'S EXHIBIT:-

      ANNEXURE A1        :  COPY OF THE JUDGMENT IN O.P.No.190/2003
                            ON THE FILE OF THE FAMILY COURT, KANNUR.

      ANNEXURE A2        :  COPY OF THE JUDGMENT IN MAT APPEAL
                            No.284/2005 BY THIS HON'BLE COURT.

RESPONDENTS' EXHIBT      :  NIL.


                             True copy

                            P.A. to Judge


                     V.K.MOHANAN, J.
           ---------------------------------------------
                   Crl.A.No.161 of 2010
          ----------------------------------------------
     Dated this the 08th day of November, 2012

                         JUDGMENT

    The complainant in a prosecution for the offence

punishable under Sections 420, 406 and 498-A read with

Section 34 of the I.P.C. is the appellant herein as she is

aggrieved    by   the    judgment       dated    26/08/2009 in

C.C.No.415 of 2002 of the court of the Judicial First Class

Magistrate, Mattannur by which the learned Magistrate

acquitted all the four accused, under Section 248(1) of

Cr.P.C., who faced the prosecution for the above offences.

    2.    The case of the complainant is that the

marriage between the complainant and A1 took place on

26/03/2001 at Mahadeva Temple, Keezhur, as per the

customs and and ceremonies prevailing among the Hindu

Community and after the marriage the complainant was

residing along with the accused in their house. According

to the complainant at the time of the marriage

complainant's parents gave 35 sovereign of gold

Crl.A.No.161/2010
                             : 2 :


ornaments. The further case of the complainant is that

on the first day of marriage, during night, A1 revealed

that he is impotent and he is incapable of performing

sexual acts. Due to the impotency of A1, the marriage

has not been consummated so far. It is also the case of

the complainant in order to conceal his impotency, the

accused       physically  and     mentally  harassed   the

complainant.      It is also alleged that     the accused

physically and mentally harassed her and compelled her

to assign 50 cents of property in the name of A1 and

accused compelled her for artificial insemination. It is

also stated in the complaint that accused obtained entire

gold ornaments of the complainant on the first week of

the marriage and when the complainant asked to return

her gold ornaments the accused refused to give the same.

It is also alleged that the accused physically and mentally

harassed the complainant by demanding more dowry and

also compelled her for artificial insemination.      Thus

according to the complainant the accused suppressed the

Crl.A.No.161/2010
                             : 3 :


fact that A1 is an impotent and contracted the marriage

with the complainant and thereby cheated her and thus

the accused has committed the offences punishable under

Sections 420, 406 and 498-A read with Section 34 of the

I.P.C.

      3.     On receiving the complaint after recording the

sole statement of the complainant as well as the one of

the witnesses, the court below took cognizance against

the accused for the said offences and when summons

issued the accused they appeared before the trial court.

Thereafter PWs.1 to 4 were examined. PW.1 is the de

facto complainant and PW.2 is the mother of PW.1, PW.3

is the younger brother of PW.1's father and PW.4 is the

urologist attached to Medial college, Pariyaram.      After

hearing the prosecution as well as the defence the trial

court framed a formal charge against the accused for the

offences punishable under Sections 406, 420 and 498-A

read with Section 34 of the I.P.C. and when the said

charge read over and explained to the accused, they

Crl.A.No.161/2010
                           : 4 :


denied the same. Consequently the trial was continued

during which PWs.1 to 4 were re-called and cross-

examined. From the side of the complainant Exts.P1 to 3

documents were also marked.         Exts.P1 and P2 are

respectively the judgment and decree in O.P.No.190 of

2003 of the Family Court, Kannur.          Ext.P3 is the

judgment of this Court in MAT. Appeal No.284 of 2005.

During 313 examination the circumstances and evidence

brought during the prosecution evidence against the

accused put to them and they denied the same. During

the evidence of defence, DW.1 was examined and Exts.D1

and X1 were marked. DW.1 is the doctor who conducted

the potency test of the accused and who issued Ext.D1,

the potency certificate. Ext.X1 is the potency certificate

issued by the Medical Board, Government Hospital,

Kannur. On the basis of the pleading advanced by the

complainant and defence and on the basis of the evidence

on record, trial court has formulated five points for its

consideration. Finally the learned Magistrate has found

Crl.A.No.161/2010
                             : 5 :


that the complainant has miserably failed to establish her

case beyond reasonable doubt and consequently the

accused are acquitted under Section 248(1) of Cr.P.C.,

which finding and order of acquittal are challenged in this

appeal.

      4.     I have heard Sri.P.P.Ramachandran, learned

counsel for the appellant and Sri.Peethambaran, learned

counsel for the respondent.

      5.     The counsel for the appellant vehemently

submitted that the evidence of PWs.1 and 4 established

the offence against the accused under Section 420 of the

I.P.C. It is also the submission of the counsel that Exts.P1

to P3 documents further proves the fact that A1-husband

was impotent at the time of marriage but the trial court

overlooking the above evidence of PW.1 and Exts.P1 to P3

found that no offence under Section 420 of I.P.C. is

attracted and therefore according to the learned counsel,

the said finding is liable to be interfered with. It is also

the    submission    of  the   learned  counsel   that  the

Crl.A.No.161/2010
                             : 6 :


complainant has established the offence under Section

406 of I.PC. against the accused through the evidence of

PW.1 regarding the entrustment of the ornaments of 35

sovereign.      But the learned Magistrate overlooked the

above evidence especially when the defence has not

denied the claim of PW.1 with respect to the dowry as

well as the ornaments handed over to the accused. It is

the further submission of the learned counsel that it is

practically impossible to have independent evidence

other than the evidence of wife in the present case with

respect to the offence under Section 498-A of the I.P.C.

According to the learned counsel PW.1 when examined,

had deposed that against her the accused meted out

harassment       but  the  learned  Magistrate    failed  to

appreciate those evidence and came into a wrong

conclusion.      Therefore, the learned counsel for the

appellant submitted that the finding of the court below is

absolutely incorrect and illegal and liable to be interfered

with and liable to be set aside and the order of acquittal

Crl.A.No.161/2010
                             : 7 :


has to be reversed and the accused are liable to be

convicted. In support of his submission learned counsel

placed reliance on the decisions in Karnidan Sarda and

another Vs. Sailaja Kanta Mitra [A.I.R. 1940 Patna

page     683]    and   Velu    Pillai   Padakalingam vs.

Paramanandam Yesudasan [1953KLT page 587].

      6.     Shri.Peethambaran, learned counsel for the

respondent after inviting me through the deposition of

PW.1 and the evidence of PW.4 and evidence of DW.1 and

Exts.D1 and Ext.X1 document, submitted that the

complainant has miserably failed to prove the essential

ingredients of Sections 420, 406 and 498-A of I.P.C., the

offences which are alleged against the accused and

therefore the trial court is fully justified in its finding and

acquitting the accused. Thus, according to the learned

counsel the appellant has miserably failed to make out

any ground to interfere with the finding of the court

below and the order of acquittal.

Crl.A.No.161/2010
                            : 8 :


      7.     I have carefully considered the arguments

advanced by the learned counsel for the appellant as well

as the respondent. I have perused the judgment of the

trial court carefully and scrutinized the evidence and

materials on record.

      8.     In the light of the arguments and rival

contentions advanced by the learned counsel for the

appellant and the respondent and in the light of the

evidence and materials on record particularly in view of

the finding of the court below the question that emerges

for consideration is whether the trial court is justified in

its finding and acquitting the accused and further

whether the appellant has succeeded in making out any

case to interfere with the finding of the court below and

to reverse the order of acquittal recorded in favour of the

accused.

      9.     I do not propose to repeat the evidence and

materials referred to by the learned Magistrate of the

trial court in the impugned judgment. Before going to the

Crl.A.No.161/2010
                            : 9 :


details of the case it is beneficial to refer to certain

undisputed facts. The marriage between the complainant

and the first accused has taken place on 26/03/2001 and

thereafter the marital relationship continued only for

seven months. Before the filing of the present private

complaint, the complainant has already approached the

Family Court and obtained Exts.P1 judgment and P2

decree which are confirmed by this Court as per Ext.P3

judgment.

      10. The first offence alleged against the respondent

is under Section 420 of I.P.C.         The case of the

complainant is that at the time of marriage the first

accused and his relative suppressed the fact that the first

accused was impotent and concealing the said fact the

first accused entered into a contract of marriage with the

complainant.      Therefore the accused has committed

offence punishable under Section 420 of I.P.C. According

to me, in order to establish an offence under Section 420

of I.P.C. in the present case the complainant is expected

Crl.A.No.161/2010
                            : 10 :


to prove that the first accused and the other accused

were having sufficient knowledge that the first accused

was impotent before contracting the marriage with the

complainant and the said fact has been suppressed by the

accused.      Before considering the above question, it is

absolutely inevitable to find out whether the first accused

is an impotent either at the time of the marriage or

before it. To prove the above facts the only evidence

available on record from the part of the complainant is

that of the oral testimony of PW.1 and the evidence of

PW.4. The complainant wanted a conviction against the

accused including A1, on the ground that the marriage

was not consummated since the first accused has

admitted that he is an impotent as he disclosed the same

to the complainant on the first night after the marriage.

But the trial court has found that after the marriage, the

complainant PW.1 did not disclose the above fact to

anybody and        no step was taken during their co-

habitation for seven months. It is to be noted that the

Crl.A.No.161/2010
                              : 11 :


PW.1 complainant deposed before the court during the

trial of the case, after her institution of case for divorce in

the Family Court. So, at the time of giving evidence by

PW.1 she was against her husband as well as the in-laws.

The complainant, when examined as PW.1, stated that the

first accused disclosed to her on the first night about his

impotency. According to me, whether the above evidence

of PW.1 can be believed without any corroboration. As I

indicated earlier to corroborate the evidence of PW.1, she

had examined PW.4 who is the then urologist attached to

the Medical College Hospital, Pariyaram. When Pw.4 was

examined, he had stated that, even though the genital

organs are normal, the person may be impotent due to

various reasons.       The learned Magistrate has also

observed that PW.4 further deposed that the assertion of

non-consummation of marriage is a positive indication of

impotency. Thus it can be seen that the evidence of PW.4

is in no way helpful to the complainant to prove that A1 is

impotent. Harving upon Exts.P1 to P3 documents, the

Crl.A.No.161/2010
                            : 12 :


learned counsel for the appellant submitted that the

findings in those documents are supporting the evidence

of PW.1, but the learned Magistrate failed to consider

those documents in its proper perspective. I am unable

to sustain the above contention. It is crystal clear that

Ext.P1 verdict and consequently Ext.P2 decree was

pronounced by the Family Court simply by drawing

adverse inference against the first accused who was the

respondent therein as he failed to appear for medical

examination. So, absolutely there is no finding in Exts.P1

and P2 or P3, with the support of materials and evidence

to the effect that PW.1 is impotent. It is also relevant to

note that the finding of the civil court or the judgments of

the civil court are relevant and attracted in the criminal

cases only if those documents are relevant under Section

40 to 43 of the Indian Evidence Act.         As I indicated

earlier, Exts.P1 to P3 judgments and decree were passed

only by drawing an adverse inference and not on the

basis of the factual finding supported by legal evidence to

Crl.A.No.161/2010
                           : 13 :


the effect that A1 in the present case who is the

respondent therein was impotent. In view of the decision

reported in Iqbal Singh Marwah Vs. Meenakshi

Marwah [2005(4)SCC 370], particularly in paragraph 32

the appellate court is of the opinion that civil cases are

decided on the basis of preponderance of evidence,

whereas in criminal cases it is the bounden duty of the

prosecution to prove its case beyond reasonable doubt

against the accused. Thus there is no legal and

acceptable evidence to show that A1 was impotent either

before the time of marriage or after it, except the

interested version of PW.1.

      11. But it is pertinent to note that in the present

case, when the complainant failed to produce positive

evidence to prove that A1/husband is impotent, the 1st

accused himself volunteered to adduce evidence to show

that he is not impotent. Though A1 was not ready to

undergo medical examination when the civil matter was

pending before the Family Court, in the criminal cases

Crl.A.No.161/2010
                            : 14 :


the accused was examined as DW.1 and marked Ext.D1.

Ext.D1 is the potency certificate with respect to A1 issued

by DW.1. According to DW.1 there is nothing to suggest

that the person-namely A1 is incapable of performing

sexual act. On comparison of above evidence of DW.1

supported by Ext.D1 it can be seen that defence evidence

itself is sufficient to contradict the evidence given by

PW.1 and evidence of PW.4 which is not based upon any

particular and scientific test conducted by him. It is also

relevant to note that on the basis of the contention raised

by the complainant against the evidence of DW.1 and

Ext.D1, the accused has filed a petition before the trial

court stating that he is ready and willing to undergo

medical examination before the Medical Board, Kannur

and the learned Magistrate after considering the said

application allowed the same and accordingly A1

underwent medical examination by the Medical Board on

24/03/2008. Thus after a detailed examination of the first

accused with respect to his potency, the medical board

Crl.A.No.161/2010
                            : 15 :


issued a potency certificate which marked as Ext.X1. In

Ext.X1 medical board opined that there is nothing to

suggest that the person-namely the accused is incapable

of performing his sexual act.      So with respect to the

offence under Section 420 of the I.P.C., when the

complainant has miserably failed to prove that the

accused A1 is impotent, the evidence adduced from the

side of the defence proves otherwise. It is on the basis of

the above facts and evidence and materials on record that

the trial court came into a conclusion except the oral

evidence of PW.1 there is no evidence that A1 is

impotent. According to me the above finding of the trial

court is fully justified and supported by evidence and

materials on record.

      12.     Another offence alleged by the complainant

against the accused is 406 of I.P.C.     In the complaint

there is no specific or detailed allegation or averments

regarding the ornaments alleged to have given to the

accused as dowry but what stated in the complaint is that

Crl.A.No.161/2010
                             : 16 :


at the time of marriage, parents of complainant have

given 35 sovereign of gold ornaments.        During the

evidence of PW.1, she stated thus:

          35                          .

Further stated that:
                                            .

It is the further deposition that:

              1  3                       

        .               .


But in the Chief examination PW.1 has stated that:

             .

Further during the cross-examination of PW.1, she has

stated that:

        4        .   28 

                                         

         . 2001   30      

                            . 1  2             .

                 .


During the re-examination, she had stated that:

                                       
                 .

      So with respect to the dowry and gold ornaments

there is no specific pleadings in the complaint and the

Crl.A.No.161/2010
                            : 17 :


complainant is not consistent in her deposition, when she

was examined as PW.1. So the evidence of PW.1 with

respect to the gold ornaments and the dowry contained

contradictions. The trend of cross-examination on PW.1

shows that the accused has not admitted the claim of

PW.1 with respect to the dowry and the gold ornaments,

whereas the same suggestive that they are denying it. As

I indicated earlier with respect to the dowry and giving of

ornaments there is no specific and detailed pleadings in

the complaint and no evidence adduced by PW.1 during

her examination in this regard. The deposition of PW.1

during the chief examination as well as during cross-

examination has to be examined in the background that

she had filed the present private complaint against the

accused after having approached the Family Court for

divorce. Thus on examination of the evidence of PW.1 in

the above backdrop, according to me, no evidentiary

value can be given, rightly done by the learned

Magistrate.

Crl.A.No.161/2010
                              : 18 :


      13.     With regard to the offence under Section 498-A

of I.P.C. the learned Magistrate has observed that there

is no independent evidence. The learned counsel for the

appellant submitted that it is practically impossible to

produce direct evidence with respect to the incident

being taken place inside the dwelling house. Still then it

is up to the prosecution to prove the allegation beyond

reasonable doubt. In the absence of direct evidence, the

prosecution can prove the allegation, if the same are

true,    by     adducing  evidence    connected   with   the

circumstances which point towards the guilt of the

accused. But in the present case no independent evidence

or materials are produced. It is pertinent to note that as

rightly observed by the learned Magistrate after the

marriage, even though PW.1 has stated that the accused

disclosed on the first night about his impotency, no step

is seen taken by PW.1 against the accused, but she

continued to enjoy the relationship with the accused and

they lived as husband and wife for seven months. She did

Crl.A.No.161/2010
                           : 19 :


not disclose the facts with respect to the so called

impotency of A1 and the harassment to any of her

relatives at the relevant point of time. During the period

of seven months after the marriage PW.1 lived along with

the accused without any complaint and she had stayed

along with the accused in the hotel and visited the

relatives of both PW.1 and A1. No complaint of

harassment is raised at any point of time during the

seven months from the date of their marriage. So the

deposition of PW.1, after her filing of divorce petition

before the Family Court, can be treated as only an

interested version especially when the above evidence of

PW.1 is not supported by any independent evidence or

any relevant circumstances. So it is also relevant to note

that, even if the evidence of PW.1 is accepted as true and

correct, the same are not sufficient to constitute the

essential ingredients of Section 498-A of the I.P.C. The

vague allegation that the accused demanded more money

towards dowry or the claim of PW.1 that she was

Crl.A.No.161/2010
                                 : 20 :


subjected to harassment are not sufficient to establish

the offence under Section 498 of the I.P.C.

      14. Thus on examination of the finding of the court

below, it can be seen that the learned Magistrate refused

to accept the case of the complainant and disbelieve her

by assigning cogent and sufficient reasons which are

supported by available evidence and materials on record.

Therefore, it cannot be said that the judgment of the trial

court is perverse or illegal.           The appellant has also

miserably failed to point out that the learned Magistrate

has over looked any evidence and materials which are in

favour of the complainant to prove its allegations against

the accused. Thus the appellant failed to make out any

case to interfere with the finding of the court below.

      15. In a recent decision of the Apex Court reported

in State of Rajasthan v. Darshan Singh @ Darshan

Lal (2012(4) Supreme 72), the Hon'ble Apex Court has

held that,

             "In exceptional cases where there are compelling

             circumstances and the judgment under appeal is

Crl.A.No.161/2010
                                   : 21 :


             found to be perverse, the appellate court can

             interfere with the order of acquittal. The appellate

             court should bear in mind the presumption of

             innocence of the accused and further that the trial

             court's acquittal bolsters the presumption of his

             innocence."


Thus, on examination of the facts and circumstances

involved in the present case and in the light of the dictum

laid down by the Apex Court in the decision cited supra, I

find no ground to interfere with the order of acquittal

recorded by the trial court. Therefore, the appeal fails.

       Hence there is no merit in the above appeal and

accordingly the same is dismissed.




                                                         Sd/-

                                         V.K.MOHANAN, JUDGE




skj
                                True copy

                              P.A. to Judge



