
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                PRESENT:

                 THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE V.K.MOHANAN

         FRIDAY, THE 15TH DAY OF MARCH 2013/24TH PHALGUNA 1934

                      CRL.A.No. 1373 of 2008 ( )
                      ---------------------------

   CRA.638/2005 of ADDL.SESSIONS JUDGE, FAST TRACK COURT-I, ALAPPUZHA
                            DATED 09.05.2006
     C.C.NO.849 OF 2001 OF JFCM COURT-I, CHERTHALA, DATED 22.9.2005


APPELLANT(S)/RESPONDENT NO.2/COMPLAINANT:
-----------------------------------------

       SHAHINA, D/O.T.BEERAN,
       PUTHUKOLIPPARAMBIL, CC 20/1170 NO.HOUSE,
       KONAINE ROAD, PALLURUTHY, KOCHI.

       BY ADV. SRI.A.X.VARGHESE

RESPONDENT(S)/ACCUSED:
--------------------------------------------

     1. STATE OF KERALA,REP.BY GOVERNMENT PLEADER,
       HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM.

     2. ABDUL RAHIM, S/O.SHAMSUDIN, PALATHARA
       VEEDU, KODAMTHURUTHU PANCHAYATH, CHANDIROOR
       NEAR KUMARATHUPADY TEMPLE, CHERTHALA.

     3. SUBAIDA, W/O.SHAMSUDIN, PALATHARA VEEDU
       KODAMTHURUTHU PANCHAYATH, CHANDIROOR
       NEAR KUMARATHUPADY TEMPLE, CHERTHALA.

     4. MUBEENA, D/O.SHAMSUDIN, PALATHARA
       VEEDU, KODAMTHURUTHU PANCHAYATH, CHANDIROOR
       NEAR KUMARATHUPADY TEMPLE, CHERTHALA.

     5. JOONAIDHU, S/O.SHAMSUDHIN, PALATHARA
       VEEDU, KODAMTHURUTHU PANCHAYATH, CHANDIROOR
       NEAR KUMARATHUPADY TEMPLE, CHERTHALA.

       BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR ADV.SRI.N.SURESH
                            ADV. SRI.A.DINESH RAO

       THIS CRIMINAL APPEAL  HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD  ON  11-03-2013,
        THE COURT ON 15.03.2013 DELIVERED THE FOLLOWING:


                   V.K.MOHANAN, J.
                -------------------------------
                 Crl.A.No.1373 of 2008
                -------------------------------
        Dated this the 15th day of March, 2013.


                     J U D G M E N T


        The complainant in a private complaint is the

appellant as she is aggrieved by the judgment dated

9.5.2006 in Crl.A.No.638 of 2005 of the court of Additional

Sessions Judge, Fast Track court-I, , by which the learned

Judge acquitted all the accused who faced the prosecution

for the offence punishable under section 498 A r/w 34 of

IPC, though they were convicted and sentenced by the trial

court, namely, the court of Judicial First Class Magistrate-

II, Cherthala, by its judgment dated 22.9.2005 in

C.C.No.849 of 2001.

     2. The case of the complainant is that the marriage

between the complainant, who was examined as PW1 and

accused No.I was solemnised on 29.8.1996 as per their

religious custom and thereafter they lived as husband and

                               2
Crl.A.No.1373 of 2008


wife in her matrimonial house till 16.5.1999 and a child was

born in the said wedlock. According to the complainant, at

the time of the marriage, her father had given an amount of

`30,000/- and 25 sovereigns of gold ornaments to the

accused. It is the further case of the complainant that while

she was staying with the accused, she had been treated

cruelly and ill-treated both physically and mentally

demanding more dowry. The allegation continues to the

effect that the 1st accused who is her husband was

suspicious of the complainant and he used to come home

drunken and abuse her, and also used to assault on several

occasions. It is the further allegation that the complainant

and her child were locked in a room and she was in-

humanly ill-treated by A1 to A3 and attempted to kill her.

It is also her case that when the complainant demanded and

sought permission to attend the betrothal of her younger

brother which was scheduled on 16.5.1999, after rejecting

the request, on 16.5.1999 the 1st accused and the 3rd

                              3
Crl.A.No.1373 of 2008


accused took the complainant and her daughter to a room

and manhandled her. It is also alleged that the 2nd accused

inserted cloths into her mouth and attempted to kill her.

Thereafter, the complainant and her daughter were pushed

to the street.       She had also stated about an incident

allegedly taken place during the month of February 1999,

by which also she was subjected to brutal manhandling and

thereafter an attempt was made to murder her and her

daughter by pouring kerosene, but the complainant and her

daughter were rescued by a neighbour. It is also her case

that connected with the incident taken place on 16.5.1999,

she was admitted in the Government hospital at Palluruthy

and on discharge from the said hospital, a complaint in the

court of Judicial First Class Magistrate-I, Kochi, was filed,

which was forwarded under section 156(3) of Cr.P.C. to

Kasaba Police Station, Kochi, from where it was sent to

Aroor police station. It is also the case of the complainant

that on 27.5.1999, an agreement was executed between the

                              4
Crl.A.No.1373 of 2008


complainant and the 1st accused agreeing to live separately.

According to the complainant, though crime No.230/2000

was registered in the Kasaba Police Station, Kochi, the

same was forwarded to the Aroor police station, where the

case was re-numbered as Crime No.210/2000, but finally

the case was referred as false and therefore she preferred

the present complaint as a protest before the court of

Judicial First Class Magistrate-I, Cherthala, which was

taken on file as C.C.No.849 of 2001.

      3. On filing the complaint in the court of Judicial First

Class Magistrate-Cherthala, the sworn statements of the

complainant and two witnesses were recorded and these

were taken on file and summons were issued to the

accused. Thus when the accused appeared, copy of the

complaint and documents were served on them. Thereafter,

the statements of Pws.1 to 3 were recorded and Exts.P1 and

P2 documents were marked and thus after hearing the

prosecution and the defence, a formal charge was framed

                              5
Crl.A.No.1373 of 2008


against the accused for the offence punishable under

section 498 A r/w 34 of IPC, which when read over and

explained to the accused, they pleaded not guilty and

denied the charge. Thereafter, Pws.1 to 3 were recalled

and they were cross examined. On completing the evidence

of the complainant, accused were questioned under section

313 of Cr.P.C. during which they denied the entire

prosecution allegation and stated that they are innocent.

The husband of the complainant-A1, has further stated that

the complainant was not ready to reside at his house and

she demanded him to reside at Palluruthy and there was no

talk of dispute about the paternity of the child and they

never demanded dowry. Exts.D1 and D2 were marked as

defence exhibits, though no defence witness was examined.

The trial court has finally found that the evidence given by

PW1 proves beyond doubt that the accused have subjected

the complainant to cruelty both mentally and physically and

the evidence of Pws.2 and 3 corroborated the evidence of

                              6
Crl.A.No.1373 of 2008


PW1 and accordingly, held that the complainant has

succeeded in proving the allegation against the accused.

Consequently, the accused are found guilty of the offence

under section 498 A r/w 34 of IPC and accordingly they are

convicted thereunder.     On such conviction, each of the

accused is sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for

1 year and to pay fine of `2,000/- each and in default of

payment of fine, each of them is directed to undergo simple

imprisonment for a further period of 3 months.

      4.    Challenging the above finding, order of conviction

and sentence, the accused preferred an appeal before the

Sessions court-Alappuzha and by judgment dated 9.5.2006

in Crl.A.No.638 of 2005, the court of Additional Sessions

Judge, Fast Track-I, Alappuzha, acquitted the accused on

the ground that the evidence of PW1 cannot be believed

because of the infirmities and the improvements in her

deposition and as such, the case of the complainant is

rendered as wholly unbelievable and concocted one, and it

                               7
Crl.A.No.1373 of 2008


was launched as an after thought. Similarly, the appellate

court has held that no reliance can be placed on the

evidence of Pws.2 and 3 for the purpose of recording the

conviction of the accused. In addition to that, the appellate

court has also found that the trial court was not justified in

holding that there has been no delay in filing the complaint.

According to the learned Sessions Judge, there was

substantial delay which was not properly explained. For the

above reasons, the learned Judge of the appellate court has

found that the conviction and sentence recorded by the trial

court against the accused under section 498 A r/w section

34 of IPC is not justified and therefore the finding of the

court below is reversed and accordingly the accused are

acquitted, after setting aside the judgment of the trial court.

Thus it is the above finding and the order of acquittal

recorded by the lower appellate court reversing the order of

conviction passed by the trial court, that are challenged in

this appeal at the instance of the complainant, who is

                               8
Crl.A.No.1373 of 2008


examined as PW1 during the trial.

      5. I have heard Adv.Sri.A.X.Varghese learned counsel

for the appellant and Adv.Dinesh Rao learned counsel for

the respondents 2 to 5.

      6. Sri.A.X.Varghese, the learned counsel appearing for

the appellant vehemently submitted that the lower appellate

court went wrong in disbelieving the evidence of PW1, the

complainant and also the finding that the complaint was

filed belatedly.      According to the learned counsel, the

learned Magistrate of the trial court has elaborately

considered the evidence on record and appreciated the

same properly and found against the accused and no

acceptable reasons are assigned by the learned Judge of the

lower appellate court in interfering with the finding and

order of conviction recorded by the trial court. Learned

counsel strenuously submitted that the entire episode

connected with the cruelty and ill treatment meted out by

the accused against the complainant has taken place in the

                              9
Crl.A.No.1373 of 2008


matrimonial home and therefore it was practically

impossible to get independent evidence, particularly from

that locality and the learned Judge of the appellate court

has miserably failed to consider the above aspect. It is the

further submission of the learned counsel that Ext.P1 is a

contemporary document which would show that connected

with the incident taken place on 16.5.1999, by which the

complainant was subjected to severe manhandling and ill-

treatment, she was admitted in the Government hospital at

Palluruthy, where she had undergone medical examination

and treatment by the doctor.      According to the learned

counsel, the lower appellate court has not given any

evidential value to Ext.P1 document and on an erroneous

conclusion, found that the evidence of PW1 cannot be

believed. It is the further submission of the learned counsel

that PW1 has filed a complaint dated 21.8.2000 in the court

of Judicial First Class Magistrate-I, Kochi, which was

forwarded under section 156(3) of Cr.P.C. to the Kasaba

                               10
Crl.A.No.1373 of 2008


Police Station, Kochi, from where the same was forwarded

to    Aroor      police station and thereafter,  when   the

complainant received Ext.P2 refer notice, she filed the

present protest complaint dated 21.7.2001 in the court of

Judicial First Class Magistrate-I, Cherthala.     It is also

pointed out that it is beyond dispute that an agreement was

entered into in the presence of Circle Inspector of Police,

Kuthiathodu, on 27.5.2000 by which the matrimonial

bondage between PW1- the complainant and the 1st accused

severed. So the counsel for the appellant submitted that

absolutely there was no delay and the appellant was

prosecuting the matter vigilantly. Thus according to the

learned counsel, in a prosecution for an offence punishable

under section 498 A r/w 34 of IPC, at the instance of the

complainant, the complainant has adduced best available

evidence, ie., oral testimony of PW1- the complainant,

whose evidence is supported by the evidence of Pws.2 and

3, two independent witnesses and those evidence and

                                 11
Crl.A.No.1373 of 2008


allegation raised by the complainant were accepted by the

learned Magistrate as true but the lower appellate court

without any proper and justifiable reasons interfered with

the same and acquitted the accused and therefore the

judgment of the trial court is to be restored, after setting

aside the judgment of the lower appellate court and thus

the conviction and sentence imposed on the respondent/

accused have also to be restored.

      7. On the other hand, Sri.Dinesh Rao learned counsel

for the respondent vehemently submitted that the evidence

of PW1- the complainant is not sufficient to prove the

charge raised against the accused, and the evidence of

PW1, who is inimical to the accused, cannot be accepted,

especially when it is not free from contradictions and

infirmities.      After referring to the evidence of PW1- the

complainant, the counsel submits that going by that

evidence, Ext.P1 wound certificate appears to be connected

with the incident that allegedly took place during the month

                              12
Crl.A.No.1373 of 2008


of February 1999 and not with respect to the incident

claimed to have taken place on 16.5.1999. According to the

learned counsel, Ext.P1 wound certificate has no evidential

value at all, since the same is not proved legally. It is also

the submission of the learned counsel that even if the case

of PW1, that she was hospitalised on 16.5.1999 and

discharged on 20.5.1999, is admitted as correct for the sake

of argument, from the records it is crystal clear that she

preferred the complaint for the first time on 21.8.2000 only

and hence there is substantial delay.     Thus the learned

counsel submitted that the above vital aspects were not

considered properly and legally by the trial court but the

same was subjected to legal scrutiny by the lower appellate

court and thereby corrected the mistake committed by the

trial court and accordingly the accused were acquitted.

Thus the counsel for the respondents submits that the

findings of the lower appellate court are supported by

materials and evidence on record and there is no perversity

                               13
Crl.A.No.1373 of 2008


or illegality in those findings and therefore this Court will

not be justified in interfering with the order of acquittal

recorded in favour of the respondents/accused.            Thus

according to the counsel, the appeal is liable to be

dismissed.

      8. I have carefully considered the arguments advanced

by the learned counsel for the appellant as well as the

respondents and I have gone through the judgment of both

the trial court as well as the lower appellate court and the

evidence and materials on record.

      9.    In view of the rival contentions advanced by the

counsel for the appellant as well as the respondents and in

the light of the evidence and materials on record, the

question that arises for consideration is whether the lower

appellate court is justified in interfering with the findings of

the trial court and reversing such findings and acquitting

the accused and the further question to be considered is

whether the appellant has succeeded in her challenge

                                14
Crl.A.No.1373 of 2008


against the judgment of the lower appellate court and its

findings. As I have already referred to the facts involved in

the present case, I am not proposed to repeat the same.

Admittedly the marriage between the complainant and the

1st accused was solemnised on 29.8.1996 and thereafter, the

complainant was residing along with her husband in her

matrimonial house till 16.5.1999 and it is also beyond

dispute that a child was born in the said wedlock. During

the evidence of PW1, though she had stated about the

cruelty meted out against her by the accused connected

with the demand of dowry, according to me, her evidence is

not specific and clear.     During her deposition, PW1 has

stated about the two incidents by which she was subjected

to cruelty. One was allegedly taken place during the month

of February 1999 and the other incident was on 16.5.1999.

In this juncture it is relevant to note that with respect to the

alleged incident taken place during the month of February

1999, absolutely there is no evidence, except her interested

                              15
Crl.A.No.1373 of 2008


version. Suffice to say, no step is taken by her connected

with the above incident. In this juncture, it is relevant to

note that as per the said incident, according to PW1, the

accused attempted to kill her and her daughter by pouring

kerosene oil over their body. Comparing with the incident

that is alleged to have taken place on 16.5.1999, the said

incident according to me, is more serious and severe. But

no action whatsoever was taken by PW1. With respect to

the incident allegedly taken place on 16.5.1999, as I

indicated earlier, the main evidence is that of PW1-the

complainant herself. The lower appellate court has refused

to believe her, since there are serious infirmities and lots of

improvements in her evidence.

      10. Going by the evidence of PW1 itself, it can be seen

that though the marriage between herself and the 1st

accused was solemnised on 29.8.1996 and a child was born

out in the said wedlock, her main grievance is with respect

to the alleged incident taken place on 16.5.1999 and during

                              16
Crl.A.No.1373 of 2008


the month of February 1999. Though she had stated before

the court that the accused used to subject her to cruelty, no

details of any particular incident was deposed, except the

general statement about the demand for dowry and cruelty.

Suffice to say, connected with any of such incident or with

respect to the above two incidents, she has not made any

complaint before her relatives and none of her relatives

were examined to prove any such facts or incident. As I

indicated earlier, though the incident has allegedly taken

place during the month of February 1999, no petition is

filed or any legal step was taken to redress the grievance, if

any connected with such incident. That incident was also

not claimed to have been reported to any of her relatives.

As rightly pointed out by the counsel for the respondents,

during the chief examination of PW1, after stating about the

incident on 16.5.1999, she had deposed that thereafter

herself and her daughter were driven out to the street. In

the chief examination, she has stated that it was on

                                17
Crl.A.No.1373 of 2008


16.5.1999 the last incident occurred, and according to her,

the betrothal of her younger brother was scheduled on

16.5.1999 and her relatives came to her matrimonial house

in advance to invite herself and the accused.          But the

accused did not show any interest. According to PW1, she

requested the accused to permit her to attend the function

but the same was declined. Her deposition is extracted for

convenience. "16.9.1999-                             .

    .                                                         3-


                                . 2-

                                                           

     .                                      

 ."             Towards the last of her chief examination, after

stating about the alleged incident during the month of

February,        1999, "                             

   .                                             1-   

           .                                     .  

       .         

                             18
Crl.A.No.1373 of 2008


     .                                                

                       ." A careful

reading of the chief examination of PW1 shows that she was

hospitalised connected with the incident taken place during

the month of February 1999. Suffice to say that, no re-

examination was conducted and no clarification was sought

from PW1 to the effect that she was hospitalised connected

with the incident on 16.5.1999. It is also relevant to note

that connected with the incident on 16.5.1999, what she has

stated is that her husband and the 3rd accused Mubeena had

taken PW1 inside to a room and manhandled her and the 2nd

accused Subaida put cloth into her mouth and thus tried to

commit her murder. According to me, the above claim of

PW1 is not supported by Ext.P1 wound certificate, even if

the same is not proved legally and properly.      In Ext.P1

wound certificate, it cannot be said that the injuries noted

therein are corresponding to the so called incident taken

place on 16.5.1999. The overtact of A1 or the 3rd accused-

                             19
Crl.A.No.1373 of 2008


Mubeena are not stated by PW1, except a general

statement to the effect that ".......    ." It is

also relevant to note that no corresponding injuries are

noted in Ext.P1 to the overtact of the 2nd accused as alleged

by PW1. So even if Ext.P1 wound certificate is taken as

correct and admitted, according to me, the same renders no

assistance to the complainant to substantiate her case

against the accused. As rightly pointed out by the learned

counsel for the respondent, Ext.P1 is not proved properly.

The doctor who issued Ext.P1 is not examined and no step

was taken in this regard. Had the doctor been examined,

defence could have cross examined PW1 on the basis of the

content of Ext.P1. So the non-examination of the doctor

concerned, prejudiced the defence and the complainant has

miserably failed to prove the contents of Ext.P1 and show

that the contents therein are corresponding to the incident

allegedly occurred and pleaded against the accused. So the

complainant has miserably failed to prove her allegation

                              20
Crl.A.No.1373 of 2008


against the accused connected with the alleged incident

taken place on 16.5.1999. During the time of the argument,

the learned counsel has not argued much on the deposition

of Pws.2 and 3 to show that the evidence are acceptable.

The learned Judge of the appellate court has, by assigning

numerous reasons declined to act upon the evidence of

those witnesses. According to me, the grounds on which

the lower appellate court refused to believe Pws.2 and 3 are

based upon sound and good reasons and I cannot say that

the same are wrong.

      11.     Another ground considered by the learned Judge

of the lower appellate court is with respect to the delay.

The alleged incident, against which the present complaint is

filed, has taken place on 16.5.1999. She was hospitalised

on the same date but she claimed that she was discharged

on 20.5.1999. However, she filed the complaint only on

21.8.2000. Thus there is a delay of more than one year.

Learned counsel for the appellant, sticking on the findings

                               21
Crl.A.No.1373 of 2008


of the trial court submitted that there is no delay, since she

had filed complaint on 16.5.1999 based upon which Ext.D1

agreement dated 27.5.1999 was executed at the instance of

the Circle Inspector of police, Kuthiathodu. But the learned

Judge of the appellate court has found that absolutely there

is no explanation offered as to why PW1-the complainant

did not make any enquiry regarding the petition claimed to

have been filed by her before the Sub Inspector of police,

Aroor Police Station and therefore, according to the learned

Judge, there is no evidence to show that the complainant

has filed any petition before the police station on or before

21.8.2000.

      12. Besides all the above the defects, including the

contradictions, infirmities, insufficiency of evidence and the

delay, according to me, in this case, there are certain other

circumstances and facts which go against the complainant.

As I indicated earlier, none of the relatives of the

complainant was examined in this case to corroborate the

                                22
Crl.A.No.1373 of 2008


evidence, if any of PW1, with respect to the alleged cruelty

and ill-treatment taken place in her matrimonial home. No

other reliable and independent witness was also examined.

I have already found that there is substantial delay of more

than one year which is not properly explained by the

complainant. According to me, it cannot be ruled out that

the delay has occurred, since she preferred the complaint

as an after thought, after receiving the gold ornaments and

the amount as evidenced by Ext.D1. So in such a case, the

evidence of PW1, unless the same is intact and free of

contradictions and improvements, and supported by

independent and reliable evidence in the nature of

corroboration, the case of the complainant cannot be

accepted. According to me, the above crucial aspects were

not properly considered by the trial court. As a result of the

judgment of the lower appellate court, the above fault on

the part of the trial court is seen rectified and corrected and

thereby the accused are acquitted after reversing the order

                               23
Crl.A.No.1373 of 2008


of conviction. According to me, the available materials and

evidence would show that the complainant has approached

the court of Judicial First class Magistrate-I, Kochi, by filing

a complaint dated 21.8.2000, which was forwarded under

section 156(3) of Cr.P.C. to the Kasaba Police Station,

Kochi, from where it was forwarded to the Aroor Police

Station and though Aroor police has registered the case as

crime No.210 of 2000, as evidenced by Ext.P2, the same

was referred as false one. It is thereafter the complainant

filed the present protest complaint dated 21.7.2001 before

the court of Judicial First Class Magistrate-I, Cherthala,

whereupon the present case was instituted. So after the

alleged incident on 16.5.1999, as per the records, the first

complaint came into existence only on 21.8.2000. Though

the complainant has taken a contention to the effect that

she approached Aroor Police Station by filing a complaint,

the same has not been substantiated. It is also relevant to

note that, if she had filed a complaint as claimed by her,

                                24
Crl.A.No.1373 of 2008


before Aroor police station, she could have prosecuted the

same, especially when the complainant has not disputed

the fact that Ext.D1 agreement was arrived at the instance

of the Circle Inspector of police, Kuthiathodu police station.

In spite of Ext.D1, the complainant has not taken any

further steps or enquiry and thus it can be seen that she

had filed the first complaint only on 21.8.2000, which is

highly belated. The trial court has not considered the above

aspect and the lower appellate court after an elaborate

consideration found that there is considerable delay.

According to me, the above finding of the lower appellate

court is absolutely correct.

      13.       In the light of the above discussion and the

evidence and materials referred to above, it can be seen

that the lower appellate court after assigning acceptable

and convincing reasons, that too on the basis of the

evidence       and   materials  on  record,  disbelieved  the

complainant and accordingly reversed the findings of the

                               25
Crl.A.No.1373 of 2008


trial court and acquitted the accused. Therefore, it cannot

be said that the findings of the lower appellate court and

the order of conviction are perverse or illegal.          The

Honourable Apex Court in a recent decision reported in

Pudhu Raja and another Vs. State {(2013) 1 SCC (Crl)

430} has held that, "The Appellate court can interfere only

in    exceptional     cases  where   there   are   compelling

circumstances and the judgment in appeal is found to be

perverse.       The Appellate court should bear in mind the

presumption of innocence of the accused and further that

the trial court's order of acquittal bolsters the presumption

of innocence". On a consideration of the facts and

circumstances involved in the case in the light of the dictum

laid down in the above decision, I am of the view that, the

appellant has miserably failed to show that the findings of

the trial court are perverse or illegal and in making out any

prima facie case in support of her challenge against the

judgment of the trial court.

                              26
Crl.A.No.1373 of 2008


      Therefore, the appeal fails and accordingly the same is

dismissed.

                                                  Sd/-
                                           V.K.MOHANAN,
                                                Judge
ami/
                        //True copy//

                        P.A. to Judge



