
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                  PRESENT:

                          THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE P.BHAVADASAN

           MONDAY,THE 9TH DAY OF DECEMBER 2013/18TH AGRAHAYANA, 1935

                                     CRL.A.No. 1774 of 2006 (F)
                                      --------------------------------------
          [AGAINST THE JUDGMENT IN S.C.NO.308/2005 OF
           THE ADDL. SESSIONS JUDGE, (FAST TRACK COURT NO.II-ADHOC)
           THRISSUR, DTD. 16/08/2006]
                                                ...........

APPELLANTS/ACCUSED:
------------------------------------


        1. VARGHESE, S/O. DEVASSY,
            PULIKKAL HOUSE, MUNIPARA DESOM, PARIYARAM VILLAGE,
            CHALAKKUDY.

        2. ANNIE, W/O. DEVASSY,PULIKKAL HOUSE,
            MUNIPARA DESOM, PARIYARAM VILLAGE, CHALAKKUDY.

        3. ELSY, W/O. ANTONY, CHULLIKKADAN HOUSE,
            NOW RESIDING WITH THE 1ST & 2ND ACCUSED.


            BY ADV. SRI.A.C.DEVY.


RESPONDENT/STATE:
--------------------------------


            THE STATE OF KERALA, REPRESENTED BY
            THE PUBLIC PROSECUTOR,
            HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM,
            KOCHI-31.


            BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SMT. P. MAYA.




            THIS CRIMINAL APPEAL HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD
            ON 09-12-2013, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY DELIVERED
            THE FOLLOWING:


Prv.


                        P.BHAVADASAN, J.
                - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                      Crl.A. No. 1774 of 2006
                - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
         Dated this the 09th day of December, 2013


                          J U D G M E N T

     The accused, three in number, were prosecuted for the

offences punishable under Sections 498(A), 304(B) and 306

read with Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code. Though they

were acquitted for the offences under Sections 304(B) and

306 read with Section 34 of IPC, they were found guilty of

the offence punishable under Sections 498(A) of IPC. Each

of them was convicted and sentenced to suffer rigorous

imprisonment for three years.                 Set off as per law was

allowed.

     2.    The marriage between the victim and the first

accused took place on 06.09.1998. The second accused is

the mother of the first accused and the third accused is the

sister of the first accused. On 22.09.2003, the victim, after

doing away with two of her children, committed suicide by

hanging.    PW1, a Panchayat member laid Ext.P1, First

Crl.A. No. 1774 of 2006
                               -2-



Information Statement.       PW19 recorded the same and

registered crime as per Ext.P14, FIR. He had the inquest

conducted over the body and then sent the body for

autopsy. The respective doctors, namely, PWs 13, 14 and 15

conducted autopsy and furnished Exts. P10 to P12

certificates.     Exts. P3 to P5 are the inquest reports.

Investigation was taken over by PW20.            He recorded

statements witnesses, had the copies of requisite records

collected, completed investigation and laid charge before

court.

      3.    The court before which the final report was laid

took cognizance of the offences. Finding that the offences

are exclusively triable by a Court of Sessions, committed the

case to Sessions Court, Thrissur. The said court made over

the case to Additional Sessions Court, (Fast Track-II, Adhoc),

Thrissur for trial and disposal.

      4.    The latter court, on receipt of records and on

appearance of the accused, framed charges for the offences

Crl.A. No. 1774 of 2006
                              -3-



punishable under Sections 498(A), 304(B) and 306 read with

Section 34 of IPC. To the charge, the accused pleaded not

guilty and claimed to be tried. The prosecution therefore

had PWs 1 to 20 examined and had Exts. P1 to P25 marked.

MOs 1 to 13 were got identified and marked.

      5.    After the close of the prosecution evidence, the

accused were questioned under Section 313 Cr.P.C. They

denied all the incriminating circumstances brought out in

evidence against them and maintained that they were

innocent.     The first accused has also stated that he had

married the victim after fully knowing the financial

circumstances of the family of the victim. At the time of

marriage, the first accused claimed that he was employed in

a Granite Quarry. With the income he earned there from, he

used to maintain his family including his sister and her two

children. He denied having done any act which would cause

annoyance to the victim and that he had never asked for

any dowry from either the victim or her parents. He would

Crl.A. No. 1774 of 2006
                             -4-



say that the victim was not very happy about the first

accused looking after his mother and also his sister and her

two children. This is used to insist that they should reside

separately.     He was unable to do so.      This might have

caused considerable annoyance and desperation in the mind

of the victim that might have driven her to commit suicide.

The second accused pointed out that she had never asked

for dowry nor did she threaten or intimidate the victim. The

allegation that she asked the victim to go and die etc., are

without any foundation. She too would assert that it was the

first accused taking care of the third accused and her

children that had annoyed both the victim and her family

members and as a result, the victim might have committed

suicide. The third accused stated that when she had given

birth to two children, her husband deserted her and

thereafter she and her children are being looked after by the

first accused. This was not to the liking of the victim as well

as the members of her family. She would say that she has

Crl.A. No. 1774 of 2006
                               -5-



put up a house nearby where she had planned to shift her

residence. Even though the victim had indicated to the first

accused on several occasions that they should live

separately, A3 would say that because of her financial

difficulty, she could not do so. She asserted that she has not

committed any act or she has not uttered any words to the

victim to cause her annoyance.

      6.    Finding that the accused could not be acquitted

under Section 232 Cr.P.C., they were asked to enter on their

defence. The defence examined Dws 1 and 2.

      7.    The court below, on an appreciation of the

evidence, came to the conclusion that the testimony

furnished by PWs 1 to 4 and 5 and to a certain extent, by

PW6 is sufficient to show that the victim was ill-treated by

the accused persons and therefore, found them guilty of the

offence punishable under Section 498(A). Conviction and

sentence already mentioned followed.

Crl.A. No. 1774 of 2006
                              -6-



      8.    Assailing the said conviction and sentence, the

learned counsel appearing for the appellants contended that

PWs 2 to 4 are none other than the kith and kin of the

deceased and they had ulterior motive in implicating the

accused. It is significant to notice according to the learned

counsel that the author of Ext.P1, First Information

Statement did not support the same.        The court below,

according to the learned counsel, was not justified in taking

aid of the evidence of PW5 to come to the conclusion that

there is an evidence regarding the ill-treatment alleged to

have been committed by the accused persons.          Usually,

according to the learned counsel for the appellants, a vicar

attached to the church will not deal with the family affairs

and the undue interest which has been shown by PW5 in the

affairs of the family of the victim cause suspicion about his

conduct.       The neighbours have not supported the

prosecution and in fact the evidence of DWs 1 and 2 would

show that the acts of cruelty alleged to have been spoken to

Crl.A. No. 1774 of 2006
                                -7-



by PWs 2 to 4 and 5 had never occurred and the relationship

between the victim and the first accused was very cordial

and pleasant. At any rate, according to the learned counsel

for the appellants, the court below was not justified in

discarding the evidence of DWs 1 and 2 which stands on the

same footing as the evidence of the prosecution witnesses

and had that evidence being properly appreciated, it would

have been found that no offences are made out.

Accordingly it is contended that conviction and sentence

under Section 498(A) cannot stand.

      9.    The learned Public Prosecutor on the other hand

pointed out that it is not as if that the allegation of cruelty

and ill-treatment is introduced for the first time at the time

of evidence.       Even in Ext.P1, First Information Statement,

the author of which had betrayed the prosecution in box

clearly mentions about the possible reason for the suicide of

the victim. That is given by an independent person and not

any relative of the victim. Merely because PWs 2 to 4 are

Crl.A. No. 1774 of 2006
                               -8-



relatives of the victim, it cannot be said that their evidence

should not be accepted. It is only that, they being related to

the victim, there evidence should be carefully scrutinized

and if it is found acceptable, there is no reason why it should

be discarded. No infirmity, according to the learned Public

Prosecutor, is pointed out regarding the testimony given by

PW5. He is a totally independent witness who had no axe to

grind against any either of the parties and was an impartial

witness. There is no suggestion to PW5 as to why he should

speak against the accused persons. The evidence of PW5 is

clinching     enough,   according   to   the   learned   Public

Prosecutor, to show that the allegations of cruelty are clearly

established. The learned Public Prosecutor pointed out that

at any rate, the court below has chosen to accept the

evidence of PWs 2 to 4 and 5 and so also PW6 and has come

to the conclusion that the offence under Section 498(A) is

made out unless it is shown that the findings of the court

below are either perverse or contrary to the evidence on

Crl.A. No. 1774 of 2006
                                -9-



record, the learned Public Prosecutor submits that the

interference is uncalled for.

      10. Even though, initially the charge contained the

offences under Sections 306 and 304(B) of IPC, after trial,

the court below came to the conclusion that the offence

under Section 498(A) alone is made out. As rightly noticed

by the learned Public Prosecutor, the main evidence of ill-

treatment relates to the testimony furnished by PWs 2 to 4

and 5. Among them, PW2 is the elder sister of the victim,

PW3 is the brother of the victim and PW4 is the sister of the

victim. Even though, it could be said as they are related to

each other, they may have some interest in the matter that

by itself is insufficient to discard the evidence for the simple

reason that if any ill-treatment or cruel acts were committed

on the victim by the accused, normally and usually, if the

victim is unable to put up with it, she would have conveyed

the information either to her brother or sister.          Those

witnesses speaking about the nature of life led by the victim

Crl.A. No. 1774 of 2006
                             -10-



in the matrimonial house cannot be easily ignored.

      11. Before going to the evidence of PWs 2 to 4 and 5,

it is necessarily to notice that PW1 is the author of Ext.P1,

First Information Statement. He is the member of the local

Panchayat and he admitted that Ext.P1 has been given by

him.     The signature found on Ext.P1 is his signature.

However, in the chief examination itself, he declined to go in

favour of the prosecution and therefore, he declared hostile

and continued as such.

      12. PW2 is the elder sister of the victim. She would

say that the marriage between the first accused and the

victim took place in 06.09.1998 as per the religious rites.

She would also assert that at the time of marriage, the

victim was given ten sovereigns of gold and  10,000/-. As

per the evidence of this witness, a month after the marriage,

the accused took to drinks. She says that her sister told her

that she was being ill-treated and even manhandled

demanding that she should go to her house to get more

Crl.A. No. 1774 of 2006
                           -11-



dowry.     She would say that with the priest of the local

church and others, she had gone to enquire about the house

of the accused. She asserts that when she talked to the

members of the family of the accused, she too was told that

they had spent  7,000/- for the marriage and that the said

amount should be paid by the family of the victim. PW2

would say that she did not have the necessary money to

meet the demand made by the accused. She would then

say that she obtained two bangles from Viji and a Necklace

and that she pledged it in Syndicate Bank and obtained 

7,000/- which was handed over to the accused.        Even

thereafter, according to PW2, the accused continued to

harass the victim. She would also say that on a day when

she visited the house of the victim along with her brother,

they found that the accused had damaged the window and

the door of the house. The deceased told them that it was

done under the influence of alcohol. Coming to know about

her plight, PW2 would say that the victim was taken from

Crl.A. No. 1774 of 2006
                            -12-



the matrimonial house and she stayed in their Tharavadu

house for a period of one month. On a particular day, the

first accused arrived and promised that no further untoward

incident would take place in the house and the victim would

be properly taken care of.    She would also say that the

second and the third accused also contributed to the agony

suffered by the victim. In cross examination, this witness

admitted that she used to go and stay in the matrimonial

house of the victim and the victim and the first accused used

to come and stay in their house also. She would say that

when the victim came to their house, she could see the

visible marks of assault on the body of the victim.      She

would also say that on the previous day of incident, she was

telephoned by the victim.

      13. PW3 is the brother of the victim. He would say

that he had gone to the matrimonial house of the victim a

month prior to the incident. He would assert that he used to

see the couple quarreling with each other and the accused

Crl.A. No. 1774 of 2006
                             -13-



demanding money from her. He would also say that he had

stayed in the matrimonial house of the victim for a few days

and during that time when the victim was attacked, he used

to intervene and prevent further attack from the accused.

He would also say that the second accused also said that the

victim would be done away with. In cross examination, this

witness faltered regarding his residence on a few occasions.

      14. PW4 is another sister of the victim. After speaking

about the marriage between the victim and the accused, she

says that she had gone to the matrimonial house of the

victim after the second delivery by the victim and she

stayed for quiet a few days in the house. However, she says

that the first accused used to come home drunk almost

every day and used to pick up quarrel with the victim. On a

few occasions, she had intervened and then she got share of

blows. In cross examination, this witness stated that the last

occasion when she had visited the matrimonial house of the

victim was in April 2001. She asserts in cross examination

Crl.A. No. 1774 of 2006
                             -14-



that he had occasion to see the first accused beating the

victim.

      15. PW5 is the witness who has been believed by the

trial court and had come to the conclusion that the offences

have been made out. His evidence shows that he was close

to the family of the victim and it is clear from his evidence

that he had been taking keen interest in the affairs of the

family. He would say that in fact, the money was demanded

on the basis that the family of the first accused had incurred

expenses of the marriage and that has to be repaid. PW5

would say that at the time of marriage, ten sovereigns of

gold and  10,000/- was given to the victim. His evidence

shows that the accused expected much more than what they

were given. He further says that the accused insisted the

victim to sell her gold ornaments and raise money. Due to

the timely intervention of PW5 and others, that was given up

and a few gold ornaments belonging to the victim was sold

and an amount of  7,000/- was obtained and that was was

Crl.A. No. 1774 of 2006
                            -15-



handed over tot he victim.

      16. PW6, a neighbour of the accused though did not

support the prosecution case and had turned hostile to the

prosecution, would say that the behaviour of the accused

persons towards his neighbours was atrocious and nobody

could go to their house. PW8, another neighbour also turned

hostile to the prosecution. He would even deny having seen

the accused coming home drunk.

      17. The court below chose to accept the evidence of

PWs 2, to 4 and 5 and to a certain extent, a portion of the

evidence of PW6.

      18. It is true that PWs 2 to 4 are the siblings of the

victim and they may have a particular interest in mind. But,

when their evidence is read as a whole, no flaws as such

could be found out in their evidence. It will not be prudent

on the part of the court to discard such evidence as it was

furnished by persons related to the victim.     It has to be

noticed that the persons who are most likely to come to

Crl.A. No. 1774 of 2006
                             -16-



know about the incident are the members of the family of

the victim and that is where the victim under such

circumstances would take shelter. It is not as if that the acts

of cruelty are spoken to only by PWs 2 to 4. In fact, we get a

reference to the ill-treatment in Ext.P1 itself which has been

furnished by PW1, who is the Panchayat Member. True, he

betrays the prosecution in several ways but he conceded

that Ext.P1 has been furnished by him. Even though, Ext.P1

cannot be used to corroborate with the evidence of other

witnesses, it clears that the story regarding the physical

assault, ill-treatment and torture which is not something

which is invented at the stage of evidence. Of course, the

learned counsel for the appellants contended that it is

conceded by PWs 2 to 4 that some of them had gone and

stayed for a while in the matrimonial house of the victim. It

is contended that if as a matter of fact, the victim was being

ill-treated and harassed as now spoken to by these

witnesses, it is inconceivable that anybody would have gone

Crl.A. No. 1774 of 2006
                           -17-



and stayed in that house. The answer is simple. Probably

and possibly, these witnesses would have thought that their

presence would deter the accused from ill-treating or acting

cruelly towards the victim. In fact, PW4 had admitted that

he stayed for quite some time in the matrimonial house of

the victim. He would also say about the conduct of the

accused. He has stated that he stayed on one occasion for

one month and on another for 1 = months. He would also

say that he had occasion to see the accused ill-treating the

victim.

      19. To doubt the version of PWs 2 to 4 merely

because, PW3 and others had stayed in the matrimonial

house of the victim and the question that they would not

have done so, if there had been actual ill-treatment, is

without any basis. There is no suggestion to any of these

witnesses that they had anything to gain by falsely

implicating the accused. It must be remembered at this

point of time that the victim did not leave behind her

Crl.A. No. 1774 of 2006
                             -18-



children and she was made sure that they did not survive.

      20. Even assuming that there is some infirmities in the

evidence of PWs 2 to 4, one has no reason to doubt the

version given by PW5. The contention that his close affinity

to the family of the victim should make his evidence

suspicious has no substance. It is always possible to find out

one reason or other to doubt the version given by a witness.

The attempt should be to see that whether the witness had

any particular interest or motive to falsely implicate the

accused and if it is found that he had no such reasons and

he was only narrating what he had seen or heard, there is no

reason to attribute motive to such a witness and doubt his

version. There is nothing in the cross examination of PW5 to

show that there was any indication that he had a motive for

speaking against the accused persons.           It must be

remembered that he is a Vicar of the Church. His evidence

shows that the victim had complained to him about the ill-

treatment meted out to her. The evidence of PW5 shows

Crl.A. No. 1774 of 2006
                              -19-



that he had occasion to stay in the matrimonial house for a

few days and he would also depose that on one occasion, he

was shown the door broken by the accused and also further

atrocities committed by him after coming home drunk and

ill-treating the victim.

      21. Read as a whole, the evidence of PW5 does not

admit of any doubt and there is no reason to disbelieve him.

      22. The learned counsel for the appellants is justified

in his submission that the evidence of DWs 1 and 2 has to be

treated on far from the evidence of prosecution witness and

there is no inferiority attached to their evidence. True, DWs

1 and 2 are the neighbours of the accused. They would say

that the life of the victim and the first accused was very

cordial and smooth and there was no ill-treatment to their

knowledge of the victim by the accused. But their evidence

need not be taken as gospel truth.         It will have to be

weighed in the light of the evidence adduced by the

prosecution also. It is here that Ext.P1 assumes importance.

Crl.A. No. 1774 of 2006
                                -20-



It is not as if that initially, there were no allegations of ill-

treatment or cruelty, but later on, it was developed with

ulterior motive. Even at the time of laying of Ext.P1, the

First Information Statement, there were allegations of ill-

treatment.       Even though no interestedness could be

attributed to Dws 1 and 2, in the light of the evidence

furnished by PWs 2 to 4 and 5, it becomes difficult to accept

their version that there was no ill-treatment of the victim by

the accused. In fact, in the cross examination of PW5 even

suggesting that the act which is spoken to by the first

accused is either false or that he had any reason to

unnecessarily implicate the accused.

      23. The court below therefore was inclined to accept

the evidence of PWs 2 to 4 and 5 and come to the conclusion

that the offence under Section 498(A) has been made out.

There can be no doubt regarding the fact that the victim was

subjected to cruelty and ill-treatment.

Crl.A. No. 1774 of 2006
                              -21-



      24. The next question that arise for consideration is

the involvement of the accused in the act alleged to have

been committed on the victim. There is no specific overt

acts attributed either to the second accused or the third

accused. Of course, PW4 would say that they were also ill-

treating the victim. But that is only a general and vague

statement. They have no case that the acts committed by

the first accused were at the instigation of the second and

the third accused. Of course, the accused have a case that

the victim and the members of her family did not like the

first accused looking after his mother and the sister who had

been deserted by her husband.        None of the witnesses

namely PWs 2 to 4 and 5 attributed any specific role to A2

and A3. May be that, there have been domestic quarrels

between them. But that is far from saying that they have

either contributed to the acts committed by the first accused

or that they had treated the victim in a cruel manner. The

court below does not appear to be justified in coming to the

Crl.A. No. 1774 of 2006
                              -22-



conclusion that A2 and A3 are guilty of ill-treatment.

      25. However, the position of the first accused is quite

different. All the witnesses namely PWs 2 to 4 and 5 clearly

depose about the involvement of the first accused and the

ill-treatment on the victim. They all say is that initially, the

family life between the first accused and the victim was

smooth, but a month or so after the marriage, he took to

drinks and then the trouble started. That s sum of  7,000/-

was paid is evidenced by the testimony of PWs 2 to 4 and 5.

Of course, PWs 2 to 4 and 5 do not say that the first accused

made any demand for dowry as such. But they all speak

about the ill-treatment meted out by him to the victim.

There can be no doubt that he has committed the act which

would fall within the ambit of Section 498(A) of IPC and the

court below was perfectly justified in coming to the

conclusion that he is guilty of the said offence.

      26. What now remains to be considered is the

question of sentence as far as the first accused is concerned.

Crl.A. No. 1774 of 2006
                             -23-



The court below has awarded a sentence of three years

rigorous imprisonment under Section 498(A) of IPC. Going

by the provisions, imposition of fine is mandatory and one

fails to understand why the court below is not imposed the

fine. Considering the fact that the marriage was in the year

1998 and the incident had taken place in 2003 and

considering the passage of time, it is felt that some leniency

can be shown with regard to the sentence.

      27. This appeal is partly allowed and conviction and

sentence passed by the lower court against the second and

the third accused are set aside and it is held that they are

not guilty of the offence alleged against them. They stand

acquitted of the charge under Section 498(A) of IPC.

      As far as the first accused is concerned, while

confirming the conviction for the offence punishable under

Section 498(A) of IPC, the sentence awarded by the court

below is set aside and instead, he is sentenced to undergo

rigorous imprisonment for a period of two years and to pay a

Crl.A. No. 1774 of 2006
                               -24-


fine of  15,000/-, in default of payment of which he shall

suffer simple imprisonment for a period of three months.

Set off as per law will be allowed.




                                        P.BHAVADASAN
                                             JUDGE
ds



