
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                        PRESENT:

                  THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE C.T.RAVIKUMAR

         MONDAY, THE 11TH DAY OF MARCH 2013/20TH PHALGUNA 1934

                              Crl.MC.No. 3432 of 2012 ()
                                ---------------------------
                 CRIME NO.147/98 OF KUTTIADU POLICE STATION
                     C.P.17/2013 OF JFCM COURT, NADAPURAM

PETITIONER(S)/ACCUSED(A16):
-----------------------------------

         RAJAN THAYYULLATHIL,
         S/O KANNAN, THAYYULLATHIL HOUSE, P.O.POOLAKOOL
         CHERUPURAM-VATAKARA, KOZHIKODE.

         BY ADV. SRI.ZUBAIR PULIKOOL

RESPONDENTS/DEFACTO COMPLAINANTS & STATE:
------------------------------------------------------

       1. AMMAD, S/O.MOOSA,
         VELOM, VATAKARA, KOZHIKODE DISTRICT-673102.

       2. MUHAMMED.P,
         S/O.ABDULLA, THIRUVALLOOR, VATAKARA
         KOZHIKODEDISTRICT-673101.

       3. STATE OF KERALA,
         REPRESENTED BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR
         HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM-682031.

         R1-2 BY ADV. SMT.P.A.ANEESHA
         R3 BY ADDL.D.G.P. SRI.K.I.RASHEED

         THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE HAVING COME UP FOR ADMISSION ON
11-03-2013, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE FOLLOWING:

Crl.MC.No. 3432 of 2012 ()


                                APPENDIX




PETITIONER'S EXHIBITS


ANNEXURE I: TRUE COPY OF FINAL REPORT IN CRIME NO.147/2008

ANNEXURE II: TRUE COPY OF JUDGMENT IN S.C.616/2009

ANNEXURE III: TRUE COPY OF THE DEPOSITION OF IST RESPONDENT
              IN S.C.616/2009

ANNEXURE IV: TRUE COPY OF SWORN AFFIDAVIT

ANNEXURE V: TRUE COPY OF THE DEPOSITION OF 2ND RESPONDENT
             IN.S.C.616/2009.

ANNEXURE VI: TRUE COPY OF MEDICAL PRESCRIPTION OF THE SURGERY
              ISSUED FROM PARIYARAM MEDICAL COLLEGE.

ANNEXURE VII: TRUE COPY OF THE JUDGMENT IN S.C.616/2010 OF THE Ist
              ADDL. SESSIONS COURT, KOZHIKODE DATED 19.6.2009.

RESPONDENTS' EXHIBITS : NIL




                          // TRUE COPY //




TKS


                                                     P.S. TO JUDGE


                         C.T.RAVIKUMAR, J.
                       ----------------------------
                       Crl.M.C.No.3432 of 2012
                       ----------------------------
                       Dated 11th March, 2013

                                 ORDER

            The petitioner is the 16th accused in Crime No.147 of 1998

of Kuttiady Police Station. Annexure-I would reveal that against the

first accused therein and certain others commission of offences under

Sections 143, 147, 148, 452, 427 and 304 read with Section 149 of the

Indian Penal Code was charged. Subsequently, the petitioner and

certain others were also identified as persons having involvement in the

commission of the said crime and consequently, they too have been

arraigned as accused in the said crime. Accused Nos.3 and 5 were tried

in S.C.No.1261 of 2006.      Obviously, on finding that there was no

material to connect the said accused with the commission of the said

offences they were acquitted under Section 232 Cr.P.C. Annexure-VII

is the judgment in S.C.No.616 of 2009 which is a split up case. One

Suresh who was one another accused was tried in that case and upon

finding that there is no material before the court to connect the said

accused with the commission of the aforesaid offences he was acquitted

under Section 232 Cr.P.C. The contention of the learned counsel for the

petitioner is that all the accused sans the petitioner herein in the

aforesaid crime were acquitted and in such circumstances no fruitful

purpose could be achieved by conducting trial against the petitioner. It

Crl.M.C.3432/2012                  2


is to be noted that all such persons were acquitted only after trial. To

substantiate the contention that trial against the petitioner would be a

wasteful exercise the petitioner has produced Annexures-II and VII and

relied on the decision of the Hon'ble Apex Court in Gian Singh v. State

of Punjab reported in 2012 (4) KLT 108 (SC). The learned counsel

for the petitioner further contended that a perusal of the evidence in

S.C.No.616 of 2009 would reveal that the witnesses failed to identify the

accused and according to the learned counsel appearing for the

petitioner virtually they deposed to the effect that they could not identify

any of the assailants.     In the context of the said contention I have

carefully perused Annexure-II and VII which are respectively the

judgments in S.C.Nos.1261 of 2006 and 616 of 2009. True that some of

the witnesses deposed to the effect that they could not identify any of

the assailants. At the same time, they would go to show that some of

the witnesses deposed to the effect that they had seen some assailants

approaching the shop run by PW1 and also had seen the attack on the

deceased Ashraf. Necessarily, from their evidence one could gather only

the impression that such witnesses failed to identify the accused who

stood the trial. When that be the situation and in the light of the decision

of the Hon'ble Apex Court in State of Kerala v. Joseph @ Baby (2013

Crl.M.C.3432/2012                  3


(1) KLT 546 (SC))        I cannot uphold the contention of the learned

counsel for the petitioner that the evidence in those cases should be

relied on to consider the case of the petitioner, that too, for the purpose

of quashing the entire proceedings against him. The learned counsel for

the petitioner submitted that the said decision is not relevant as regards

the petitioner's case and what is relevant in this case is the decision of a

Full Bench of this Court in Moosa v. Sub Inspector of Police (2006

(1) KLT 552 (F.B.). It appears that the learned counsel relies on the

explanation carved out by the Full Bench in paragraph 50 of the said

judgment.     After laying down the general rule to the effect that the

judgment of acquittal of co-accused could not act as a bar for the

subsequent trial of absconding accused the Full Bench held that the said

general rule would not be applicable in a case where the very substratum

of the prosecution case had been lost with the pronouncement of the

judgment in the case of a co-accused who stood the trial.            I have

carefully considered Annexures II and VII judgments.             As stated

hereinbefore, in Annexures II and VII judgments relating the case of

some of the co-accused of the petitioner, who stood the trial, the trial

court held that no material evidence was available to connect them with

the commission of the crime. It is also evident from the discussion of the

Crl.M.C.3432/2012                          4


evidence therein that some of the accused despite admitting the fact that

they they had seen the incident failed to identify the accused. I am

afraid, such a judgment cannot be relied upon to canvass the position

that the very substratum of the prosecution case was lost. I am not

persuaded to uphold the contention of the petitioner that the substratum

of the case had been lost with the pronouncement of Annexures II and

VII judgments, in the circumstances.




              2. True that in the decision in Gian Singh's case (supra) the

Hon'ble Apex Court held that High Courts are having a duty to prevent

continuation of proceedings which became absolutely unnecessary in the

interest of justice. The Hon'ble Supreme Court held thus:-




        "Inherent power is of wide plenitude with no statutory limitation
        but it has to be exercised in accord with the guideline engrafted
        in such power viz; (i) to secure the ends of justice or (ii) to
        prevent abuse of the process of any Court. In what cases power
        to quash the criminal proceeding or complaint or F.I.R may be
        exercised where the offender and victim have settled their
        dispute would depend on the facts and circumstances of each
        case and no category can be prescribed. However, before
        exercise of such power, the High Court must have due regard to
        the nature and gravity of the crime. Heinous and serious
        offences of mental depravity or offences like murder, rape,
        dacoity, etc., cannot be fittingly quashed even though the victim
        or victim's family and the offender have settled the dispute.
        Such offences are not private in nature and have serious impact

Crl.M.C.3432/2012                         5


        on society. Similarly, any compromise between the victim and
        offender in relation to the offences under special statutes like
        Prevention of Corruption Act or the offences committed by
        public servants while working in that capacity etc; cannot
        provide for any basis for quashing criminal proceedings
        involving such offences. But the criminal cases having
        overwhelmingly and pre-dominatingly civil flavour stand on
        different footing for the purposes of quashing, particularly the
        offences arising from commercial, financial, mercantile, civil,
        partnership or such like transactions or the offences arising out
        of matrimony relating to dowry, etc. or the family disputes where
        the wrong is basically private or personal in nature and the
        parties have resolved their entire dispute. In this category of
        cases, High Court may quash criminal proceedings if in its view,
        because of the compromise between the offender and victim,
        the   possibility of   conviction   is  remote   and    bleak   and
        continuation of criminal case would put accused to great
        oppression and prejudice and extreme injustice would be
        caused to him by not quashing the criminal case despite full and
        complete settlement and compromise with the victim. In other
        words, the High Court must consider whether it would be unfair
        or contrary to the interest of justice to continue with the criminal
        proceeding or continuation of the criminal proceeding would
        tantamount to abuse of process of law despite settlement and
        compromise between the victim and wrongdoer and whether to
        secure the ends of justice, it is appropriate that criminal case is
        put to an end and if the answer to the above question(s) is in
        affirmative, the High Court shall be well within its jurisdiction to
        quash the criminal proceeding."



In the context of this case it is only apposite to refer to the decision of

the Hon'ble Apex Court in Dimpey Gujral and Others v. Union

Territory of Chandigarh and others (2013(1) KLD 66 (SC)). In

that case the Hon'ble Supreme Court held thus:-

Crl.M.C.3432/2012                   6


                  "5. In the light of the observations of this
          Court in Gian Singh, we feel that this is a case where
          the continuation of criminal proceedings would
          tantamount to abuse of process of law because the
          alleged offences are not heinous offences showing
          extreme depravity nor are they against the society.
          They are offences of a personal nature and burying
          them would bring about peace and amity between the
          two sides."




Thus, it is evident from the judgment that heinous and serious offences

of mental depravity or offences like murder, rape, dacoity etc. cannot be

fittingly quashed even though the victim or victim's family and the

offender have settled the dispute. In other words, in the case of heinous

offences or when an offence is said to have been committed against the

society it would certainly be against the interest of society to quash

proceedings even if the victim or victim's family and the offender settled

the disputes. In this case, it is to be noted that, it cannot be said that

the victim's family settled the dispute with the petitioner. It is only PW1

who was one of the witnesses filed an affidavit to the effect that he got

no objection in quashing the proceedings against the petitioner. Thus, it

is obvious that in this case even the victim's family had not so far settled

the disputes with the petitioner and even if such settlement is arrived at

in the light of Moosa's case (supra) this Court cannot quash the

Crl.M.C.3432/2012                    7


proceedings against the petitioner relying on Annexures-II and VII

judgments.    In fact, no case has been brought out for the application of

the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Gian Singh's case (supra).

In this case one of the offences alleged is under Section 304 IPC and that

is certainly an offence against the society. I have no hesitation to hold

that this is not a fit case for invocation of the inherent power under

section 482, Cr.P.C. to quash the proceedings against the petitioner.




             In view of the above discussion, I am of the considered view

that this petition is liable to fail and accordingly, it is dismissed. It is

made clear that this judgment will not stand against the petitioner's right

to claim for discharge at the appropriate stage, in accordance with law.




                                                 Sd/-
                                           C.T.RAVIKUMAR
                                                Judge

TKS



