
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                        PRESENT:

                         THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE PIUS C.KURIAKOSE
                                                              &
                                   THE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE P.D.RAJAN

                   FRIDAY, THE 1ST DAY OF MARCH 2013/10TH PHALGUNA 1934

                                          Mat.Appeal.No. 834 of 2010 ( )
                                                 ------------------------------
     AGAINST THE ORDER/JUDGMENT IN OP.899/2006 of FAMILY COURT, ALAPPUZHA
                                                   DATED 09-04-2010

APPELLANTS/RESPONDENTS::
------------------------------------------------

        1. ASHOK KUMAR, ALAMPALLIL VEEDU,
            PALLIKKAL NADUVILE MURI, BHARANIKKAVU VILLAGE.

        2. L.JAGADAMMA PILLAI, ALAMPALLIL VEEDU,
            PALLIKKAL NADUVILE MURI, BHARANIKKAVU VILLAGE.

            BY ADVS.SRI.GEORGE VARGHESE(PERUMPALLIKUTTIYIL)
                          SRI.A.R.DILEEP
                          SRI.V.SUNIL KUMAR (PANACHAMOODU)
                          SRI.H.JAWHAR

RESPONDENT(S)/PETITIONER::
----------------------------------------------------

            MADHURI, THOTTATHIL VEETTIL,
            MUTHUKULAM SOUTH MURI-690 506, MUTHUKULAM VILLAGE
            KARTHIKAPPALLI TALUK.

            R,R1 BY ADV. SRI.RASHEED C.NOORANAD

            THIS MATRIMONIAL APPEAL HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD ON 07-02-2013,
            THE COURT ON 01-03-2013 DELIVERED THE FOLLOWING:


acd


                     PIUS.C. KURIAKOSE
                                 &
                         P.D. RAJAN, JJ.
            -------------------------------------------
                   Mat. Appeal No.834 of 2010
           ----------------------------------------------
             Dated this the 1st day of March, 2013

                           JUDGMENT

P.D.Rajan, Judge.

      This appeal is directed against the judgment and decree in

O.P.(OS) 899/2006 of the Family Court, Alappuzha by the

husband and his mother, who are the respondents in the court

below.   Petitioner Madhuri filed the O.P. for recovery of gold

ornaments     from   the    appellants.      The    case  of the

petitioner/respondent in the court below was that her marriage

with the 1st appellant was solemnized on 18.1.1998 as per Hindu

customary rites and in the wedlock a child was born to them. At

the time of marriage, 85 sovereigns of gold ornaments were

given to the respondent as her share and on the next day of the

marriage, the entire gold ornaments were entrusted to the 2nd

appellant, mother-in-law, which was kept in a bank locker in her

name.    After the marriage, within a period of six months, 30

sovereigns of gold were taken from the bank locker and sold for

Mat. Appeal No.834/10            2

the personal need of the appellants and in the month of June,

15 sovereigns of gold were sold for arranging a job for the 1st

appellant in Malaysia.     The balance gold is still retained

with the appellants and they are not willing to return it to the

respondent. Subsequently, the 1st appellant demanded more

amount as dowry and ill-treated her, which created a tension

and    the    matrimonial  relationship   strained.    In   the

circumstances, she preferred the above petition for getting

gold ornaments from the appellants.

      2.    Both appellants contested the case by filing a

written objections and contended that the marriage was

following a love affair between the 1st appellant and the

respondent and the parents of the respondent were against the

marriage and according to this resistance by the parents of the

respondent, the marriage was solemnized. She did not bring

much gold ornaments at the time of marriage as claimed by

her and the gold ornaments, were kept in a locker for the

benefit of the respondent as a trustee, when the respondent

deserted the 1st appellant, she carried all gold ornaments with

her and the other story is not true.   The 1st appellant had no

necessity for raising a fund for going to Malaysia.     The 2nd

Mat. Appeal No.834/10              3

appellant is a retired teacher and she never demanded any

gold from the respondent.

      3.    The learned trial Judge, after framing issues

permitted the parties to adduce evidence in support of their

respective contention.      The petitioner/respondent examined

PWs 1 to 3 in order to prove her case and marked Exts.A1 and

A2 as documentary evidence. The 1st appellant was examined

as RW1 and no documentary evidence has been adduced by

them in respect of their contention.       The learned trial judge

analyzing the evidence on record came to a conclusion that the

petitioner/respondent is entitled to a decree to realise amount

of Rs.2, 45,000/-, which is the value of 35 sovereigns of gold

from the appellants.      The rest of the claim with regard to

ornaments is disallowed.      It is also directed that if the 1st

appellant, husband and the 2nd appellant, his mother failed to

pay the aforesaid amount forthwith, the petitioner/respondent

will be entitled to realise the amount with 6% per annum from

the date of original petition till realisation. Aggrieved by the

aforesaid decision, the appellants, who are husband and

mother-in-law preferred this appeal.

      4.    We heard the learned counsel appearing for the

Mat. Appeal No.834/10             4

appellants and the respondent in detail and considered the oral

and documentary evidence adduced by both parties. At the

outset we would like to make it clear that both parties had

expressed their views with regard to the matrimonial life and

they have shown no inclination to clear the matrimonial

rapture. Now the daughter is residing with the respondent, the

mother. It is evident from the oral testimony of PW1 that the

relationship between the 1st appellant and the respondent had

broken. Now, PW1 approached the court for getting back her

gold ornaments. It is the specific case of PW1 that at the time

of marriage, 85 sovereigns of gold was given to her by her

mother and brothers.       While both of them were residing

together in the matrimonial house 30 sovereigns of gold was

sold by the appellants after six months, which was kept in the

bank locker in the name of the 2nd appellant. After a few days,

they also informed that the 1st appellant intended to go to

Malaysia. For obtaining visa, they sold 15 sovereigns of gold.

PW1 categorically stated that the appellants sold 45 sovereigns

of gold without her consent and they misappropriated the gold

given to her.      But, the appellants totally denied the above

contentions and contended that PW1 was in love with the 1st

Mat. Appeal No.834/10             5

appellant. For this reason alone, her relatives and family

members resisted her, moreover, due to this resistance, there

was not much gold at the time of the marriage.

      5.    The matter may be further elaborated on the basis

of the evidence of PWs 2 and 3. To prove the purchase of the

gold, she produced Exts.A1 and A2 in the court below. PW2

participated in the marriage, who, supported the evidence of

PW1, is the Joint Secretary of NSS Karayogam who intervened

in the matrimonial dispute when there was an allegation

against their relationship. In the evidence of PW2 he deposed

that the 1st appellant visited her house with his father's brother

for mediation talk. At that time, he agreed that he will give

some property in the name of the respondent as the price of

the gold ornaments. PW3 also supported the evidence of PW1

and deposed that he was working in the Fashion Jewellery,

Kayamkulam, thirteen years back he polished the gold

ornaments of PW1. Analyzing the evidence of PW1 and PW3, it

is clear that PW1 is financially sound to raise the fund for

purchase the gold ornaments as claimed by her at the time of

her marriage. But, exact weight of the gold ornaments worn

by PW1 at the time of marriage was not approved by the court

Mat. Appeal No.834/10           6

below at the time of the discussion.          The 1st appellant

examined as RW1 and disputed the quantity of gold ornaments

and denied the total evidence of PW1. Even though RW1 was

examined in the lower court to rebut the evidence of PW1,

much reliance cannot be given to his evidence in this context.

The manner, in which, the oral and documentary evidence

analyzed by the lower court was considered by us. Each and

every point highlighted by the appellants was considered by

the lower court and fully discussed in the judgment, without

any unnecessary lengthy details. The appellants submitted in

the court below that PW1 should not be glibly believed for the

reason that she is exaggerating the facts.

      6.    The 1st appellant affirmed in his evidence that

Exts.A1 and A2 documents are the photocopies and it is not

admissible. But, PW3 admitted the handwriting in Exts.A1 and

A2. But, he is not in a position to say the exact weight of the

gold ornaments in the absence of an original receipt. There

was total denial from the side of RW1 and contended that PW1

was not wearing any gold ornaments at the time of marriage.

However, the court below rejected that argument and

concluded that the appellants are liable to pay 35 sovereigns of

Mat. Appeal No.834/10            7

gold ornaments or its value of Rs.2,45,000/-.        We find no

reason to interfere in the finding of the court below and the

finding is only to be confirmed.

      In the result, the decree and judgment passed by the

lower court are confirmed. There is no merit in this appeal and

it is dismissed. Accordingly, there is no order as to cost.




                               PIUS.C.KURIAKOSE,JUDGE




                                      P.D. RAJAN, JUDGE.

acd

Mat. Appeal No.834/10    8

Mat. Appeal No.834/10    9



