
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                      PRESENT:

                           THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE V.K.MOHANAN

                  MONDAY,THE 10TH DAY OF JUNE 2013/20TH JYAISHTA 1935

                                           Crl.MC.No. 1511 of 2013 ()
                                                ---------------------------


AGAINST THE JUDGMENT IN Crl.MC 3504/2009 of HIGH COURT OF KERALA DATED

AGAINST THEJUDGMENT IN CC 362/2011 of JUDICIAL FIRST CLASS MAGISTRATE-I,
MAVELIKKARA DATED NIL

CRIME NO. 138/2008 OF KURATHIKADU POLICE STATION , ALAPPUZHA

PETITIONER(S)/SECOND ACCUSED:
--------------------------------------------------------

            SABU KOSHY PHILIP
            S/O.KOSHY PHILIP, AGED 42 YEARS,
            KOCHUPARAMBIL HOUSE (THAZHATHETHIL)
            KUTTAPPUZHA P.O., THIRUVALLA, PIN CODE 689103.

            BY ADVS.SRI.RAM MOHAN.G.
                          SRI.G.P.SHINOD
                          SRI.MANU V.
                          SRI.GOVIND PADMANAABHAN

RESPONDENTS/STATE AND DE-FACTO COMPLAINANT:
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

        1. STATE OF KERALA
            REPRESENTED BY ITS PUBLIC PROSECUTOR AT THE HIGH COURT OF
          KERALA ERNAKULAM.

        2. SOFIYA.J, AGED 33 YEARS
            D/O.JOSEPH DANIEL, RESIDING AT VALLAYATH THARAYIL
            KOMALLOOR MURI, CHUNAKKARA VILLAGE, MAVELIKKARA TALUK
            ALAPPUZHA DISTRICT.

          R2 BY ADV. SRI.A.SHAFEEK (KAYAMKULAM)
          R1 BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SMT.S.HYMA

            THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD ON 10-06-2013,
THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE FOLLOWING:

jm/-

Crl.MC.No. 1511 of 2013 ()
---------------------------

                                           APPENDIX

PETITIONER(S)' EXHIBITS
-------------------------------------

ANNEXURE-A: ATRUE PHOTOCOPY OF THE CHARGESHEET IN C CRIME NO.138 OF
                     2008 OF KURATHIKADU POLICE STATION.

ANNEXURE-B: THE AFFIDAVIT DATED 02.04.2013 SWORN TO BY THE SECOND
                     RESPONDENT.

ANNEXURE-C: ATRUE COPY OF THE ORDER DATED 02/02/2010 OF THIS
                     HONOURABLE COURT IN CRIMINAL MISCELLANEOUS CASE NO.3504
                     OF 2009.

RESPONDENT(S)' EXHIBITS: NIL
---------------------------------------


                                                                \\ TRUE COPY\\


                                                                  PA TO JUDGE


jm/-


                       V.K.MOHANAN, J.
                ----------------------------------------
                   Crl.M.C.No.1511 of 2013
                ----------------------------------------
            Dated this the 10th day of June, 2013

                               ORDER

        The above petition is filed under Section 482 of the

Criminal Procedure Code (for short 'Cr.P.C.') at the instance of

the petitioner, who is the accused in C.C.No.362 of 2011 on

the file of the Judicial First Class Magistrate Court-I,

Mavelikkara, which is a case instituted upon the police report

in Crime No.138 of 2008 of Kurathikadu Police Station for the

offences punishable under Sections 498-A, 323 & 34 of IPC

with a prayer to quash Annexure A charge sheet as the matter

is settled out of court.

     2.    The learned counsel for the petitioner submitted

that the first accused who is the brother of the present

petitioner has already approached this Court by filing

M.C.No.1409 of 2013 with a prayer to quash the proceedings

pending against him in C.C.No.362 of 2011 on the file of the

Judicial First Class Magistrate Court-I, Mavelikkara on the

ground of settlement between the de facto complainant who is

Crl.M.C.No.1511/2013
                               :-2-:




the wife of the first accused and the 1st accused and

accordingly this Court by order dated 27/03/2013 in the above

M.C. quashed the proceedings against the petitioners therein

who is the co-accused of the petitioner.

      3.        The allegation against the accused is that the

marriage       between   the    second   respondent      and   the

petitioner/the second accused was solemenized on 21/10/2002

and subsequent to the marriage, there was persistent demand

for dowry of Rs.2 lakhs more, which could not be met by the

parents of the second respondent and resultantly, the 2nd

respondent was subjected to physical harassment. Now, the

case of the petitioner is that the matter is settled out of court.

         4. Heard the learned counsel for the petitioner as well

as the second respondent.         I have also heard the learned

Public Prosecutor.

         5. The learned counsel for the petitioner submitted

that during the pendency of the above case, the matter is

settled amicably between the parties to the dispute which is

the subject matter of the above case.              Therefore, the

Crl.M.C.No.1511/2013
                              :-3-:




continuation of the proceedings in the above case is abuse of

process of law and proceedings.

         6. The learned counsel for the second respondent who

on the basis of specific instruction received from the

respondent submitted that the above respondent, who is the de

facto complainant does not intend to proceed any further

against the petitioner and she has no grievance against him.

         7. I have carefully considered the above submissions of

the respective counsel.     I have verified the documents and

materials produced along with the above petition which is

marked as Annexure-B. In the given facts and circumstances

of the case and especially in the light of the settlement arrived

between the parties to the dispute, the learned Public

Prosecutor has also no objection in allowing the above petition.

         8.     Having regard to the facts and circumstances

involved in the case, it can be seen that the offences involved

in the above case are only matrimonial dispute which are more

or less personal in nature and no public interest is involved. It

is pertinent to note that though such offences are involved, the

Crl.M.C.No.1511/2013
                                  :-4-:




real parties to the dispute approached this Court after having

amicably settled the matter. From the submission made by the

counsel for the second respondent, it appears to me that the

de facto complainant has no further grievance against the

petitioner/accused in the light of the settlement arrived by

them. In this juncture, it is relevant to note the decisions of

the Honourable Apex Court reported in Gian Singh v. State

of    Punjab       [2012(4)    KLT      108(SC)]         and     Jitendra

Raghuvanshi and Others v. Babita Raghuvanshi and

another [2013 (1) KLD 817 (SC)]. In Gian Singh's case, the

Supreme Court has held as follows:-

                "57. The position that emerges from the above

         discussion can be summarised thus: the power of the

         High Court in quashing a criminal proceeding or FIR

         or complaint in exercise of its inherent jurisdiction is

         distinct and different from the power given to a

         criminal court for compounding the offences under

         S.320 of the Code.      Inherent power is of wide

         plenitude with no statutory limitation but it has to be

         exercised in accord with the guideline engrafted in

         such power viz;(i) to secure the ends of justice or (ii)

         to prevent abuse of the process of any Court. In what

         cases power to quash the criminal proceeding or

Crl.M.C.No.1511/2013
                                     :-5-:




         complaint or F.I.R. may be exercised where the

         offender and victim have settled their dispute would

         depend on the facts and circumstances of each case

         and no category can be prescribed."

It is further held as follows:-

         "......... But the criminal cases having overwhelmingly

         and pre-dominatingly civil flavour stand on different

         footing for the purposes of quashing, particularly the

         offences           arising       from       commercial,

         financial,mercandile, civil, partnership or such like

         transactions or the offences arising out of matrimony

         relating to dowry etc. or the family disputes where

         the wrong is basically private or personal in nature

         and the parties have resolved their entire dispute. In

         this category of cases, High Court may quash

         criminal proceedings if in its view, because of the

         compromise between the offender and victim, the

         possibility of conviction is remote and bleak and

         continuation of criminal case would put accused to

         great oppression and prejudice and extreme injustice

         would be caused to him by not quashing the criminal

         case despite        full and complete settlement and

         compromise with the victim........"

Further, in Jitendra Raghuvanshi's case, the Apex Court

has held as follows:-

                 "7.    It is not in dispute that matrimonial

Crl.M.C.No.1511/2013
                                   :-6-:




         disputes have been on considerable increase in

         recent times resulting in filing of complaints under

         Sections 498A and 406 of I.P.C. not only against the

         husband but also against the relatives of the

         husband.    The question is when such matters are

         resolved either by the wife agreeing to rejoin the

         matrimonial home or by mutual settlement of other

         pending    disputes    for   which    both   the  sides

         approached the High Court and jointly prayed for

         quashing of the criminal proceedings or the FIR or

         complaint by the wife under Sections 498A and 406

         of I.P.C., whether the prayer can be declined on the

         sole ground that since the offences are non-

         compoundable under Section 320 of the Code, it

         would be impermissible for the court to quash the

         criminal proceedings or FIR or complaint.

                8. It is not in dispute that in the case on hand

         subsequent to the filing of the criminal complaint

         under Sections 498A and 406 of IPC and Sections 3

         and 4 of the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961, with the

         help and intervention of family members, friends and

         well-wishers, the parties concerned have amicably

         settled    their    differences    and    executed    a

         compromise/settlement.         Pursuant   thereto,  the

         appellants filed the said compromise before the Trial

         Court with a request to place the same on record and

         to drop the criminal proceedings against the

         appellants herein. It is also not in dispute that in

         additional to the mutual settlement arrived at by the

Crl.M.C.No.1511/2013
                                  :-7-:




         parties, respondent/-wife has also filed an affidavit

         stating that she did not wish to pursue the criminal

         proceedings    against   the    appellants   and   fully

         supported the contents of the settlement deed. It is

         the grievance of the appellants that no only the Trial

         Court rejected such prayer of the parties but also the

         High Court failed toe exercise its jurisdiction under

         Section 482 of the Code only on the ground that the

         criminal   proceedings     relate   to   the   offences

         punishable under Sections 498A and 406 of IPC

         which are non-compoundable in nature."

                "12. In our view, it is the duty of the Courts to

         encourage    genuine   settlements     of   matrimonial

         disputes, particularly, when the same are on

         considerable increase. Even if the offences are non-

         compoundable, if they relate to matrimonial disputes

         and the Court is satisfied that the parties have

         settled the same amicably and without any pressure,

         we hold that for the purpose of securing ends of

         justice, Section 320 of the Code would not be a bar

         to the exercise of power of quashing of FIR,

         complaint or the subsequent criminal proceedings.

                13. There has been an outburst of matrimonial

         disputes in recent times. The institution of marriage

         occupies an important place and it has an important

         role to play in the society. Therefore, every effort

         should be made in the interest of the individuals in

         order to enable them to settle down in life and live

         peacefully. If the parties ponder over their defaults

Crl.M.C.No.1511/2013
                                  :-8-:




         and terminate their disputes amicably by mutual

         agreement instead of fighting it out in a Court of law,

         in order to do complete justice in the matrimonial

         matters, the Courts should be less hesitant in

         exercising its extraordinary jurisdiction. It is trite to

         state that the power under Section 482 should be

         exercised sparingly and with circumspection only

         when the Court is convinced, on the basis of material

         on record, that allowing the proceedings to continue

         would be an abuse of the process of the Court or that

         the ends of justice require that the proceedings

         ought to be quashed."

Considering the particular facts and circumstances in this

case, it can be seen further that the criminal proceedings are

initiated consequent to the matrimonial dispute arose among

the parties and both the disputes are now amicably settled

between the parties. According to me, in the light of the facts

and    circumstances       involved    in the      present       case and

particularly in view of the settlement arrived in the present

case, the dictum laid in the above decisions will be squarely

applicable in the present case. According to me, as the parties

to the dispute settled the issues amicably, it is the duty of this

Court to promote such settlement, instead of compelling the

Crl.M.C.No.1511/2013
                             :-9-:




parties to go on with the dispute. It is pertinent to note that

since the matter is settled out of court, in the event of

proceeding with the trial, there would not have any fruitful

prosecution, resulting the conviction of the accused, rather the

net result would be sheer waste of judicial time and abuse of

process of the court and proceedings. Thus, according to me,

following the decisions cited supra, this Crl.M.C. can be

allowed granting the relief as sought for.

         In the result, this Crl.M.C. is allowed, quashing

Annexure-A Charge Sheet and all further proceedings pending

against the petitioner in C.C.No.362 of 2011 on the file of the

Judicial First Class Magistrate Court-I, Mavelikkara and all

further proceedings thereto.




                                                  Sd/-
                                      V.K.MOHANAN, JUDGE
skj
                           True copy

                         P.A. To Judge



