
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                        PRESENT:

          THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE K.HARILAL

   MONDAY, THE 8TH DAY OF JULY 2013/17TH ASHADHA, 1935

            Crl.Rev.Pet.No. 1025 of 2012 ()
            --------------------------------

AGAINST THE ORDER IN CMP NO.4889/08    IN CC 403/2008 of
J.M.F.C.-II,ATTINGAL DATED 7/4/2012.

REVISION PETITIONER(S)/REVISION PETITIONERS:
--------------------------------------------

          1. A.ABDUL SALIM,
      K.K. HOUSE, DECENTUMUKKU, NAVAIKULAM,
      KUDAVOOR VILLAGE, TRIVANDRUM.

          2. SHAFEEK,
      K.K. HOUSE, DECENTUMUKKU, NAVAIKULAM
      KUDAVOOR VILLAGE, TRIVANDRUM.

          3. SHAJITHA,
      K.K. HOUSE, DECENTUMUKKU, NAVAIKULAM
      KUDAVOOR VILLAGE, TRIVANDRUM.

      BY ADV. SRI.T.M.ABDUL LATHEEF

RESPONDENTS/STATE,  COUNTER   PETITIONER   &   DE   FACTO
COMPLAINANT :
---------------------------------------------------------

          1. STATE OF KERALA,
      REPRESENTED BY THE PUBLIC PROSECUTOR,
      HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM-682 031.

          2. THE SUB INSPECTOR OF POLICE,
      KAZHAKUTTO0M-695582.

          3. THE SUB INSPECTOR OF POLICE,
      KILIMANOOR-695601.

          4. MUBEENA,
      D/O. NAZEEMA BEEVI, J.J. MANZIL, VETTU ROAD,
      KAZHAKUTTOM-695582.

      R4 BY ADV. SRI.SABU S.KALLARAMOOLA
      BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SRI. LIJU V. STEPHEN

        THIS CRIMINAL REVISION PETITION      HAVING BEEN
FINALLY HEARD  ON  08-07-2013, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY
PASSED THE FOLLOWING:


                          K. HARILAL, J.
         ------------------------------------------------------
                  Crl.R.P. No. 1025 of 2012
         ------------------------------------------------------
            Dated this the 8th day of July, 2013

                              ORDER


      This Revision Petition is filed challenging the order

passed in CMP.No.4889/2008 in CC.No.403/2008 on the

files of the Judicial First Class Magistrate-II, Attingal. The

above petition was filed under Section 239 of the Code of

Criminal Procedure seeking discharge from prosecution.

The Revision Petitioners 1 to 3 are accused Nos.2, 4 and 5

in the above CC. The defacto complainant is the wife of the

first accused. He is the son of the first Revision Petitioner

and brother of the Revision Petitioners 2 and 3. The third

accused in the said case was the mother of the Revision

Petitioners 2 and 3 and the first accused. She died during

the pendency of the proceedings.

Crl.R.P. No. 1025 of 2012    -: 2 :-

     2.   The allegation against the Revision Petitioners is

that the Revision Petitioners had stated that the defacto

complainant is not a beautiful woman and that there was no

dowry and that their brother would have got more dowry

and a more beautiful girl. According to them, they are made

as accused in Crime No.535/2005 of Kazhakkoottom police

station on the strength of the said allegation only. But the

said allegation by itself does not make out any offence under

Section 498-A. The deceased mother when she was alive

approached this Court by filing Crl.MC.No.3060/2008 under

Section 482 of the Cr.PC for quashing the proceedings. But

this Court directed the Revision Petitioners herein and the

deceased mother to approach the lower court to claim

discharge.    Presently, the above petition was filed in

compliance with the order passed by this Court in

Crl.MC.No.3060/2008. But the court below dismissed the

above application on the ground that there is ground to

proceed against the accused. This order is under challenge

in this Revision Petition.

     3.   The learned counsel for the Revision Petitioners

Crl.R.P. No. 1025 of 2012    -: 3 :-

submits that the impugned order is illegal, unsustainable

and passed without considering the statutory requirements

under Section 239 of the Cr.PC. In short, the argument is

that the order under challenge is not a speaking order. The

learned counsel contends that the specific case of the

Revision Petitioners is that the allegations do not constitute

the offence alleged against them.        Hence the learned

Magistrate ought to have considered the materials on record

meticulously.

     4. Per contra, the learned counsel for the respondent

submits that on a petition under Section 239 of the Cr.PC,

there is no need to pass a speaking order. A speaking order

shall be passed only if the Magistrate allow the application

filed under Section 239 of the Cr.PC. So, the impugned

order under challenge is justifiable and not liable to be

interfered with. The learned counsel further cited Honey

Thankachan v. State of Kerala (2012(2) KLT 209) and

drew my attention to paragraph 8 of the said decision.

     5.   I have given my anxious consideration to the

submissions made by the respective counsel at the Bar. In

Crl.R.P. No. 1025 of 2012    -: 4 :-

view of the rival contentions, the question to be considered

is whether there is any illegality or impropriety in the

impugned order. The findings in the impugned order read

as follows:

               "3.     On perusal of records and

           documents by the prosecution, I find that

           there is ground to proceed against the

           accused.   Hence, the discharge petition is

           dismissed."




Going by the impugned order it could be seen that

apparently the order is a nonspeaking, cryptic as well as

laconic. The learned Magistrate claims that he had perused

the materials produced along with the report filed by the

police. Prima facie, I find that a perusal of the record is not

sufficient under Section 239 of the Cr.PC. Going by Section

239 of the Cr.PC, the section itself says that, if, upon

considering the police report, and the documents sent with

it under section 173 and making such examination, if any, of

the accused as the Magistrate thinks necessary and after

giving the prosecution and the accused an opportunity of

Crl.R.P. No. 1025 of 2012     -: 5 :-

being heard, the Magistrate considers the charge against

the accused to be groundless, he shall discharge the

accused, and record his reasons for so doing. What are the

statutory observance under Sec.239 of the Cr.P.C.? On an

analysis of the above section it could be seen that the

statutory observance under Section 239 of the Cr.PC consist

of three things ie., (1) the consideration of the police report

and also the examination of the document sent along with

the report under Section 173; (2) making such examination,

if any, of the accused as the Magistrate thinks necessary

and (3) giving the prosecution and the accused an

opportunity of being heard.

      6.  Needless to say, the impugned order does not say

that the order was passed after complying the above

statutory observance.     I am of the opinion that a      mere

perusal of a document and the consideration of a document

are different and in the latter the degree of application of

mind is more rather than the former.        The consideration

certainly   requires      sufficient   application  of   mind.

Obviously, none of the above things are observed in the

Crl.R.P. No. 1025 of 2012     -: 6 :-

impugned order.       Therefore, I have no hesitation to hold

that the impugned order is passed in violation of the

statutory observance under Section 239 of the Cr.PC.

     7. Certainly, the grounds which are seen in the police

report and documents can be observed in the order without

weighing the scope of reliability or credibility or without

making any findings as to whether the same would end in

conviction or acquittal. It is true that such a finding will go

beyond the outer limits of jurisdiction provided under

Sec.239 of the Cr.P.C.      Thus, the scope of considerations

under Sec.239 of the Cr.P.C. and at the time of final hearing

after trial are well distinguishable and earmarked.     It is to

be borne in mind of the learned Magistrate that the order

which is required to be passed under Sec.239 of the Cr.P.C.

is a revisable order under the revisional jurisdiction.

Therefore, the specific grounds under which the petition is

dismissed must be manifested in the order.

     8. The learned counsel for the respondent submits that

if the Magistrate passes a detailed order that would cause

prejudice to him as trial is not commenced. I am unable to

Crl.R.P. No. 1025 of 2012    -: 7 :-

accept that argument because what is stated in the earlier

decision will be helpful to consider this aspect.     In the

decision in Honey Thankachan v. State of Kerala (2012

(2) KLT 209), the dictum laid down is that in an enquiry

under Section 239 of the Code, the Magistrate is concerned

only with the question whether there are grounds to

presume the guilt of the accused for the offences triable as a

warrant case and at that stage, the truth, veracity and effect

of the materials, which is proposed to be adduced by the

prosecution is not to be meticulously adjudged. Certainly,

the decision laid down is conformed with the statutory

requirements under Section 239 of the Cr.PC ie., the

Magistrate is not required to adjudge or assess the veracity

and truth of the materials.

     9. But that does not mean that Magistrate shall not

consider whether there are sufficient grounds to proceed

against the accused or the Magistrate can pass a non-

speaking order under the guise of prejudice. Certainly, the

Magistrate can look into the question whether the

allegations in the police report and the documents produced

Crl.R.P. No. 1025 of 2012      -: 8 :-

along with are admitted at its entirety that will constitute

any offence alleged against him.          So, there is no legal

impediment in the way of assessing the materials produced

along with the police report to find out the question whether

it will disclose the offence alleged against him.

      10. Therefore, I find that the decision quoted above

will not render any assistance or help to the respondent.

The impugned order is perse unsustainable under law and I

am inclined to set aside it and I do so. Consequently, the

impugned order is set aside and remitted back to the trial

court for fresh consideration in accordance with law,

keeping in view of the observations made above.            The

Magistrate shall pass fresh orders within a period of four

months from today.

                                                 Sd/-


                                       (K. HARILAL, JUDGE)


Kvs/

                   //true copy//

                                       P.S. to Judge



