
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                      PRESENT:

                      THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE PIUS C.KURIAKOSE
                                                             &
                                THE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE P.D.RAJAN

            MONDAY, THE 25TH DAY OF FEBRUARY 2013/6TH PHALGUNA 1934

                                        Mat.Appeal.No. 780 of 2010 ( )
                                               ------------------------------
                            OP.134/2006 OF FAMILY COURT, ERNAKULAM.
                                                       ...............

APPELLANTS/PETITIONERS:
------------------------------------------

        1. T. RADHIKA, AGED 26 YEARS,
            W/O.SURESH GOPALAKRISHNAN, KRISHNAKRIPA,
            AYYAPPURAM, KALPATHY P.O., PALAKKAD,
            PRESENTLY RESIDING AT KRISHNAKRIPA,
            SOUTH BAVANS ROAD, ELAMAKKARA -682 026.

        2. NIVEDA, D/O.RADHIKA, AGED 5 YEARS,
            REPRESENTED BY MOTHER AND GUARDIAN
             RADHIKA DO. DO.

           BY SRI.P. SANTHALINGAM, SENIOR ADVOCATE.
                ADVS. SRI.S.SHARAN,
                          SRI.A.D.SHAJAN.

RESPONDENTS/RESPONDENTS:
------------------------------------------------

        1. SURESH GOPALAKRISHNAN,
           AGED 33 YEARS, H.NO.38/1880,
           OPPOSITE CENTURY CLUB, P.O.VENNALA,
           COCHIN-28.

        2. DAMAYANTHI, AGED ABOUT 64 YEARS,
           W/O.LATE GOPALAKRISHNAN, NO.12, LOTUS APARTMENTS,
           KRISHNAKANANDHI ROAD, KOPPAM, PALAKKAD-678 005.


            BY ADVS. SRI.K.R.VINOD,
                           SRI.K.V.ARUN KUMAR.


           THIS MATRIMONIAL APPEAL HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD
           ON 05-02-2013, THE COURT ON 25-02-2013 DELIVERED THE
           FOLLOWING:

rs.


                     PIUS.C. KURIAKOSE
                                &
                        P.D. RAJAN, JJ.
            -------------------------------------------
                  Mat.Appeal No.780 of 2010
          ----------------------------------------------
          Dated this the 25th day of February, 2013

                          JUDGMENT

P.D. Rajan, J.

      The petitioners in O.P.No.134/2006 of the Family Court,

Ernakulam are the appellants and the respondents in that O.P.

are respondents in this appeal.      Petitioners filed the Original

Petition under Sections 24 and 25 of Hindu Marriage Act, 1955,

seeking permanent alimony, return of gold ornaments and

maintenance etc.   The 1st respondent is the husband and the 2nd

respondent is the mother.        The marriage between the 1st

appellant and the 1st respondent was registered on 12.11.2001 in

the Sub Registrar, Koduvayoor, after that the marriage was

conducted in the nearby temple as per Hindu customary rites. At

the time of the marriage, the mother of the 1st appellant gave 25

sovereigns of gold and a sum of Rs.10,000/- to her. After the

marriage, both of them lead a happy married life, but,

subsequently when the 2nd respondent demanded more amount

Mat. Appeal No.780/10             2

as dowry, the marital relationship strained.     When she was

unable to pay the amount she withdrawn the Fixed Deposit

account and entrusted it to the respondents.    In the wedlock,

a female child was born to them on 18.2.2005 at Indira Gandhi

Hospital, Ernakulam.     In the   meantime, the 1st respondent

filed O.P. No.586/2005 for divorce which was dismissed by the

Family Court. The 1st respondent is a Marketing Executive in

the Standard Chartered Bank, Ernakulam and having landed

properties at Palakkad worth rupees thirty lakh and Fixed

Deposit in bank for more than ten lakh rupees.      Hence, they

filed the above petition for getting alimony and to return of the

gold ornaments and maintenance.

      2.    The     respondents   denied  the   allegation   and

contended that the 1st appellant voluntarily left her house and

joined with the 1st respondentt.        They admitted that the

marriage was solemnized at Sub Registrar office, Koduvayoor

and no gold ornaments were gifted by the mother of the 1st

appellant and the other contention is absolutely false.       No

money and house hold articles were entrusted to the 1st

respondent and he denied the job as Marketing Executive in

Mat. Appeal No.780/10             3

the Standard Chartered Bank and contended that he has no

bank balance and Fixed Deposit.           The gold ornaments,

certificates, dress materials and personal belongings of the 1st

appellant are in her possession and she is not eligible for any

relief as claimed. She also filed additional counter statement.

      3.    The court below dismissed the application under

Section 25 of the Hindu Marriage Act. Aggrieved by that, the

wife preferred this appeal.

      4.    The learned counsel appearing for the appellants

contended that the 1st appellant is entitled to get permanent

alimony as claimed in the petition. The court below dismissed

the claim of permanent alimony without considering the legal

position. Hence, he submitted that the impugned order is to

be set aside and passed permanent alimony. But, the learned

counsel appearing for the respondents strongly resisted the

above contention and contended that the divorce petition was

dismissed by the court below and she is not eligible for

permanent alimony.

      5.    Now the point that arises for consideration is

whether the appellants are entitled to get permanent alimony

Mat. Appeal No.780/10           4

as claimed. The marriage between the 1st appellant and the 1st

respondent was admitted by both parties.      The 1st respondent

filed O.P.No.586/2005 in the court below for divorce and it was

dismissed by the court below. After dismissing the above O.P.

the 1st appellant claimed permanent alimony. The evidence of

PW1 in the court below shows that while residing with the 1st

respondent, he treated her with cruelty, moreover his mother

misappropriated the gold ornaments and manhandled her

several times. Even in the midst of this quarrel PW1 adjusted

with her husband for a settled married life.      Both of them

undergone for counsellling, ultimately it failed. It is submitted

by the 1st appellant that she always maintained dignity of the

marriage with the 1st respondent and as a last resort she

approached the court below with an application.

      7.    The Section 25 of the Hindu Marriage Act 1956

provides that permanent alimony can be granted to any of the

party to a marriage at the time of passing any decree or at

any time subsequent thereto.    What is indicated above is that

permanent alimony could be granted only when a decree is

passed with substantive relief, if no request is made at the

Mat. Appeal No.780/10                 5

time of passing the decree, there is no bar for seeking such

relief on a subsequent application. Therefore, it is clear that

an application cannot be made by a party at the time of

dismissal of a petition for divorce.           A dismissal order of a

petition for divorce could not be treated as the passing of a

decree under Section 25 of the Hindu marriage Act 1955.

Apex Court discussed this position in a decision in Chand

Dhawn v. Jawaharlal Dhawan [1993 KHC 1182], it is held

thus (23):

      23. The preamble to the Hindu Marriage Act suggests
      that it is an Act to amend and codify the law relating to
      marriage among Hindus. Though it speaks only of the
      law relating to marriage, yet the Act itself lays down
      rules relating to the solemnization and requirements of
      a valid     Hindu marriage as well as Restitution of
      Conjugal Rights, Judicial Separation, Nullity of Marriage,
      Divorce, legitimacy of children and other allied matters.
      Where the statute expressly codifies the law, the court
      as a general rule, is not at liberty to go outside the law
      so created, just on the basis that before its enactment
      another law prevailed. Now the other law in the context
      which prevailed prior to that was the uncodified Hindu
      law on the subject.     Prior to the year 1955 or 1956
      maintenance could be claimed by a Hindu wife through
      court intervention and with the aid of the case law
      developed. Now with effect from December 21, 1956,
      the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act is in force and
      that too in a codified form.   Its preamble too suggests
      that it is an Act to amend and codify the law relating to
      adoptions and maintenance among Hindus. S.18(1) of
      the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 1956 entitles
      a Hindu wife to claim maintenance from her husband
      during her life time. Sub-section (2) of S.18 grants her
      the right to live separately, without forfeiting her claim

Mat. Appeal No.780/10                  6

      to maintenance, if he is guilty of any of the
      misbehaviours enumerated therein or on account of his
      being in one of objectionable conditions as mentioned
      therein.     So while sustaining her marriage and
      preserving her marital status, the wife is entitled to
      claim maintenance from her husband.          On the other
      hand, under the Hindu Marriage Act, in contrast, her
      claim for maintenance pendente lite is durated on the
      pendency of a litigation of the kind envisaged under S.9
      to 14 of the Hindu Marriage Act, and her claim to
      permanent maintenance or alimony is based on the
      supposition that either her marital status has been
      strained or affected by passing a decree for restitution
      of conjugal rights or judicial separation in favour or
      against her, or her marriage stands dissolved by a
      decree of nullity or divorce, with or without her consent.
      Thus when her marital status is to be affected or
      disrupted the court does so by passing a decree for or
      against her. On or at the time of the happening of that
      event, the court being seize of the matter, invokes its
      ancilliary or incidental power to grant permanent
      alimony. Not only that, the court retains the jurisdiction
      at subsequent stages to fulfill this incidental or ancilliary
      obligation when moved by an application on that behalf
      by a party entitled to relief. The court further retains
      the power to change" or alter the order in view of the
      changed circumstances.      Thus the whole exercise        is
      within the gammit of a diseased or a broken marriage.
      And in order to avoid conflict of perceptions the
      legislature while codifying the Hindu Marriage Act
      preserved the right of permanent maintenance in favour
      of the husband or the wife, as the case may be,
      dependent on the court passing a decree of the kind as
      envisaged under S.9 to 14 of the Act. In other words
      without the marital status being affected or; disputed by
      the matrimonial court under the Hindu Marriage Act the
      claim of permanent alimony was not to be valid as
      ancilliary or incidental to such affectation or disruption.
      The wife's claim to maintenance necessarily has then to
      be agitated under the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance
      Act, 1956, which is a legislative measure later in point of
      time than the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955, though part of
      the same socio legal scheme revolutionizing the law
      applicable to Hindus."

Mat. Appeal No.780/10              7

      In view of the aforesaid discussion, it is clear that the

relationship between the 1st appellant and the 1st respondent is

strained. The decree of divorce was not allowed by the court

below.      Therefore, the permanent alimony claim of the

appellants was rejected by the court below. We are of the

opinion that the claim of the permanent alimony is only to be

rejected.     Therefore, no interference and modification are

necessary about permanent alimony and this appeal is to be

dismissed.     In the result, the appeal is dismissed. There is no

order as to cost.



                                  PIUS.C.KURIAKOSE,JUDGE




                                      P.D. RAJAN, JUDGE.

acd



