
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                               PRESENT:

                           THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE V.K.MOHANAN

                    FRIDAY, THE 26TH DAY OF JULY 2013/4TH SRAVANA, 1935

                                   Crl.MC.No. 3847 of 2011 ( )
                                        ----------------------------
            CC.NO. 205/2011 OF CHIEF JUDICIAL MAGISTRATE COURT, ERNAKULAM
                                   ------------------------------------------

PETITIONER(S):
--------------------------

        1. M.L.MEENA,
            THE LAW OFFICER, DENTAL COUNCIL OF INDIA (DCI)
            AIWAN-E-GALIB MARG, KOTLA ROAD, NEW DELHI-110 002.

        2. DR.MAHESH VERMA,
            VICE PRESIDENT (FORMERLY ACTING PRESIDENT)
            DENTAL COUNCIL OF INDIA (DCI), AIWAN-E-GALIB MARG,
            KOTLA ROAD, NEW DELHI-110 002.

        3. DR.S.K.OJHA,
            OFFICIATING SECRETARY, DENTAL COUNCIL OF INDIA (DCI)
            AIWAN-E-GALIB MARG, KOTLA ROAD, NEW DELHI-110 002.

              BY ADV. SRI.ALEXANDER THOMAS

RESPONDENTS :
-----------------------------

        1. STATE OF KERALA,
            REPRESENTED BY THE PUBLIC PROSECUTOR,
            HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM.PIN-682 031

        2. DR.JOSEPH ISSAC,
            S/O.K.E.ISSAC, G-398, PANAMPILLY NAGAR,
            KOCHI-682 036.

             R1 BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SRI.RAJESH VIJAYAN
             R2 BY ADV. SRI.K.R.VINOD

            THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD
            ON 11-07-2013, THE COURT ON 26-07-2013 PASSED THE FOLLOWING:




sts

CRMC.NO.3847/2011

                               APPENDIX

PETITIONER(S) ANNEXURES:


ANNEX A1   THE CERTIFIED COPY OF THE PRIVATE CRIMINAL COMPLAINT IN
            CC.NO.205/2011.

ANNEX A2   TRUE COPY OF THE SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (SLP) NO.
           207/2011.

ANNEX A3   TRUE COPY OF THE WPC.37520/2010.

ANNEX A4   TRUE COPY OF THE ORDER DATED 7/1/2011.

ANNEX A5   TRUE COPY OF THE SUMMONS SERVED TO THE IST PETITIONER.

ANNEX A5(A) TRUE COPY OF THE SUMMONS SERVED TO THE 2ND PETITIONER.

ANNEX A5(B) TRUE COPY OF THE SUMMONS SERVED TO THE 3RD PETITIONER.

ANNEX A6   TRUE COPY OF THE FIRST INFORMATION REPORT IN CRIME
            NO.1130/09.

ANNEX A7   TRUE COPY OF THE ARREST MEMO IN CRIME NO.1130/09.

ANNEX A8   TRUE COPY OF THE FINAL REPORT SUBMITTED BY THE
           POLICE IN CC.NO.278/10.




RESPONDENTS' ANNEXURES:            NIL




                                         /TRUE COPY/




                                         P.S.TO.JUDGE




sts


                        V.K.MOHANAN, J.
                 ----------------------------------------
                   CRL.M.C.No. 3847 of 2011
                 ----------------------------------------
               Dated this the 26th day of July, 2013

                              O R D E R

              Smt.M.L.Meena - the Law Officer,             Dr.Mahesh

Verma, the Vice President (Formerly Acting President)           and

Dr.S.K.Ojha, the Officiating Secretary of the Dental Council of

India, a statutory regulatory body constituted under the Dentists

Act,1948 and its registered office, situating at Aiwan-E-Galib

Marg, Kotla Road, New Delhi are the petitioners herein, who

preferred the above petition under Section 482 of the Cr.P.C.,

praying inter alia to call for the entire records leading to the

institution of C.C.No.205 of 2011 pursuant to Annexure A1

complaint on the file of the court of the Chief Judicial Magistrate,

Ernakulam and to quash Annexure A1 complaint and all

proceedings taken in C.C.No.205 of 2011, as they are being

aggrieved in implicating them as accused in the above case.

      2. Annexure A1 is the complaint preferred by the second

Crl.M.C.No.3847 of 2011
                                 :-2-:

respondent herein under Sections 190 and 200 of the Code of

Criminal Procedure (hereinafter referred to as 'the Cr.P.C.')

alleging the offences punishable under Sections 500,501 and

502 of the I.P.C. against the accused therein, who are the

petitioners in the present proceedings.

      3. The subject matter of the complaint and the allegation

against the petitioners/accused is that the complainant

approached this Court by filing WP(c) No.37520 of 2010 being

a public interest litigant with a prayer for issuing a writ of

certiorari to call for the records including the proceedings of the

Executive Committee of the Dental Council of India by which it

appointed one Major General (Retd.) Dr.P.N.Awasthi as

Advisor/Consultant and to quash the same. It is also prayed for

issuing a writ of mandamus interdicting the Secretary and

Acting President of the Dental Council of India for permitting

the said Dr.P.N.Awasthi from functioning as Advisor/Consultant

or in any other post in the Dental Council of India and along

Crl.M.C.No.3847 of 2011
                               :-3-:

with the above writ petition, the complainant sought an interim

relief by way of an order restraining the said Dr.P.N.Awasthi

from functioning as an Advisor or any other post in the Dental

Council of India and this Court granted an order dated

17.12.2010 as prayed for.        It is the further case of the

complainant that the Dental Council of India, at the instance of

the petitioners/accused, challenged the said interim order before

the Hon'ble Supreme Court, by filing Special Leave Petition (C)

No. 207 of 2011 invoking the special appellate jurisdiction of

the Supreme Court of India        and in the said special leave

petition, under the caption "Synopsis and list of dates" in item

No.xvii, in page No.F, it is stated as "Dr.Joseph Issac is also a

person is a man of dubious nature" and according to the

complainant, in Page No."O" of the synopsis and in Item No.iv,

it is pleaded there as "the writ petitioner himself is a man of

dubious nature, a First Information Report No.1130/2009 under

Section 507 of the Indian Penal Code which was lodged on

Crl.M.C.No.3847 of 2011
                                :-4-:

28.9.2009 against the petitioner and he was charge sheeted and

arrested on 8.12.2009 and tried by the Additional Chief Judicial

Magistrate Court (Economic Offence), Ernakulam u/s 173(2) of

the Cr.P.C." According to the complainant, further in page

No.13 of the above special leave petition, a lawyer certificate is

exhibited in which it is stated by the lawyer of the Dental

Council of India as "This certificate is given on the basis of the

instructions given by the petitioner/person authorised by the

petitioner, whose Affidavit is filed in support of the Special

Leave Petition." It is also the case of the complainant that in

page No.14 of the Special Leave Petition, the third accused, in

the absence of Secretary, filed an affidavit stating that the

contents of the Special Leave petition were read over and

explained to him and all the statements are absolutely true to his

knowledge and records. According to the complainant, the duty

of the first accused is to ratify and give advices to the counsel

being engaged by the Dental Council of India and when

Crl.M.C.No.3847 of 2011
                                :-5-:

enquiring about the reality, he has submitted such a note referred

above on 18.1.2011 to the concerned lawyer knowing fully well

that the note is absolutely false and the complainant is innocent.

So, according to the complainant, the above quoted pleadings

and averments in the Special Leave Petition, which are per se

defamatory are incorporated in the Special Leave Petition in

pursuance of their common intention to malign the complainant

in front of the public and other known persons to him and with

the said intention to defame and malign the complainant, they

did    the    aforesaid   act.       Thus,  according     to   the

respondent/complainant, the petitioners/accused have committed

the offences punishable under Sections 500,501 and 502 of

I.P.C.

      4. On filing the above complaint, a copy of which is

produced along with this Crl.M.C. as Annexure A1, in due

compliance of the statutory formalities, the learned Chief

Judicial Magistrate at Ernakulam took cognizance upon the

Crl.M.C.No.3847 of 2011
                               :-6-:

complaint for the above offences.       It is against the above

Annexure A1 complaint and the proceedings adopted by the

court below in taking cognizance upon Annexure A1/complaint

for the above said offences against the petitioners, they preferred

the present petition under Section 482 of the Cr.P.C,. with the

above referred prayers.

      5. Heard Sri.Alexander Thomas, learned Standing Counsel

for the Dental Council of India, who is appearing for the

petitioners/accused and Sri.K.R.Vinod, learned counsel for the

second     respondent/complainant    and   the   learned    Public

Prosecutor for the first respondent State.

      6. Mr.Alexander Thomas, the learned Standing Counsel

for the Dental Council, after taking me through the materials

produced along with this petition and through various provisions

of the Indian Penal Code as well as the Code of Criminal

Procedure, submitted that a mere perusal of the complaint itself

would show that no offences under Sections 500,501 and 502 of

Crl.M.C.No.3847 of 2011
                               :-7-:

I.P.C. are attracted as the pleadings and averments in the

complaint do not spell out the facts constituting the essential

ingredients of the above offences. According to the learned

counsel, while challenging the interim order of this Court

mentioned above in the Supreme Court, it was incumbent upon

the petitioners to convince the Apex Court that the complainant,

who was the writ petitioner, was not entitled to get the interim

relief as sought for, in exercise of the discretionary powers of

this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, by

showing that the hands of the writ petitioner were not clean and

to attain the above object and towards discharging the duties of

the petitioners, under the bona fide belief, they took such a

pleading in the Special Leave Petition to project the character of

the complainant/petitioner, the said pleading was incorporated in

the S.L.P. After taking me through Annexure A6 FIR, A7 memo

of arrest and A8 final report, connected with crime No.1130 of

2009 of Ernakulam Town South Police Station, Ernakulam, the

Crl.M.C.No.3847 of 2011
                                :-8-:

learned counsel submitted that the petitioners eventually pleaded

before the Supreme Court on the basis of the facts revealed

from the above documents showing the character of the

complainant, since the same was inevitable to support the prayer

in the Special Leave Petition. It is also the contention of the

learned counsel for the petitioners that in the light of the above

referred documents and the factual aspect involved in the case

definitely attract the Exceptions first, fourth,eighth and ninth of

Section 499 of I.P.C. and the court below was not justified

in taking cognizance for the above offences against the

petitioners. It is the point raised by the learned counsel for the

petitioner that in order to attract the offence of defamation that

contained in Section 499 of I.P.C., the publication of the

imputation, defaming any person is absolutely inevitable, but in

the present case, no averments and no facts are alleged to show

any publication of such defamatory statement, at the instance of

the petitioners.

Crl.M.C.No.3847 of 2011
                                :-9-:

      7. Another important and vital point raised by the learned

counsel for the petitioners is that the petitioners have got

privilege and the imputation alleged to have made against the

respondent/complainant in the S.L.P. is protected as the said

imputations are coming under the privilege class. It is also

pointed out by the learned counsel for the petitioners that even if

it is admitted for the sake of argument that what projected in the

Special Leave Petition and as alleged in the complaint is false or

factually incorrect so as to defame the complainant, it is for the

Honourable Supreme Court to initiate proceedings against the

petitioners under Section 340 of the Cr.P.C. if the same are

coming under Section 195 of the Cr.P.C. But, in the present

case, the Honourable Apex Court has not recommended for such

proceedings. It is also the contention of the learned counsel for

the petitioners that as the petitioners herein were not amenable

for the unlawful demand of the complainant, he preferred the

present complaint against the petitioners with ulterior motive to

Crl.M.C.No.3847 of 2011
                             :-10-:

wreck vengeance against them.        In support of the above

submissions, the learned counsel for the petitioners placed

reliance and cited the following decisions reported in Abdul

Rehman and others v. K.M.Anees-Ul-Haq [(2011)10 SCC

696],    Kuttiah v. Federal Bank Ltd. [2006(3) KLT 418],

Jayasankar v. Reghuvaran [2001(3) KLT SN 45] and Daniel v.

Hymavathy Amma [1985 KLT 574] and Gopalankutty Nair v.

Sankunny Ezhuthassan [1971 KLT393 (FB)].

      8. On the other hand, Mr.K.R.Vinod, the learned counsel

appearing for the second respondent, vehemently submitted that

all the allegations and contentions advanced by the petitioners

before this Court are untenable and unfounded since there is no

evidence or material, which is yet to be adduced during the trial

of the case and no finding can be entered into by this Court in a

proceedings under Section 482 of the Cr.P.C. After taking me

through Section 499 of the I.P.C., the learned counsel for the

second respondent submitted that in order to attract Section 499

Crl.M.C.No.3847 of 2011
                                :-11-:

of I.P.C., the publication of defamatory article or statement is

immaterial or unwarranted and the offence of defamation is

complete when such a statement or imputation is made.

According to the learned counsel for the second respondent,

even if a statement is made in the Special Leave Petition or in

the affidavit filed thereto, during the proceedings of the court,

the offence under Section 499 is attracted and no privilege can

be claimed. Inviting my attention to the decision of this Court in

Shybimon v. Haridas [2010(2) KHC 607], even if a defamatory

statement is made in an affidavit during the course of judicial

proceedings, Sections 499 and 500 of I.P.C. are attracted. It is

also the contention of the learned counsel for the respondents

that the contentions of the learned counsel for the petitioners and

the petitioners which are protected under the exceptions of

Section 499 of I.P.C. are to be raised before the trial court

during the trial, particularly after the stage of evidence and it is

for that court to decide whether such exceptions are attracted or

Crl.M.C.No.3847 of 2011
                              :-12-:

not. Thus, according to the learned counsel, there is no merit in

the above Crl.M.C. and the same is liable to be dismissed.

      9. I have carefully considered the arguments advanced by

the learned counsel for the petitioners as well as the second

respondent.      I have perused the materials and documents

produced along with this Crl.M.C. and I have gone through the

decisions cited supra.

      10.    In the light of the rival pleadings and also the

materials produced along with this petition and in view of the

decisions cited supra, the only question to be considered is

whether Annexure A1 complaint discloses any offence under

Sections 500,501 and 502 against the petitioners and whether

the institution of Annexure A2 based upon Annexure A1

complaint is legal, proper and regular and the further question to

be considered is whether the court of the Chief Judicial

Magistrate, Ernakulam has got territorial jurisdiction to take

cognizance for the alleged offence and whether any cause of

Crl.M.C.No.3847 of 2011
                                :-13-:

action arose for the respondents to file the complaint in the said

court.

      11. At the outset, it is to be noted that it is an undisputed

fact that the complainant, who is the second respondent herein,

was an accused in Crime No.1130 of 2009 of the Ernakulam

Town South Police Station as evidenced by Annexure A6 FIR,

Annexure A7 arrest memo issued against the complainant, and

Annexure A8 final report filed in Crime No.1130 of 2009 of the

Ernakulam Town South Police Station before the CJM Court,

Ernakulam whereby the complainant is charge sheeted on

7.10.2009 for the offence punishable under Section 507 of I.P.C.

and the court took cognizance for the said offence on

19.12.2009.      It is also beyond dispute that the respondent/

complainant approached this Court by filing Annexure A3 writ

petition with the prayers which I have already indicated above

and this Court has passed an interim order, in terms of the

interim relief sought for in the above W.P(C). It is against the

Crl.M.C.No.3847 of 2011
                                :-14-:

said order of this Court, the second respondent, which is the

Dental Council of India, in Annexure A3 writ petition, preferred

the above Annexure A2 special leave petition before the Hon'ble

Supreme Court in Delhi.

      12. It is relevant to note that in paragraph 2 of Annexure

A2, the question of law muted in clause 'E' is 'whether the court

should play in hands of a person who take legal recourse to

settle the personal vendetta.' In support of the above legal point,

in paragraph 5, several grounds are taken. In ground 'f', it is

stated as 'because the interim order passed by the Hon'ble High

Court is illegal, arbitrary in nature and contrary to the public

policy and in the greater interest of Council.' In para 'g', the

ground is 'because the balance inconvenience lies in favour of

the petitioner and there was no irreparable loss to the

respondent herein and hence the Hon'ble High Court ought not

have passed any interim order restraining the engagement of

Dr.Awasthi as a consultant'. The ground 'h' is relevant and most

Crl.M.C.No.3847 of 2011
                                 :-15-:

important for the purpose of the present issue.        It is stated

'because Dr.Joseph has no locus standi to prefer the writ

petition and more over looking into his conduct, the writ

petition filed is nothing but a sheer abuse of process of law as

the writ petition was filed because of personal vendetta against

Dr.Awasthi.'      It appears to me that in order to substantiate the

above legal point raised and the ground urged, the petitioners

therein under the synopsis and list of dates of the above

Annexure A2 Special Leave Petition, particularly under clause

(xvii) has stated as follows:

           "(xvii) Academic Activity of Maj.Gen (Retd.)
           P.N.Awsthi during the tenure as Secretary
           DCI:-
           (a) xxxxx xxxxx xxxx xxx
           (b)xxx xxxx xxx xxxx xxxx xxx

           Annexure-P/1

           That one Dr.Joseph        Issac who was the
           Respondent no.1 in the Special Leave Petition
           had a personal vendetta against Dr.P.N.Awasthi.
           Dr.Joseph Issac wanted to be a part of the
           teaching faculty in Pushpagiri College of Dental
           Sciences, Trivalla, Kerala but since he did not
           fulfil the laid down norms of the Dental Council

Crl.M.C.No.3847 of 2011
                                  :-16-:

           of India, hence Dr.P.N.Awasthi who pointed out
           this anomaly by which he was not accepted was
           a reason for him to be upset with him."

      13. In the light of the above facts and circumstances and

in the given situation, the question to be considered is whether

the pleadings that contained in clause (xvii) coming under the

synopsis and list of dates in Annexure A2 against the

complainant that "Dr.Joseph Issac is also a person is a man of

dubious nature and the matter of fact a First Information Report

No.1130/2009 u/s 507 of the Indian penal Code which was lodged

on 28.9.2009 against them and he was charge sheeted and arrested

on 8.12.2009, and tried by Addl.Chief Judicial Magistrate Court

(Economic Offence), Ernakulam u/s.173 of Cr.P.C.," would come

within the first, fourth,eighth or ninth exception under Section

499 of I.P.C. which read as follows:-

                "First   Exception.--Imputation    of   truth
         which public good requires to be made or
         published.--It is not defamation to impute anything
         which is true concerning any person, if it be for the
         public good that the imputation should be made or
         published. Whether or not it is for the public good
         is a question of fact.
                Second Exception.----

Crl.M.C.No.3847 of 2011
                                  :-17-:

                Third Exception.---
                Fourth Exception.-- Publication of reports
          of proceedings of Courts.--It is not defamation to
          publish substantially true report of the proceedings
          of a Court of Justice, or of the result of any such
          proceedings.
                Explanation.--A Justice of the Peace or other
          officer   holding  an   inquiry    in  open   Court
          preliminary to a trial in a Court of Justice,is a
          Court within the meaning of the above section.
                Fifth Exception.--
                Sixth Exception.--
                Seventh Exception.--
                Eighth Exception.--Accusation preferred in
          good faith to authorised person.--It is not
          defamation to prefer in good faith an accusation
          against any person to any of those who have lawful
          authority over that person with respect to the
          subject-matter of accusation.
                Ninth Exception.--Imputation made in good
          faith by person for protection of his or other's
          interests.--It is not defamation to make an
          imputation on the character of another provided
          that the imputation be made in good faith for the
          protection of the interests of the person making it,
          or of any other person, or for the public good."

In this juncture, according to me, the contention advanced by the

learned counsel for the petitioner assumes importance. As I

indicated earlier, it is an indisputable fact          that the second

respondent/complainant was an accused in Crime No.1130 of

2009 of the Ernakulam Town South Police Station at the time of

filing Anenxure A2 special leave petition which fact is more

Crl.M.C.No.3847 of 2011
                               :-18-:

vivid as per Annexures A6,A7 and A8. As I indicated earlier,

the petitioner in the S.L.P., who was the second respondent in

the above writ petition is a statutory body and the writ petition

was filed challenging the proceedings of the said statutory body.

Based upon such writ petition, an interim order was issued by

this Court, which was the subject matter of the S.L.P. and

therefore, it was incumbent upon the said council, the petitioner

in the S.L.P. to canvass whatever proposition available in

support of its challenge against the interim order and to

convince the appellate court about the illegality, incorrectness,

impropriety and irregularity of the order passed and towards the

same, and obviously, it is the burden upon the petitioners to

convince the Apex Court that as the hands of the

respondent/complainant were not clean, he was not entitled to

get an order in exercise of the discretionary powers of the High

Court of Kerala under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.

It is well settled that a person, who invoked the discretionary

Crl.M.C.No.3847 of 2011
                                :-19-:

powers of the High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution

of India, is not entitled to get any relief thereon if his hands are

not clean and if he suppresses material facts deliberately,

especially when the High Court was called upon to exercise its

powers upon an issue not concerned with the person who

approached the court. In the present case, it is beyond dispute

that the respondent/complainant preferred the above writ

petition not connected with any of his right either under

common law right or any statutory right. It is also the case of

the petitioner in the S.L.P. that the writ petition was moved by

the second respondent/complainant to wreck vengeance against

Dr.Awasthi and thereby to disturb the proceedings issued by the

Dental Council in favour of the said Dr.Awasthi. So it was

incumbent upon the special leave petitioner before the

Honourable Apex Court to bring those facts to the notice of the

Apex Court towards the prosecution of the above Special Leave

Petition, particularly as part of the duties of the petitioner therein

Crl.M.C.No.3847 of 2011
                                :-20-:

to meaningfully challenge the interim order passed by this

Court.      So, according to me, no mala fide can be alleged

against the petitioners in making such plea in the S.L.P.

      14. It is further relevant to note that whatever facts stated

against the respondent/complainant in the S.L.P. are only true

facts, as disclosed by the speaking documents like Annexures

A6,A7 and A8 and counsel for the respondents has also admitted

the said facts.      But, the learned counsel for the respondent

submitted that the respondent/complainant was discharged from

the above criminal case and therefore, there is no factual footing

for the said averment against the complainant. I am unable to

sustain the above contention.         It is relevant to note that

Annexure A2 Special Leave Petition was filed on 3.1.2011, but

the respondent/de facto complainant was discharged from the

criminal case covered by Annexures A6,7 and 8 documents only

on 26.6.2011 and that too after disposing of Annexure A2

Special Leave Petition by the Honourable Supreme Court on

Crl.M.C.No.3847 of 2011
                                  :-21-:

7.1.2011.     So, it is crystal clear that when Annexure A2 S.L.P.

was filed, the respondent/complainant was          an accused as

evident from Annexures A6,A7 and A8 and criminal

proceedings were pending against him. More over, as rightly

pointed out by the learned counsel for the petitioner, the word

'dubious' means circuitous, erring, not straight forward as seen

from the Concise Oxford Dictionary (hesitating or doubting). It

appears that the petitioners made such pleading in the light of

the facts spelled out from Annexures A6,A7 and A8 documents

as on the date of filing of the S.L.P., which, according to the

petitioners, was absolutely necessary to substantiate their

pleading to show that the respondent/complainant, who was the

writ petitioner, was undeserved to get such discretionary relief.

A learned Judge of this Court in the decision reported in

Jayasankar v. Reghuvaran [2001(3) KLT SN.45 (Case No.61)

has held that the statements made in the objection in good faith

for the protection of their interest fall under Exception 9 to

Crl.M.C.No.3847 of 2011
                                  :-22-:

Section 499. So, according to me, the above pleading contained

in Annexure A2 cannot be treated as defamatory and such

pleadings will be protected by 1st,4th,8th and 9th exception to

Section 499 of I.P.C.


      15. In the decision in Daniel's case (supra), this Court has

observed that an examination of the common law of England

would show that the English Courts have accepted that

statements made by Judges,Juries, counsel, parties and witnesses

in the course of trial in the course of any judicial proceeding or

statements made on previleged occasions and the maker of the

statements is saved from civil action by the rule of absolute

privilege and no action will lie for damages. In paragraphs 15

and 16, this Court has further held as follows:-

               "15. Courts in India also have considered this
        question. In Adivaramma's case, Madras High Court held
        that while statements in order to be protected need not be
        absolutely relevant, statements which have no earthly
        connection with the case may not be protected. In
        Hindustan Gilt Jewel Work's case Madras High Court
        observed that the statements must have some reference to
        the enquiry and not entirely irrelevant though the
        expression "reference to enquiry"must be given a very wide

Crl.M.C.No.3847 of 2011
                                 :-23-:

        and comprehensive application.
               16. There is logic behind this rule. When
        participating in a judicial proceeding, persons concerned
        must be able to devote their entire attention to the conduct
        of the proceedings, be they Judges, counsel, parties or
        witnesses. At every stage they should not be compelled to
        pause and analyse the absolute relevancy of the statements
        they proposed to make in the course of proceedings; to
        insist that they should do so would seriously hamper and
        weaken judicial process. At the same time statements
        which are absolutely irrelevant or are made de hors the
        matter in hand or have no reference to the matter of
        enquiry cannot be privileged. It must always be borne in
        mind that in deciding whether a statement has reference to
        the matter of enquiry, the widest and most comprehensive
        interpretation must be given."

      16. It is further relevant to note that such pleadings are

taken in Annexure A2 as part of the proceedings in the Apex

Court while the petitioners preferred Annexure A2 special leave

petition to protect the interest of the Dental Council, which is a

statutory body and thereby to save or protect the interest of the

general public.

      17. In this juncture, it is pertinent to note that such a

pleading, which according to the respondent/the complainant,

amounts to defamation, was made during the course of the

proceedings before the Honourable Apex Court. If that be so,

Crl.M.C.No.3847 of 2011
                                 :-24-:

according to me, as rightly pointed out by the learned counsel

for the petitioner, it is a matter covered by Chapter XXVI of the

Cr.P.C. which deals with the provisions as to offences affecting

the administration of justice.      If Section 340 is attracted or

applicable, with respect to the offences covered by Section 195

of the Cr.P.C., the specific provisions are engrafted in the Cr.P.C.

and it is for the court concerned to initiate appropriate

proceedings against the wrong doer either upon the complaint

preferred by the aggrieved person or otherwise.      In the present

case, the Honourable Apex Court has not initiated or

recommended any such proceedings either suo motu or upon a

petition     filed      by     any     person    including      the

respondent/complainant. In this juncture, the decisions cited by

the learned counsel for the petitioners have become relevant and

applicable. In the decision reported in Abdul Rehman's case

(supra), allowing the appeal therein, the Apex Court has held as

follows:-

Crl.M.C.No.3847 of 2011
                                   :-25-:

                 "24. It was next argued by the learned
          counsel for the respondent that while an offence
          under Section 221 IPC cannot be taken congizance
          of, there was no room for for interfering with the
          proceedings insofar as the same related to the
          commission of an offence punishable udner
          Section 500, since the bar of Section 195 Cr.P.C.
          was not attracted to the proceedings under Section
          500 IPC. The argument though attractive does not
          stand closer scrutiny.
                 25. The substance of the case set up by the
          respondent is that the allegations made in the
          complaint lodged with CAWC accusing him of an
          offence punishable under Section 406 IPC and
          Section 3 and 4 of the Dowry Prohibition Act were
          false    which   according     to  the   respondent
          tantamounts to commission of an offence punishble
          under Section 211 IPC apart from an offence
          punishable under Section 500 IPC. The factual
          matrix for both the offences is however one and the
          same. Allowing the respondents to continue with
          the prosecution against the appellants for the
          offence punishable under Section 500 IPC would
          not, in our opinion, subserve the ends of justice
          and may result in the appellants getting vexed
          twice on the same facts,         We are doubtless
          conscious of the fact that any complaint under
          Section 500 IPC may become time-barred if the
          complaint already lodged is quashed. That is not
          an insurmountable difficulty and can be taken care
          of by moulding the relief suitably.
                 26. It would, in our opinion, be appropriate
          if  the   orders   passed    by  the   Metropolitan
          Magistrate and that passed by the High Court are
          set aside and the complaint filed by the respondent
          directed to be transferred to the court dealing with
          the charge-sheet filed against the respondent. The
          said court shall treat the complaint as an
          application for filing of a complaint under Section

Crl.M.C.No.3847 of 2011
                                   :-26-:

          211 IPC to be considered and disposed of at the
          final conclusion of the trial; having regard to the
          provisions of Section 340 IPC and the finding
          regarding guilt or innocence of the respondent as
          the case may be recorded against him.           The
          respondent shall also have the liberty to proceed
          with the complaint insofar as the same relates to
          commission of the offence punishable under
          Section 500 IPC depending upon whether there is
          any room for doing so in the light of the findings
          which the court may record at the conclusion of
          the trial against the respondent.
                 27. In the result, these appeals are allowed,
          and the orders dated 3.2.2003 passed by the
          Metropolitan Magistrate and that passed by the
          High     Court  dated    26.2.2008   are   quashed.
          Criminal Complaint No.180/1 of 2002 filed by the
          respondent shall stand transferred to the court of
          competent jurisdiction seized of the charge sheet
          filed against the respondents, for such orders as
          the court may deem fit at the conclusion of the trial
          of   the   respondent     having   regard   to   the
          observations made above."

Thus, it is relevant to note that no proceedings are taken by the

Apex Court against the petitioners with respect to the alleged


statement made in Annexure A2. The Full Bench of this Court

in the decision reported in Gopalankutty Nair's case (cited supra)

has held as follows:-

               "6   There can be no dispute that any step which is
        essentially a step in a judicial or quasi judicial
        proceeding would be immune from liability for defamation

Crl.M.C.No.3847 of 2011
                                     :-27-:

        as it gives rise to an occasion for absolute privilege. If
        proceedings under S.107 or 145 of the Criminal
        Procedure Code are judicial in character, then, there can
        be no question that a petition to initiate proceedings
        under either of the sections is essentially a step in a
        judicial proceeding, and would give rise to an occasion
        for absolute privilege. Whether a proceeding under S.107
        before the issue of notice to the opposite party by the
        magistrate is judicial or administrative in character is a
        matter on which there is scope for controversy. But I think
        that the proceeding from its inception is judicial or quasi-
        judicial in character. It is however difficult to bold that
        Ext. A1 is a petition to initiate proceedings. under S.107.
        S.107 (1) reads:
                "Whenever
                  "            a   Presidency    Magistrate,     District
         Magistrate, Sub Divisional Magistrate or Magistrate of the
         first class is informed that any person is likely to commit a
         breach of the peace or disturb the public tranquillity, or to do
         any wrongful act that may probably occasion a breach of the
         peace, or disturb the public tranquillity, the Magistrate if in
         his opinion there is sufficient ground for proceeding may, in
         manner hereinafter provided, require such person to show
         cause why he should not be ordered to execute a bond, with or
         without sureties, for keeping the peace for such period not
         exceeding one year as the Magistrate thinks fit to fix."
         Ext. A1 is not a petition invoking the power of the
         Magistrate under S.107. There is no prayer in it asking
         for taking any security from the opposite party for
         keeping the peace. (See for similar case T. Ayyangar v. K.
         S. Ayyangar AIR. 1957 Madras 756.). Even assuming
         that Ext. A1 can be treated,as a petition to initiate
         proceedings under S.107, and therefore gave rise to an
         occasion for absolute privilege, the question remains
         whether publication of a copy of the same to the Sub
         Inspector of Police was absolutely privileged."

It is true, the rule of absolute privilege is available connected

with the civil proceedings              But, in the case of criminal

Crl.M.C.No.3847 of 2011
                              :-28-:

proceedings and law, the rule of absolute privilege is

inapplicable and the rule of qualified privilege comes to the

rescue connected with any proceedings in criminal law.

According to the learned counsel for the respondents, though

defamatory statement is based upon false facts stated before the

Honourable Apex Court, the petitioners are not entitled to get

any protection or any privilege, in view of the decision in

reported in Shybimon's case (supra). But, according to me, the

above contention on the strength of the decision of a learned

Judge of this Court reported in Shybimon's case (supra) is

unsustainable in the light of the latest decision of the

Honourable Apex Court in Abdul Rehman's case (supra), which

I have already referred to.    A learned Judge of this Court, in

Kuttiah's decision (supra) has held that when an offence is seen,

shown or alleged to have been committed which falls under

Chapter XI of I.P.C., there cannot be a private complaint and

such a complaint can be only by the Court as provided in S.340

Crl.M.C.No.3847 of 2011
                                :-29-:

Cr.P.C., specifically in relation to offences enumerated in S.195

(1)(b)(i). A judicial sieve is legislatively put, through which,

only such prosecutions as are necessary in the larger interest of

justice reach the court competent to try.    In the present case, it

is relevant to note that the Honourable Apex Court has not

recommended any proceedings based upon the so-called

defamation statement. A learned Judge of this Court though in a

different context, in the decision reported in Ramakrishnan v.

State of Kerala [1998(1) KLT 68] has held that if an offence in

terms of Section 463 IPC is alleged to have been committed in

the course of a proceeding in court, the true procedure is to

make a preliminary enquiry and not directing a Police Officer to

investigate into it, which shows that if a false statement is made

before the Apex Court which is covered by Section 195(1)(b), it

is for the Hon'ble Apex Court to take appropriate action. But,

in the present case, as I indicated, no proceedings are initiated or

recommended by the Honourable Apex Court connected with

Crl.M.C.No.3847 of 2011
                               :-30-:

the statement which, according to the complainant, is

defamatory and the facts stated therein are false.

      18. It is further relevant to note that as contended by the

learned counsel for the petitioner, there is no averment in

Annexure A1 complaint that the above pleading contained in

Annexure A2 S.L.P. published or circulated to attract Section

499 of I.P.C. To avert the above contention, learned counsel for

the respondents, as I indicated earlier, contended that in order to

complete the offence under Section 499 of the I.P.C., the

defamatory statement need not be published and the offence

will be completed on its making. If that be so, according to me,

as rightly pointed out by the learned counsel for the petitioners,

the court of CJM, Ernakulam has no jurisdiction to entertain

Annexure A1 complaint since even if admitted for argument

sake that the above referred pleadings amount to defamation, the

same was made in New Delhi since Annexure A2 Special Leave

Petition was filed before the Honourable Apex Court in New

Crl.M.C.No.3847 of 2011
                             :-31-:

Delhi. So, the present trial court has no jurisdiction to take

cognizance upon Annexure A1 complaint in which the alleged

cause of action arose within the territorial jurisdiction of the

court at New Delhi.     Therefore, on the above ground also,

Annexure A1 complaint is not maintainable in the court below

and all proceedings instituted in C.C.No.205 of 2011 upon

Annexure A1 are liable to be set aside.

      In the result, Crl.M.C.No.1347 of 2011 is allowed

quashing Anenxure A1 complaint and all proceedings taken

thereon and the entire proceedings instituted in C.C.No.205 of

2011, pending against the petitioners in the court of the Chief

Judicial Magistrate, Ernakulam.




                                       V.K.MOHANAN,Judge.

MBS/

Crl.M.C.No.3847 of 2011
                           :-32-:



