
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                           PRESENT:

           THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE P.BHAVADASAN

  TUESDAY, THE 19TH DAY OF NOVEMBER 2013/28TH KARTHIKA, 1935

                 CRL.A.No. 1349 of 2005 ( )
                 ---------------------------
  AGAINST THE JUDGMENT IN SC 337/2002 of ADDL.SESSIONS COURT
            (ADHOC)-II, KOZHIKODE DATED 22-07-2005
                            -----
    APPELLANT/ACCUSED :
    -----------------

      NAZEER, AGED 41 YEARS,S/O. MOIDEEN KOYA,
      MELECHANDANAMPARAMBATH, MAVUR AMSOM
      MALAPPURAM DESOM, KOZHIKODE.

      BY ADV. SRI.JACOB ABRAHAM

    RESPONDENT/COMPLAINANT   :
    ----------------------

      STATE OF KERALA, REPRESENTED BY
      THE KPUBLIC PROSECUTOR,
      HIGH COURT OF KERALA
      ERNAKULAM.

      BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SMT.P.MAYA

      THIS CRIMINAL APPEAL  HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD
      ON 19-11-2013, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY DELIVERED
      THE FOLLOWING:

bp


                     P.BHAVADASAN, J.
             ---------------------------------------
                Crl. Appeal No.1349 OF 2005
             ---------------------------------------
         Dated this the 19th day of November, 2013.


                        J U D G M E N T


     The accused was prosecuted for the offences punishable

under Sections 306 and 498A of Indian Penal Code.        He was

found guilty on both counts. He was therefore convicted and

sentenced to suffer rigorous imprisonment for a period of three

years and to pay a fine of Rs.5,000/- with default clause of

simple imprisonment for three months under Section 306 IPC and

also sentenced to suffer rigorous imprisonment for two years and

to pay a fine of Rs.2,000/- with default clause of simple

imprisonment for two months for the offence under Section 498A

IPC.    The substantive sentences were directed to run

concurrently. Set off as per law was allowed.

     2. The marriage between the victim and the accused took

place on 08.07.1987.     The incident in which the victim self

humiliated herself happened on 14.04.2000.       Though she was

rushed to the hospital for treatment, while undergoing treatment

Crl. Appeal No.1349/2005            2


in the Medical College Hospital, Kozhikode, she breathed her last.

       3. Ext.P10(a) is the First Information Statement which was

recorded by PW13 who registered a crime on the basis of the

same.       Investigation was taken over by PW14.    Inquest was

conducted on the body of the deceased and autopsy was

conducted by PW7 who furnished Ext.P5 postmortem report. The

records show that in the process of trying to save the life of the

victim, the accused had suffered injuries and he was also

admitted to the hospital. The wound certificate relating to him is

Ext.P4 and PW6 had attended to him in the Medical College

Hospital.          The investigating officer obtained the wound

certificates and recorded the statement of witnesses. He also

had the articles collected during investigation sent for forensic

examination and obtained Ext.P15 report. After completing the

investigation, final report was laid before court.

       4.      The court before which final report was laid took

cognizance of the offences and on finding that the offences are

exclusively triable by a Court of Sessions, the case was

committed to Sessions Court, Kozhikode. The said court made

Crl. Appeal No.1349/2005          3


over the case to Additional District & Sessions Court, Fast Track,

Adhoc-II, Kozhikode for trial and disposal. The latter court, on

receipt of records and on appearance of the accused, framed

charges for the offences punishable under Sections 306 and 498A

IPC. To the charge, the accused pleaded not guilty and claimed

to be tried. The prosecution therefore had PWs 1 to 16 examined

and Exts.P1 to P15 marked.

       5. After the close of the prosecution evidence, the accused

was questioned under Section 313 Cr.P.C.        He denied all the

incriminating circumstances brought out in evidence against him

and maintained that he is innocent. On finding that the accused

could not be acquitted under Section 232 Cr.P.C, he was asked to

enter on his defence. He examined DW1 and the court had CW1

examined and Exts.C1 and C2 marked. M.O.1 series to M.O.8

were got identified and marked.

       6. Relying mainly on the evidence of PWs 1, 2 and 3 and

also the dying declaration recorded by PW5, the learned

Magistrate which is marked as Ext.P2, the court below came to

the conclusion that the offences have been made out.          The

Crl. Appeal No.1349/2005          4


conviction and sentence as already mentioned followed.

       7. Learned counsel appearing for the appellant assailed the

findings of the court below on various grounds. It is pointed out

by the learned counsel that from Exts.C1 and C2, it can be seen

that the accused was labouring from mental illness and that

might have contributed to the incident which finally led to the

suicide of the victim. It is also pointed out that the allegation

that the accused has been treating the victim cruelly and has

been assaulting her cannot be true in the light of the fact that he

had tried to save his wife and in the process he too had suffered

injuries for which he had taken treatment also.

       8. It is further pointed out by the learned counsel for the

appellant that there are indications that the accused being a

driver and who would be out of the house most of the time had

occasion to come to know that a person by name Mohanan used

to visit his house which might have caused suspicion in his mind

and that might have caused quarrels between them.              It is

significant to notice that there is no case for the prosecution that

there was any demand for dowry or any complaint regarding

Crl. Appeal No.1349/2005         5


inadequate dowry. Even assuming all that PWs 1 to 3 say are

true, that is only routine domestic quarrels and that cannot

constitute cruel acts at all. At any rate, according to the learned

counsel, offence under Section 306 IPC cannot be attracted to

the facts of the case. Even assuming that the victim was ill-

treated on the date of the incident, there is nothing to show that

the accused had instigated the victim to commit suicide or had

contributed in any manner in commission of suicide by the victim.

Merely because, even assuming that the ill-treatment is true, the

victim chose to take the extreme step does not mean that it is at

the instigation of the accused.

       9. As regards the offence under Section 498A IPC, it is

pointed out by the learned counsel for the appellant that the

evidence does not disclose any serious assault or cruel acts by

the accused and there are no definite acts referred to or definite

dates referred to on which incidents are alleged to have taken

place. On this ground also, it is pointed out that the conviction

and sentence cannot stand.

       10. Learned Public Prosecutor, on the other hand, pointed

Crl. Appeal No.1349/2005         6


out that the evidence of PW2, the daughter of the victim and also

the daughter of the accused would show that the victim was

being ill-treated by the accused. She has deposed before court

that the accused used to come home drunk and pick up quarrels

with his wife and also manhandle her.        On the date of the

incident also, he picked up quarrel with his wife and destroyed

the articles in the house.      Her evidence is fortified by the

evidence of PW3, a neighbour who also spoke about the ill-

treatment meted out to the victim. The evidence of PWs 1 to 3

are sufficient to show that the victim was harassed, ill-treated

and tortured by the accused. It was these acts of the accused

which have ultimately led to the suicide of the victim and

therefore, it could not be said that the accused had no role to

play in the suicide of the victim. In short, it is contended that

there are no grounds to interfere with the conviction and

sentence passed by the court below.

       11. It appears that the couple had a marital life of 13 years

and they have three children in that wedlock. The prosecution

allegation is that the accused who is given to drink used to come

Crl. Appeal No.1349/2005            7


home drunk and pick up quarrels with the victim and also

manhandle her.          Unable to bear it any more, she ultimately

committed suicide. The prosecution mainly relies on the evidence

of PWs 1 to 3 and also the dying declaration recorded by PW5

which is marked as Ext.P2.

       12. PW1 is the aunt of the victim. She claims that when

she came to know about the incident, she went to the hospital

and asked the victim what made her do so. The reply, according

to her, was that it was the acts committed by the accused which

led her to set herself on fire. She would also say that the victim

used to complain to her about the ill-treatment by the accused.

       13. PW2 is none other than the daughter of the victim as

well as the accused.         Her evidence is to the effect that the

accused, a driver by profession, used to come home drunk and

when the victim took objection to the said conduct of the

accused, she used to be thrashed. She would also say that on

certain occasions, when she intervened, she too received her

share of beating. Everyday, there is commotion in the house,

according to this witness. The accused used to keep at bay the

Crl. Appeal No.1349/2005         8


neighbours and also used to scold them whenever they came

home for help. PW2 in no less terms says that right from her

childhood, she has been seeing these acts of the accused. She is

certain that it was since the acts became unbearable, her mother

had set herself on fire.

       14. PW3 is a neighbour. He says that on the date of the

incident while he was watching T.V, he heard a call by his sister

and he was told that the accused was ill-treating the victim. He

reached the house of the accused and he happened to see the

victim being thrashed by the accused. He would say that he

managed to extricate the victim from the clutches of the accused

and brought the accused out of the house. He would further say

that the accused then shouted him saying that he had no

business to interfere in the domestic affairs of the accused. At

that time, the passers also converged there and the victim was

pacified. Then the victim suddenly went inside the house and

they found the victim setting herself on fire. He would also say

that in the process of trying to save the victim, the accused

suffered burn injuries.

Crl. Appeal No.1349/2005         9


       15. If one is to go by the evidence of PWs 1 to 3, there is

ample materials to show that the accused used to ill-treat the

victim. True, none of them say about any specific act or any

specific date on which the incident is alleged to have taken place.

But, the evidence of PW2, the daughter of the victim, is clear to

the effect that it was almost a daily affair. The accused was

suspicious about the visitors namely, Radhakrishnan and

Mohanan among whom the visit of Mohanan is admitted by PW2.

PW3 speaks about the ill-treatment by the accused on the date of

the incident and also about his intervention in the incident. That

he was scolded and asked to go away is fortified by the evidence

of PW2 who says that whenever the neighbours reached the

house, they used to be sent away by the accused.          There is

nothing to show that any of these witnesses had any reason to

falsely implicate the accused nor is there any suggestion to them

in that regard.

       16. Probably, the evidence of PW1 may be vague and may

not contain the necessary details. But the evidence of PWs 2 and

3 are clear to the point that the accused used to ill-treat and

Crl. Appeal No.1349/2005            10


manhandle the victim.

       17. PW5 recorded the dying declaration of the victim which

is marked as Ext.P2. To the learned Magistrate, the victim, when

a statement was taken, in no less terms stated that her husband

has been continuously ill-treating her and he even went to the

extent of throwing her child on the floor.        He destroyed the

articles and unable to bear it any more, she took the extreme

step. It is seen from the evidence that the statement was taken

when the victim was able to speak and there is no reason to

disbelieve the statement given by the victim which was recorded

by the learned Magistrate.        Therefore, there is overwhelming

evidence regarding the ill-treatment and the sufferings the victim

had undergone in the matrimonial house.

       18. It is true that it is after 13 years of marriage that the

mishap occurred and the couple had three children in the

wedlock. But, the evidence of PW2 is sufficient to show that the

accused was extremely cruel to the victim.         Therefore, even

assuming that there is no specific dates are mentioned or specific

incident as such is mentioned that does not lead to come to the

Crl. Appeal No.1349/2005          11


conclusion that the prosecution has not succeeded in establishing

its case. In fact, the specific act by the accused is spoken to by

PW3 which happened on the date of incident itself. The acts of

cruelty is therefore clearly made out.

       19. What now remains to be considered is what are the

offences if any made out on the rude facts. Of course, there is no

case for the prosecution that there was any demand for dowry or

that the victim was being ill-treated on the basis of inadequate

dowry. But the evidence is clear to the effect that the accused

was so cruel to the victim. It is clear from the evidence of PW2,

the daughter of the victim as well as the accused that the acts

done by the accused ultimately caused the suicide of the victim.

There is no doubt that the acts of the accused fall within the

Explanation (a) to Section 498A IPC.        The court below was

perfectly justified in coming to the conclusion that the offence

under Section 498A IPC is made out.

       20.        But, there is considerable doubt regarding the

applicability of Section 306 IPC. Section 306 IPC contemplates

an instigation on the part of the accused to drive the victim to do

Crl. Appeal No.1349/2005         12


a particular thing. There should be a clear intention proved by

the prosecution that that accused intended that the victim would

commit suicide or created such a situation wilfully and voluntarily

that the victim had no choice but to commit suicide. The mere

fact that after the beating, the victim went inside the house and

committed suicide is not a ground to come to the conclusion that

there is instigation on the part of the accused.       Instigation

requires a positive act and it contemplates a situation whereby

the accused would believe that the victim would go and commit

suicide and with that in mind he does something which facilitates

the commission of suicide. If that be the test to be applied,

surely the case on hand does not meet the test. Therefore, the

offence under Section 306 IPC cannot be attracted to the facts of

the case.

       21.      The marriage of the couple was in 1987 and the

incident took place in 2000. 13 years have elapsed now and the

circumstances might have changed. This is not to justify the acts

committed by the accused.        Due to the lapse of time, some

leniency with regard to sentence for the offence under

Crl. Appeal No.1349/2005             13


Section 498A IPC, it is felt, is fully justified.

       While confirming the conviction for the offence under

Section 498A IPC, the sentence passed by the court below for the

said offence is set aside and instead the accused is sentenced to

suffer rigorous imprisonment for a period of one year and to pay

a fine of Rs.3,000/- with default clause of simple imprisonment

for two months.          The conviction and sentence passed for the

offence under Section 306 IPC are set aside.

       This appeal is partly allowed.




                                          P.BHAVADASAN
                                                  JUDGE




smp

                                          // True Copy //


                                          P.A. to Judge.



