
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                        PRESENT:

                         THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE PIUS C.KURIAKOSE
                                                               &
                               THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE P.D.RAJAN

                THURSDAY, THE 21ST DAY OF MARCH 2013/30TH PHALGUNA 1934

                                            Mat.Appeal.No. 405 of 2011
                                                -------------------------------
                      OP(MM)NO.753/2007 OF FAMILY COURT, ALAPPUZHA
                                          ---------------------------------------

APPELLANT/RESPONDENT:
-----------------------------------------

            SANJAN,AGED 37 YEARS,
            S/O.SAINUDHEEN KUNU ASAN,
            AMBATTU VEEDU, MANNANCHERRY,
            ALAPPUZHA.

             BY SRI.K.RAMAKUMAR,SENIOR ADVOCATE
                    ADV. SMT.SMITHA GEORGE
                           SMT.ASHA BABU

RESPONDENT /PETITIONER:
---------------------------------------------

            AZARA,AGED 32 YEARS,D/O.ABOOBACKER,
            ERAVE VELIYIL VEETTIL, MANNANCHERRY.PIN-688 538

             BY ADV. SRI.P.K.IBRAHIM, CAVEATOR
                          SRI.UDAYAKUMAR SREEDHARAN


            THIS MATRIMONIAL APPEAL HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD
            ON 05-03-2013, THE COURT ON 21-03-2013 DELIVERED THE
            FOLLOWING:




sts


            PIUS C. KURIAKOSE & P. D. RAJAN, JJ.
      =~=~=~=~=~=~=~=~=~=~=~=~=~=~=~=~=~=~=~=~=~=~=
              Mat. Appeal No. 405 of 2011
      =~=~=~=~=~=~=~=~=~=~=~=~=~=~=~=~=~=~=~=~=~=~=
          Dated this the 21st day of March, 2013

                         JUDGMENT

Rajan, J.


       This appeal is directed against the order in O.P.(MM)

No.753/2007 of the Family Court, Alappuzha. Appellant is

the husband and respondent is the wife in this appeal. Wife

preferred the above petition in the Family Court for

dissolution of marriage under section 2 of Dissolution of

Muslim Marriage Act, 1939 (for brevity 'the Act').

       2. The facts in nutshell are as follows:- Appellant

married the respondent on 16-5-1999 according to Muslim

religious rites and after that both of them resided together

in the matrimonial house. A child was born to them on 17-8-

2004 and the appellant did not care to meet the hospital

expenses for the delivery. Before the marriage the father of

Mat. 405/2011               2

the respondent entrusted Rs.3 lakhs to the appellant, which

was misused by the appellant. The respondent was also

given 75 sovereigns of gold ornaments by her parents and

out of which 45 sovereigns were taken away by the

appellant for his sister's marriage.    Five months after

delivery, for a few days and lastly in February, 2004 the

appellant had sexual intercourse with the respondent. After

that he avoided the respondent and refused to have sexual

intercourse   with  her.  Even   though   the  respondent

persuaded him, he failed to discharge his matrimonial

obligation for more than three years preceding from the

date of petition. After delivery when she returned to her

matrimonial house, the appellant demanded Rs.7 lakhs as

dowry and demanded a car. When she was incapable to pay

the amount, she was harassed mentally. Moreover, when

she was residing with him, he did not maintain her. He did

not take care in giving her dresses or meeting medical

expenses in her day today life. When the appellant

demanded more amount as dowry, she left the matrimonial

Mat. 405/2011                3

home in January, 2006. Now their matrimonial relationship

is irretrievably broken and the respondent approached the

Family Court for a decree of dissolution of the marriage.

        3. The husband resisted the above said facts

contending, inter alia, that the wife was having only less

than 40 sovereigns of gold at the time of the marriage and

none of the gold was taken by him or his parents. There was

no mental or physical harassment from his side and there

was no demand for dowry. He paid all hospital expenses,

when she was admitted in the hospital for delivery and

thereafter. It was out of his income, the respondent studied

P.G. Degree, B.Ed. Course, SET and got employment in

Cochin University as an Assistant. He was not aware under

what circumstances 20 cents were given to her by her

parents. He contended that no legal grounds are put

forward by the respondent for a decree of divorce and prays

to dismiss the petition.

        4. The Family Court tried both petitions (i.e., O.P.

(OS) Nos.752 and 753 of 2007) jointly and recorded

Mat. 405/2011               4

evidence in O.P.(OS) No.753/2007. Both parties adduced

both oral and documentary evidence, which consist oral

testimony of PWs. 1 to 3 and RWs. 1 to 3 and documentary

evidence of Exts.A1 to A19 and Exts.B1 to B6. Court

exhibits were Exts.C1 and C2 and third party exhibit was

Ext.X1. The Family Court after sifting and weighing the

evidence on record, decreed the suit by declaring that the

marriage between the appellant and respondent was

dissolved from the date of the decree. Being aggrieved by

the aforesaid decision of the Family Court, the husband

preferred this appeal.

        5. Sri V. Ramakumar, learned senior counsel

appearing for the appellant, contended that there was no

allegation in the petition that the matrimonial relationship

between the appellant and the respondent was broken

irretrievably. The alleged cruelty of non-sex is not pleaded

and proved in this case. The marriage between the

appellant and the respondent was solemnized according to

Muhammadan Law. Section 2(ix) of the Act was not pleaded

Mat. 405/2011                 5

in the Family Court. In the proof affidavit also no grounds

are mentioned. The respondent is not entitled to get a

decree of dissolution of marriage.

        6. Sri. P.K.Ibrahim, the learned counsel appearing for

the respondent, per contra, would submit that the Family

Court verified the entire pleadings and recorded the finding

on proper appreciation of evidence.       The totality of the

pleading and evidence show that the marriage was

irretrievably broken, impossible for the husband and wife to

live together, and emotional bond between them is extinct.

After February, 2004 the appellant refused to have sexual

intercourse with the respondent and denied sex, even

though she persuaded him. The appellant failed to

discharge his matrimonial obligation for the last three

years, which shows that the marriage is irretrievably

broken. The appellant was also very cruel and he did not

care to attend the respondent during her first and second

delivery. He ill-treated her both mentally and physically.

After getting the decree for dissolution of the marriage, she

Mat. 405/2011                 6

re-married and the marriage was registered with the Kerala

Registration of Marriage Rules, 2008. Registering authority

issued a marriage certificate.

        7. Considering the tenability of the argument and the

conclusion arrived at by the Family Court, the question

which arises for consideration is whether the alleged

cruelty of non-sex is proved and if so, on that ground it can

be say that marriage is irretrievably broken?

        8. In this context, we have considered the relevant

law regarding the Act. Section 2 of the Act reads as

follows:-

             "2. Grounds for decree for dissolution of

      marriage-- A woman married under Muslim law

      shall be entitled to obtain a decree for the

      dissolution of her marriage on any one or more of

      the following grounds, namely--

       i) that the whereabouts of the husband have not

             been known for a period of four years;

       ii) that the husband has neglected or has failed

             to provide for her maintenance for a period

Mat. 405/2011                  7

             of two years;

       ii)    that the husband has been sentenced to

             imprisonment for a period of seven years or

             upwards;

       iv) that the husband has failed to perform,

             without    reasonable   cause,    his  marital

             obligations for a period of three years;

       v) that the husband was impotent at the time of

             the marriage and continues to be so;

       vi)    that the husband has been insane for a

             period of two years or is suffering from

             leprosy or virulent venereal disease;

       vii) that she, having been given in marriage by

             her father or other guardian before she

             attained the age of fifteen years, repudiated

             the marriage before attaining the age of

             eighteen years;

             Provided that the marriage has not been

             consummated;

       viii) that the husband treats her with cruelty,

             that is to say,--

       a) habitually assaults her or makes her life

             miserable by cruelty of conduct even if such

             conduct does not amount to physical ill-

             treatment, or

Mat. 405/2011                  8

       b) associates with women of evil repute or leads

             an infamous life, or

       c) attempts to force her to lead an immoral life,

             or

       d) disposes of her property or prevents her

             exercising her legal rights over it, or

       e) obstructs her in the observance of her

             religious profession or practice, or

       f) if he has more wives than one, does not treat

             her equitably in accordance with the

             injunctions of the Quran;

       ix) on any other ground which is recognised as

             valid for the dissolution of marriages under

             Muslim law."

        9. The concept of "marriage" among Muslim from the

very beginning itself regarded as a contract. Muslim

marriage has been defined as a civil contract for the

purpose of legalizing sexual intercourse and procreation of

children. It is not a sacrament but a contract, though

solemnized generally with the recitation of certain verses

from the Koran. Muslim law does not prescribe any

religious service essential for solemnization. Krishna Iyer, J.

Mat. 405/2011                9

in Islamic Law in Modern India considered the concept of

Muslim marriage and stated that "in its legal connotation,

Muslim marriage is essentially a contract, though marriage

as a social institution is regarded solemn all over the

civilized world, including the Muslims".

        10. Keeping in mind of the above explicit principles,

we have analyzed the evidence of PW1, which would show

that after the marriage both the appellant and the

respondent resided together in the matrimonial home. On 9-

5-2003 the respondent delivered a child which was dead in

the womb itself. After this the appellant ill-treated her both

physically and mentally by demanding more amount and

gold as dowry. Subsequently, she became pregnant and

delivered a child on 17-8-2004 at Medical Centre,

Ernakulam by cesarean. This time also appellant neither

visited her nor met the expenses in the hospital. When the

appellant and his parents demanded more amount, her

parents transferred 20 cents of property by virtue of sale

deed No.3444/2005 of S.RO. Mararikulam in her name.

Mat. 405/2011              10

Appellant declined to give care and protection to her,

avoided her company and hesitant to have sexual

intercourse with her.

        11. The respondent affirmed that after February,

2004,     the appellant  was    unenthusiastic   to  sexual

intercourse with the respondent. If the wife is subjected to

insults and behaved cruelly, it would make the married life

became very unhappy and miserable. Denial of Medical

treatment to the wife at the time of delivery and non-

payment of the expenses would amount to "cruelty". In the

cross-examination of PW1 nothing was brought out to

discredit her evidence, but she admitted that after the

marriage the husband had sexual intercourse with PW1 only

for limited days. The appellant (RW1) contended that there

was no ill-treatment both physically and mentally towards

PW1 and there was no demand for dowry. RW1 admitted

that he has normal intercourse with her and in that

relationship both children born to them, but this part of his

evidence is sleek and slender. PW2 and PW3 deposed about

Mat. 405/2011               11

money transaction at the time of marriage. The wife alleges

willful neglect of the husband, when she was admitted in

the Medical Trust Hospital for her two deliveries. The

husband's failure to provide medical aid and care when she

was admitted in the hospital is a serious one. This willful

neglect or avoidance is a deliberate departure from the

normal marital life which will come within the ambit of

"constructive desertion".

        12. In this situation, we have considered the

behaviour of the husband i.e., refusing to sexual intercourse

with wife, which amounts to cruelty and on that ground the

marriage between the appellant and respondent is

irretrievably broken.  It is clear from the evidence of PW1

that the appellant refused to sex with her from February,

2004 onwards. She has a right to marital intercourse from

her husband during the subsistence of her marriage. The

question     of cessation  of   sexual   intercourse   which

constitutes a ground for divorce was considered by the

Rajastan High Court in Lalita V. Radha, AIR 1976 Raj 1, and

Mat. 405/2011                  12

held that continuous ill-treatment, cessation of marital

intercourse, studied neglect or indifference, indulging in

love affairs with another woman and then promising her to

marry are acts which constitute "cruelty".

        13. The proposition of willful denial of sex and its

impact have been considered by Delhi High Court in

Shakuntala V. Om Parkash, AIR 1981 Del. 53,which held as

follows:-

            "A normal and healthy sexual relationship is

        one of the basic ingredients of a happy and

        harmonious marriage. If this is not possible due

        to ill health on the part of the one of the spouses,

        it may or may not amount to cruelty depending

        upon the circumstances of the case. But willful

        denial of sexual relationship by a spouse when

        the other spouse is anxious for it, would amount

        to mental cruelty, especially when the parties

        are    young     and   newly     married.(emphasis

        supplied)"

In another decision Rita V. Balkrishan Nijhawan, AIR 1973

Del 200, the Delhi High Court observed thus:

Mat. 405/2011                   13

             ".. the law is well settled that if either of the

        parties to a marriage being of healthy physical

        capacity refuses to have sexual intercourse, the

        same would amount to cruelty entitling the other

        to divorce. In our opinion, it would make no

        difference in law whether denial of intercourse is

        the result of sexual weakness of respondent

        disabling him from having sexual union with the

        appellant, or it is because of any wilful refusal by

        respondent. (emphasis supplied)"

The above view was confirmed by the Supreme Court in

Sirujmohedkhan V. Hafizunissa, AIR 1981 SC 1972 and held

as follows:-

             "6. We are of the opinion that if the husband

       was impotent and unable to discharge his marital

       obligation, how could he fulfill the main object of

       marriage,       more    particularly,     under    the

       Muhammadan law where marriage is sacrosanct

       contract and not a purely religious ceremony as

       in the case of Hindu law. This would certainly be

       a very just and reasonable ground on the part of

       the wife for refusing to live with her husband, as

       also in cases under the Hindu law or other laws.

             xxx             xxx        xxx         xxx

Mat. 405/2011                 14

       21... The matter deserves serious attention from

       the point of view of the wife. Here is a wife who

       is forced or compelled to live a life of celibacy

       while staying with her husband who is unable to

       have sexual relationship with her. Such a life is

       one of perpetual torture which is not only

       mentally or psychologically injurious but even

       from the medical point of view is detrimental to

       the health of the woman. Surely, the concept of

       mental cruelty cannot be different in a civil case

       and in a criminal case when the attributes of

       such a cruelty are the same."

        14. This Court in Mohammed V. Sainaba Umma, 1987

(1) KLT 712, held that "when an intolerable situation has

been reached and partners are living with hostility for a

considerable number of years, it is legitimate to draw an

inference that the marriage has broken down in reality and

the law should recognize it and try to end the relationship".

In the above situation, what the court has to look into is

whether the above state of affairs continues and one of the

spouses refuses to cohabit, which is the common obligation

of a marital life, it cannot see as a temporary withdrawal.

Mat. 405/2011                15

        15. Appellant is normally a healthy man, but he

refused to sex with the respondent when she likes and

express her wishes. Marriage without sex is a denunciation.

Sex is the foundation of marriage and without vigorous and

harmonious sexual activity, it would impossible to persist a

marriage longer. The marriage is consummated, when

parties have sexual intercourse after the solemnization of

marriage, which must be complete and not partial. Denial of

sexual activity would create depression and frustration in a

woman's mind and body. In such situation, practical and

pragmatic approaches must be taken by the courts. No

chronic ailment was reported for his reluctance. There is no

allegation of malformation of structural defect         and

abnormal size of the organ of the respondent, which are the

physical ground for reluctance. Willful refusal to consume

the marriage is a good ground for divorce under the Parsi

Marriage and Divorce Act. In Horton V. Horton (1947) 2 All

ER 871, Lord Jowitt observed that "willful refusal" connotes

a settled and definite decision without just cause".

Mat. 405/2011               16

         16. Therefore, we are of the opinion that if husband

refused to sex with his wife, when she demands for the

same, is a ground for "cruelty". As a wife she is expecting a

healthy sexual relationship with her husband for the

persistence of happy and harmonious married life. If this

avoidance is deliberate, we cannot blame the husband for

the cruelty, if the reluctance is due to ill-health or other

mental displeasure that fact is to disclose to the wife when

she       attempts for sexual intercourse. Her pathetic

disclosure in her evidence was that when she was anxious

for sexual intercourse, the appellant willfully avoided her

which would amount to a mental cruelty when both are well

qualified and employed in reputed universities. Both parties

admitted that they are physically healthy and capacity to

have sexual intercourse. Therefore, we observe that proper

denial of sexual intercourse with the other partner amount

to cruelty which is a good ground for divorce. In the

circumstances, we find no reason to interfere with the

finding recorded by the Family Court.

Mat. 405/2011                  17

          In the result, the judgment and decree passed by the

Family Court are confirmed. There is no merit in the appeal

and the appeal is dismissed.


                                 PIUS C. KURIAKOSE, JUDGE.



                                 P. D. RAJAN, JUDGE.

nkm.



