
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                             PRESENT:

                THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE P.BHAVADASAN

        FRIDAY, THE 4TH DAY OF OCTOBER 2013/12TH ASWINA, 1935

                                   CRL.A.No. 78 of 2005 (D)
                                        -------------------------
    CC NO.219/1998 OF JUDICIAL FIRST CLASS MAGISTRATE COURT I,
                                  THRISSUR DATED 26-11-2001
                                                     ...

    APPELLANT(S)/COMPLAINANT:
    ------------------------------------------------

     STATE OF KERALA, REP. BY
     CIRCLE INSPECTOR OF POLICE, CHERPU.

     BY GOVERNMENT PLEADER SMT.P.MAYA


    RESPONDENT(S)/ACCUSED:
    -----------------------------------------------

     1.       RAMADAS, S/O.BALAKRISHNAN,
              KALARICKAL HOUSE, CHIRAKKAL DESOM,
             KURUMBILAVU VILLAGE, CHERPU,
              TRICHUR DISTRICT.

     2.       LEELA TEACHER, W/O. BALAKRISHNAN,
              KALARICKAL HOUSE, CHIRACKAL DESOM,
              KURUMBILAVU VILLAGE, CHERPU,
              TRICHUR DISTRICT.

     R1 & R2 BY ADVS. SRI.V.V.ASOKAN
                                 SMT.S.AMINA


     THIS CRIMINAL APPEAL HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD
     ON 04-10-2013, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY DELIVERED
     THE FOLLOWING:

Kss


                      P.BHAVADASAN, J.
              ---------------------------------------
                  Crl. Appeal No.78 OF 2005
              ---------------------------------------
           Dated this the 4th day of October, 2013.


                        J U D G M E N T


     The State, aggrieved by the acquittal of the accused for the

offence under Section 498A of Indian Penal Code, has come up in

appeal before this Court.

     2. PW1 is the wife of the 1st accused and the 2nd accused is

none other than the mother of the 1st accused. PW2 is the father

of PW1. The marriage between the 1st accused and PW1 was

solemnised on 27.10.1991 and after the marriage, PW1 took up

residence in the matrimonial house and a girl child was born in

that wedlock on 31.07.1992. The allegations are that ever since

the marriage, PW1 has been harassed and heckled by the

accused persons demanding more dowry and she was physically

and mentally tortured and was treated cruelly by the accused

persons.   It is alleged that 27 sovereigns of gold which PW1

received at the time of marriage were taken away by the 1st

accused at the behest of the 2nd accused and even though they

Crl. Appeal No.78/2005            2


had promised to return the same, they had not done so. It is

also alleged that after she had gone to her parental house for

delivery, nobody visited her and the child and it was after six

months that the 1st accused had visited the child. There were

differences of opinion between the parties and after the

mediation which had taken place, PW1 claims to have taken up

her residence with the 1st accused. It is stated that he continued

to harass PW1 and ultimately she left for her house.

       3. Ext.P1 is the complaint laid by PW1. Based on Ext.P1, a

crime was registered as per Ext.P5 First Information Report.

Scene mahazar was prepared and after investigation, final report

was laid before court.

       4. The court before which final report was laid took

cognizance of the offence and to the charge, the accused pleaded

not guilty and claimed to be tried. The prosecution, therefore,

had PWs 1 to 8 examined and Exts.P1 to P5 marked.

       5. After the close of the prosecution evidence, the accused

were questioned under Section 313 Cr.P.C. They denied all the

incriminating circumstances brought out in evidence against them

Crl. Appeal No.78/2005            3


and maintained that they were innocent. No defence evidence

was adduced.

       6. On an appreciation of the evidence in the case, the trial

court came to the conclusion that no acts amounted to cruelty

were established by the evidence of PWs 1 and 2 and it is

insufficient, according to the lower court, to constitute cruelty

under Section 498A IPC. On the basis of the above findings, the

accused were acquitted.

       7.      Learned Public Prosecutor appearing for the State

pointed out that the court below was not justified in acquitting

the accused especially in view of the evidence furnished by PWs 1

and 2. The evidence of PW1, according to the learned Public

Prosecutor, would show the cruelties meted out to her by the

accused persons and that is supported by the evidence of PW2.

The court below was not justified in not relying on the evidence

of PWs 1 and 2 which would clearly show that PW1 was treated

cruelly by the accused persons at the matrimonial house and she

had to leave the house due to their activities. According to the

learned Public Prosecutor, the evidence of PWs 1 and 2 are

Crl. Appeal No.78/2005            4


sufficient to show that the offence had been made out.

       8. Learned counsel appearing for the accused, on the other

hand, pointed out that it has come out in evidence that it was

only after the notice in the divorce petition was received by PW1

that the present complaint has been filed and there can be no

doubt that the complaint has been laid as a retaliatory measure

to the divorce petition. It is pointed out by the learned counsel

that even going by the evidence of PWs 1 and 2, the birth

ceremonies of the child and subsequent ceremonies relating to

the child were performed in the matrimonial house and there is

no specific overt act attributed to either the 1st or the 2nd accused

which could be treated as cruel acts by the accused persons.

Some vague statements are made at the time of evidence and

there is nothing to show that the victim namely, PW1 had

suffered any physical or mental injury at the hands of the

accused persons. Learned counsel went on to point out that the

court below has analysed the evidence in considerable detail and

has come to the conclusion that the offence had not been made

out. According to the learned counsel, no grounds are made out

Crl. Appeal No.78/2005             5


to interfere with the order passed by the court below.

       9. At the outset itself, this Court must remind itself that it

is sitting in appeal against the order of an acquittal. Unless it is

shown that the findings are so perverse or are contrary to the

evidence on record, merely because a different view might be

possible, this Court will not be justified in interfering with the

order passed by the court below.

       10. The evidence regarding the cruel acts alleged to have

been committed by the accused persons remain confined to PW1.

Of course, to some extent, her evidence gets support from the

evidence of PW2. PW2 has stated that on a few occasion, he had

gone to the matrimonial house of PW1 and pacified her. PW1 in

her evidence stated about the various cruelties alleged to have

been committed by the accused persons. But, it is interesting to

note that except for some vague statements, there is no mention

about any specific date or specific overt act committed by the

accused persons. All that is raised is that they used to treat her

cruelly and harass her. The evidence of PW1 shows that at the

time of marriage, the accused persons had not asked for any

Crl. Appeal No.78/2005              6


dowry at all even though PW2 says otherwise.             The main

grievance of PWs 1 and 2 seems to be that when PW2 went to

the matrimonial house of PW1, he was not allowed to see the

child. The further allegation is that the accused persons used to

humiliate PW1 in front of others.        But, except for a vague

statement to that effect, what actually was done by the accused

persons and what were the words uttered by them are not

spoken to by PW1.

       11. At the risk of repetition, one may say that the

allegations are general in nature. All that is stated is that she

was harassed and treated badly in the matrimonial house. PW1

had to admit that for the last several years, they are living

separately and the present complaint which gave rise to the case

is only after she received notice in the divorce petition. There is

no reason given either by PW1 or PW2 for not filing a complaint

regarding the cruelties before the receipt of notice in the divorce

petition.       It is also interesting to note that many of the

statements made by PW1 at the time of evidence do not find a

place in the complaint. In fact, PW1 says that she had signed a

Crl. Appeal No.78/2005              7


complaint brought by the father.

       12. It was in the above circumstances that the court below

was inclined to hold that the evidence is insufficient to come to

the conclusion that the offence had been made out. The lower

court is also justified in its finding that even assuming that there

has been isolated incidents of discord between PW1 and the 1st

accused, that by themselves are not sufficient to constitute a

crime under Section 498A IPC. As rightly noticed by the court

below, only explanation (a) to Section 498A IPC can apply to the

facts of the case. There was no evidence to the effect that there

was any wilful conduct on the part of the accused persons as

regards the allegations made against them.

       13. This is a case where there is absolute want of evidence

on the side of the prosecution to show that the accused persons

had committed any cruel acts to PW1. On the other hand, it

becomes evident that it was only as a retaliatory measure to the

notice in the divorce petition which had been received by PW1

that the present complaint has been laid.

       14. For the above reasons, the court below is fully justified

Crl. Appeal No.78/2005             8


in coming to the conclusion that the offence had not been made

out and the accused are entitled to acquittal. No grounds are

made out to interfere with the order passed by the court below.

       In the result, this appeal is without merit and it is liable to

the dismissed. I do so confirming the order passed by the court

below.




                                        P.BHAVADASAN
                                             JUDGE



smp



