
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                     PRESENT:

                          THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE P.BHAVADASAN

                 FRIDAY,THE 4TH DAY OF OCTOBER 2013/12TH ASWINA, 1935

                                           CRL.A.No. 151 of 2005 ( )
                                                --------------------------
      SC.NO. 159/2001 OF ADDL.SESSIONS COURT (ADHOC-I), ERNAKULAM
                                         --------------------------------

APPELLANT /COMPLAINANT:
--------------------------------------------

            STATE OF KERALA, REPRESENTED BY THE
            ASSISTANT COMMISSIONER OF POLICE,
            THRIKKAKARA THROUGH THE PUBLIC PROSECUTOR,
            HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM.

             BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SMT. P.MAYA

RESPONDENT(S)/ACCUSED :
-------------------------------------------

        1. SAVITHRY,W/O.KUTTAPPAN,
            MANAPPATTUVEETTIL, AMPALLOOR VILLAGE.

        2. AMBUJAKSHY, W/O.KUNJIKKAN,
            KALLUVACHAKADUVEETTIL, NADAMA
            THEKKUMBHAGOM, VILLAGE.

              R1 & R2 BY ADV. SRI.C.P.UDAYABHANU

            THIS CRIMINAL APPEAL HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD
            ON 04-10-2013, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY DELIVERED
            THE FOLLOWING:




sts


                       P.BHAVADASAN, J.
               ---------------------------------------
                  Crl. Appeal No.151 OF 2005
               ---------------------------------------
            Dated this the 4th day of October, 2013.


                         J U D G M E N T


      A daughter and her mother were prosecuted for the

offences punishable under Sections 306 and 498A read with

Section 34 of Indian Penal Code for having been responsible for

the death of the wife of PW1 who is the son of the 2nd accused

and the 1st accused is none other than his sister.        As the

prosecution story goes, PW1 and the deceased fell in love and

they eloped.     Later on, on 03.04.1994, their marriage was

conducted in a temple.

      2. It could be seen from the records that PW1, the husband

of the victim, did not have any permanent job. On 07.04.1998, it

is alleged that the victim poured kerosene on her body and set

herself on fire. She was taken to hospital. On getting intimation

from the hospital, the Sub Inspector of Police attached to the Hill

Palace Police Station went to the General Hospital at Ernakulam

and recorded Ext.P15 First Information Statement given by the

Crl.Appeal No.151/2005           2


victim herself. Based on the First Information Statement, a

crime was registered as per Ext.P16 First Information Report.

Inquest was conducted and the body was sent for postmortem

and Ext.P13 certificate was drawn up. In the meanwhile, the

dying declaration of the victim was recorded by the learned

Magistrate concerned and the statement of witnesses were taken

by the various investigating officers namely, PWs 15 to 17. After

completing investigation, final report was laid before court.

       3.     The court before which final report was laid took

cognizance of the offences and on finding that the offences are

exclusively triable by a Court of Sessions, the case was

committed to Sessions Court, Ernakulam. The said court made

over the case to Additional Sessions Court (Adhoc-I), Ernakulam

for trial and disposal. The latter court, on receipt of records and

on appearance of the accused, framed charges for the offences

punishable under Sections 306 and 498A IPC. To the charge, the

accused pleaded not guilty and claimed to be tried.             The

prosecution, therefore, had PWs 1 to 17 examined and Exts.P1 to

P19 marked. M.O.s 1 and 2 were got identified and marked. The

Crl.Appeal No.151/2005             3


defence had Ext.D1 marked.

       4. After the close of the prosecution evidence, the accused

were questioned under Section 313 Cr.P.C. They denied all the

incriminating circumstances brought out in evidence against them

and maintained that they were innocent. The 1st accused stated

that she earns a living by casual labour and her husband and

mother are not doing well and therefore she could not leave her

husband's house.        The 2nd accused maintained that she is

innocent.

       5. On finding that the accused could not be acquitted under

Section 232 Cr.P.C, they were asked to enter on their defence.

They chose to adduce no evidence.

       6. On an analysis of the evidence, the court below came to

the conclusion that there was no convincing evidence to show

that the victim namely, the wife of PW1 was driven to commit

suicide at the behest of the accused persons and there was

nothing to show that they have treated the victim cruelly as

alleged by the prosecution.        Accordingly, the accused were

acquitted.       The State challenges the acquittal of the accused

Crl.Appeal No.151/2005           4


persons in this appeal.

       7. Learned Public Prosecutor appearing for the State very

vehemently contended that the court below was not justified in

acquitting the accused especially in view of the evidence

furnished by PWs 2, 3 and 6 who are closely related to the victim.

Their evidence show that the victim was continuously harassed

and heckled by the accused persons and unable to bear it any

more, the victim was driven to commit suicide. According to the

learned Public Prosecutor, the 1st accused was more villainous in

character and she used to often taunt the victim which made the

life of the victim in the matrimonial house miserable.

       8. According to the learned Public Prosecutor, the evidence

of PWs 2, 3 and 6 will clearly show that the accused persons did

not let the victim have a peaceful life in the matrimonial house

and she had to shift her residence to a nearby shed and later due

to the act committed by the accused persons, she committed

suicide. There is no reason to disbelieve PWs 2, 3 and 6 nor is

there anything to show that they had any reason to falsely

implicate the accused. If their evidence is to be believed, the

Crl.Appeal No.151/2005           5


claim of the accused persons that they are innocent cannot be

believed. On a reading of their evidence, it could be concluded

that the accused were treating the victim cruelly both physically

and mentally and that they were responsible for the suicide of the

victim. Learned Pubic Prosecutor contended that the acquittal

cannot stand.

       9. Learned counsel appearing for the accused persons, on

the other hand, pointed out that it could be very easily seen from

the records that the story of torture, harassment and heckling

has been developed at much a later stage. Drawing attention to

Ext.P15 First Information Statement, which is admittedly given

by the victim herself, it is contended that all that is stated in

Ext.P15 is that the 1st accused uttered very obscene words to her

and the 2nd accused asked her why she had intervened in the

quarrel between PW1 and his brother.        No other incident or

allegation is there in Ext.P15 to show that the victim committed

suicide because of the acts committed by the accused persons.

Except for two instances made mention of therein, nothing had

been done by the accused persons to the victim.           Drawing

Crl.Appeal No.151/2005          6


attention also to Ext.P3, which is a letter alleged to have been

written by the deceased, learned counsel pointed out that it is not

proved in accordance with law. Even assuming that it is in the

handwriting of the victim, there is nothing in the letter to show

that the accused were responsible for either the suicide of the

victim or that they had in any way tortured the victim. Further

emphasis is laid on Ext.P10 dying declaration recorded by the

learned Magistrate wherein also, according to the learned

counsel, there is no mention of any act committed by the accused

persons which might have driven the victim to commit suicide.

       10. Under the above circumstances, according to the

learned counsel, it is difficult to place implicit faith on the

evidence of PWs 2, 3 and 6 and it can be easily seen that they

have developed a story much later. According to the learned

counsel, the court below was perfectly justified in coming to the

conclusion that there was absolute want of evidence to hold the

accused guilty. Learned counsel went on to point out that the

acquittal has to stand.

       11. That PW1 married the deceased on 03.04.1994 and

Crl.Appeal No.151/2005           7


they were in love before that is not a matter in dispute. In fact,

the evidence would show that they had eloped and later on, the

family members conducted their marriage in a temple.          The

couple had a male child in that wedlock. It is not disputed that

on 07.04.1998, the victim namely, the wife of PW1, had poured

kerosene on her body and set herself on fire. The prosecution

would allege that the accused were responsible for the suicide

committed by the wife of PW1. The effort of the prosecution was

to establish that it was due to the unbearable behaviour and the

acts committed by the accused persons which made the life of

the victim miserable that the victim had committed suicide. For

the purpose of proving the said fact, the prosecution mainly relies

on the evidence of PWs 2, 3 and 6. PW2 is none other than the

mother of the victim. PW3 is her sister and PW6 is her uncle.

       12. A reading of the evidence of PWs 2 and 3 would show

that for a considerable time, the couple had lived in the house of

PW2 and even two months prior to the date of incident, they

were living with PW2. Of course, PWs 2 and 3 do say that the

victim complained of constant heckling and harassment by the 1st

Crl.Appeal No.151/2005            8


accused who used to taunt her saying that she had not brought

anything from home at the time of marriage.          However, both

PWs 2 and 3 are consistent in their version that the 2nd accused

had not done any other act but she only kept silent and had

given a passive support. If prosecution is to be believed, it could

be concluded that the acts of cruelty were committed by the

accused persons.

       13. The question is whether the evidence of PWs 2 and 3

can be believed. It is true that they got some support from the

evidence of PW6. The evidence of PW6 would show that he had

not gone to the matrimonial house of his niece and he has only

hearsay knowledge about the incident that is alleged to have

taken place in the house of PW1. PW3 does say that her sister

had conveyed the ill treatment meted out to her by the accused

persons in the matrimonial house which, according to her, made

the life of her sister miserable. PW2 would also support PW3 in

this regard. Except for saying that they used to pick up quarrel

with the victim etc, there is no specific overt act attributed to any

of those accused persons nor is there any specific date on which

Crl.Appeal No.151/2005             9


the incident is said to have taken place. If, as a matter of fact,

PWs 2 and 3 say are true, of course, that would have had some

reflection in Ext.P15, Ext.P3 or Ext.P10.

       14. That the victim was oriented and conscious and she

was in such a position to speak is evident from Ext.P15 which

was recorded from the hospital by the Station House Officer

concerned. Except for the two acts mentioned in Ext.P15, no

other role is attributed to either the 1st accused or the 2nd accused

for having been responsible for the death of the victim. The two

instances made mention of in Ext.P15 are two isolated instances

and there is nothing to show that she was being continuously

harassed by the accused.         There is no mention in Ext.P15

regarding demand for dowry or regarding the beauty of the

victim. All that is stated in Ext.P15 is that her sister-in-law had

picked up quarrel with her and the mother-in-law had asked her

why she should intervene in the quarrel between PW1 and his

brother. Even assuming they are to be true, that by themselves

are not sufficient in law to come to the conclusion that the

accused have been treating the victim cruelly or in a harsh

Crl.Appeal No.151/2005             10


manner. It is also insufficient to come to the conclusion that the

acts committed by the accused persons are sufficient to drive the

victim to commit suicide. The prosecution produced Ext.P3 as a

letter said to have been written by the victim. As rightly pointed

out by the learned counsel, it is not proved in accordance with

law but it is seen marked. Even a reading of that letter does not

indicate that there is any act attributed to the 1st and the 2nd

accused which had driven the victim to take such an extreme

steps.       Except for vague statements, there is no specific

reference to any act committed by the accused which made the

life of the victim miserable.

       15. It is further interesting to note that Ext.P10 is the dying

declaration recorded by the learned Magistrate concerned. It is

very cryptic and it only shows that the victim poured kerosene on

her body and set herself on fire. The learned Magistrate found

that she is fully conscious and oriented and she said nothing else.

It is important to notice that she did not attribute any role to

either the 1st accused or the 2nd accused for having been

responsible for her death. When these aspects are looked at, it

Crl.Appeal No.151/2005            11


becomes difficult to accept the evidence of PWs 2, 3 and 6 and

come to the conclusion that the victim was treated cruelly by the

accused persons and that had driven her to commit suicide.

       16. It is also interesting to note that at no point of time

either PWs 2, 3 or PW6 had intervened and tried to find out a

solution to the so called agony that was being undergone by the

victim as stated by PWs 2, 3 and 6. In fact, the evidence of PWs

2, 3 and 6 are to the effect that after the couple namely, PW1

and his wife who committed suicide shifted their residence to a

shed near to the tharavad house, PWs 2, 3 and 6 visited the

couple and they found that they are living happily. It was the

above facts and circumstances which made the lower court to

find that there was want of evidence to come to the conclusion

that either the offence under Section 498A or 306 IPC have been

made out.

       17. This Court must remind itself that it is sitting in appeal

against acquittal and unless it is shown that the findings are

either perverse or are contrary to the evidence on record,

interference may not be possible. Even assuming that a different

Crl.Appeal No.151/2005             12


view is possible, that cannot be by itself a ground to interfere

unless it is shown that the finding is perverse. No such infirmity

can be seen in the findings of the court below especially in view

of the documentary evidence adduced in the case which tell the

tale about the incident which lead to the suicide of the victim.

Except for a vague statement about the involvement of the

accused persons, there is nothing to show that they had any role

to play or that they had acted cruelly to the victim.

       In the result, this appeal is without merit and it is liable to

be dismissed. I do so confirming the order passed by the court

below.




                                        P.BHAVADASAN
                                             JUDGE



smp



