
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                     PRESENT:

                          THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE P.BHAVADASAN

            THURSDAY, THE 7TH DAY OF NOVEMBER 2013/16TH KARTHIKA, 1935

                                           CRL.A.No. 224 of 2006 ( )
                                          --------------------------------------

  AGAINST THE JUDGMENT IN SC 1975/2001 of ADDITIONAL SESSIONS COURT,FAST
                                   TRACK- III, THIRUVANANTHAPURAM
AGAINST THE ORDER IN CP 199/2000 of JUDICIAL FIRST CLASS MAGISTRATE COURT,
                                                    KATTAKADA
                                                       ------------


APPELLANT(S)/ACCUSED.:
---------------------------------------

            BABU @ STANLEY JAYIN,
            S/O.RICHARD, KEERTHI BHAVAN, KOOVALASSERI,
            MARANALLOOR VILLAGE, MARANALLOOR DESOM.

            BY ADV. SRI.S.RAJEEV

RESPONDENT(S)/COMPLAINANT.:
------------------------------------------------

            STATE OF KERALA, REPRESENTED BY
            PUBLIC PROSECUTOR, HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM.

            BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SRI.DHANESH MATHEW MANJOORAN


            THIS CRIMINAL APPEAL HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD ON 07-11-2013,
            THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY DELIVERED THE FOLLOWING:




PJ


                 -Crl.Appeal.-No.-224-of -2006-
                   - - - - -
                       P. BHAVADASAN,- J.-
                              -   - -         -

                 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
          Dated this the 7th day of November, 2013.

                           JUDGMENT


          The accused, though prosecuted for the offence

punishable under Section 304B of Indian Penal Code, was

acquitted of the same, but was found guilty of offence under

Section 498A of I.P.C.       He was therefore convicted and

sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for two years

and to pay fine of Rs.10,000/-, in default, to undergo

imprisonment for six months.

          2. The victim, who is the daughter of P.W.1 fell in

love with the accused.     They belonged to different castes.

Obviously, that was not to the liking of the members of the

house of the victim. It so happened that the victim as well as

the accused eloped and they were brought back and it is

alleged that there was a marriage ceremony conducted. It

may be noted that the victim belonged to the Hindu

community and the accused to Christian community.        The

Crl.Appeal.224/2006.
                                2

so-called marriage is said to have taken place on 31.5.1999.

The victim set herself on fire on 10.8.1999 and later

succumbed to her injuries. Ext.P3 first information statement

was laid which was recorded by P.W.8 and crime was

registered as per Ext.P3(a) FIR. Inquest was conducted by the

Tahsildar concerned and autopsy was done by the Forensic

Surgeon who prepared the necessary certificate.          Initial

investigation was conducted by P.W.8. He prepared the scene

mahazar and took the statements of witnesses.        Later the

investigation was taken over by P.W.9.         He conducted

investigation from 12.8.1999 to 7.10.1999. He claims to have

recorded statements of witnesses.       P.W.10, the Assistant

Superintendent of Police, continued the investigation and as

per his evidence he did not find any material to come to the

conclusion that offence under Section 304B I.P.C. is made out.

Therefore, he filed a report incorporating Section 498A read

with Section 34 of I.P.C. showing three persons on the array of

Crl.Appeal.224/2006.
                                3

accused. It is seen from the records that the names of the

parents of the accused were deleted and the accused alone

was in the party array. Final report was filed showing offence

under Section 498A of I.P.C.

             3. Cognizance of the offence was taken by the court

before which final report was laid. Later on it is seen that since

Section 306 I.P.C., had also been added, the court below which

took cognizance of the offence, committed the case to

Sessions Court, Thiruvananthapuram.       The said court made

over the case to Additional Sessions Court (Fast Track Court

III), Thiruvananthapuram for trial and disposal. The said court,

on scrutiny of the documents before it, came to the conclusion

that offence under Section 304B of I.P.C. is attracted to the

case and hence framed charge for that offence. To the charge,

the accused pleaded not guilty and claimed to be tried. The

prosecution therefore had P.Ws.1 to 11 examined and had

Exts.P1 to P10 marked. Exts.D1 to D2(a) were marked from

Crl.Appeal.224/2006.
                               4

the defence side as contradictory statements of the respective

witnesses with respect to the previous statements to the

police.      After the close of the prosecution evidence, the

accused was questioned under Section 313 Cr.P.C. He denied

all the incriminating circumstances brought out in evidence

against him and maintained that he is innocent. He submitted

that on 5.12.1998 onwards he was working in the Mission

Hospital, Amaravila and the victim too had joined there as

Nursing Assistant. The relatives of the victim used to come

and call her from the hospital. On 25.5.1999, P.W.7 is alleged

to have come to the hospital and called Dhanya, the victim.

The victim refused to go along with him on the pretext that on

the next day she had an examination. On the same evening

she received a phone call asking her to come home.         On

26.5.1999 at about 4.30 p.m. P.W.7 came to the hospital and

by that time Dhanya who had gone to write the examination

had returned. Though there was an attempt to persuade her

Crl.Appeal.224/2006.
                                 5

to go along with him, she did not heed. She told P.W.7 that

she would return home only when someone from her house

came to take her. By about 6.30 p.m. P.W.7 returned with

P.W.2, the sister of the victim. The victim refused to go with

them also.       That annoyed P.Ws.2 and 7, who left the place

scolding her. Dhanya went inside shedding tears. A short

while thereafter, a Nursing Assistant by name Lekha came and

called the accused.      The accused who was attending to a

patient went to the place where he was called. He found Lekha

attending to the victim. She had caught hold of the hands of

the victim.      It was revealed that the victim had  Diazepan

tablets with her.       It became clear that the victim was

attempting to consume the said tablets. When the accused

asked her for the reason for not leaving with the relatives who

had come to take her, she told him that if she goes to her

house, she may not return and that she is in love with him and

she also desired to have a marital life with him. At that point

Crl.Appeal.224/2006.
                               6

of time, according to the accused, the victim received a phone

call informing her that since she had not come home with her

sister, the relatives are coming there to pick her up.     The

accused would say that he was given to understand that the

tone of conversation was bad. The hospital works till 8 p.m..

By about 7.15 - 7.30 p.m., they closed the hospital and went

to the house of the accused. When they reached their house,

the parents of the accused told them that it is not safe to

remain there and they left the place. They left for Sulthan

Bathery. Later on, they returned to Thiruvananthapuram and

resided in a Tourist Home.     From the Tourist Home,      one

Gopinathan Nair, who is a close relative of the victim was

informed about their arrival in Thiruvananthapuram. He took

them in his car to his house. He informed all the relatives of

the victim and they together took the couple to the house of

the accused. On the date of the incident, according to the

learned counsel, at about 2 p.m. he found the dog in his

Crl.Appeal.224/2006.
                                 7

house barking unusually and it was found that the dog has not

been fed. He questioned the victim as to why she had not

given food to the dog. That seems to have annoyed the victim

and she replied that she had only two hands and she had a lot

of work to do.       The accused   then said to have asked the

victim why she should speak in such loud voice to him. The

accused would say that he went inside and found one of the

rooms closed.       He knocked at the door and then he found

smoke coming out of the room and he felt the smell of

kerosene. Hearing his cries, his father came there and broke

open the door.       By that time, Dhanya had suffered a large

measure of burns.        She was removed to Medical College

Hospital, where she died. He would deny having demanded

money or any other article from the house of the victim. He

would also say that he managed to get his house surgency

done three years after the incident and he had entrusted a

letter written by Dhanya       to the investigating officer. He

Crl.Appeal.224/2006.
                                 8

denied having treated the victim cruelly at any point of time.

Finding that the accused        could not be   acquitted under

Section 232 Cr.P.C., he was asked to enter on his defence. He

chose to examine D.Ws.1 and 2.

             4.     The court below on an appreciation of the

evidence in the case came to the conclusion that there was

want of evidence to show that soon before the death occurred,

the victim was subjected to cruelty demanding dowry and

Section 304B of I.P.C. cannot be attracted to the facts of the

case. But he was found guilty of offence under Section 498A

of I.P.C. and conviction and sentence as already mentioned

followed.

             5.   Learned counsel   appearing for the appellant

pointed out that there is absolute want of evidence of a valid

marriage between the accused and the victim. In the absence

of any marriage, the very charge levelled against the appellant

under Section 498A of I.P.C. cannot stand. Learned counsel

Crl.Appeal.224/2006.
                                9

also pointed out that it could not be said that Section 498A of

I.P.C. is a cognate offence with Section 304B of I.P.C. or a

lesser offence compared to Section 304B of I.P.C.     According

to the petitioner, the two offences operate in two different

fields, and there is nothing in common. Apart from the legal

aspect, on facts also, according to the learned counsel, there

is nothing to show that the victim was treated        cruelly or

ill-treated demanding dowry or anything from her house.

             6. Learned counsel went on to point out that P.Ws.

1 and 2, who are the mother and sister of the victim, so also

P.W.7 who is an autorickshaw driver by profession and who is

related to the victim and P.W.6 also speaks about the demands

made by the accused.

             7. Learned counsel went on to point out that the

main allegation is that the accused demanded Rs.50,000/- for

doing his house surgency. According to the learned counsel,

it has to be noticed that the accused could do his house

Crl.Appeal.224/2006.
                                 10

surgency only in 2002 and this vital aspect has been omitted

to be taken note of and a wrong conclusion has been entered

into.

             8.    Learned Public Prosecutor on the other hand

contended that even assuming that there is no valid marriage,

and no offence under Section 304B of I.P.C. is attracted, there

is sufficient evidence to show that the victim was treated

cruelly. Therefore, the finding of the court below that Section

498A of I.P.C. is      attracted has to stand.    The evidence of

P.Ws.1, 2, 6 and 7 cannot be brushed aside and they have

spoken about the demand made by the accused.

             9. Learned Public Prosecutor went on to point out

that at any rate, these witnesses have been believed by the

court below and unless it is shown that the appreciation of

evidence is perverse, no grounds are made out to interfere.

             10. As initially noticed, the victim belonged to the

Hindu      community     and   the  accused     to the   Christian

Crl.Appeal.224/2006.
                                11

community. It has been held by this Court that if one of the

parties belonged to a religion other than Hindu religion, then

the marriage under the Hindu Marriage Act is not valid. Their

marriage became valid only when they get married under the

Special Marriage Act.       Even otherwise, no documents are

produced by the prosecution to show that there is a valid

marriage between the victim and the accused. The finding of

the court below that mere cohabitation is sufficient to attract

offence under Section 304B of I.P.C. is not valid.

             11. Section 304B of I.P.C. reads as follows:



      "304B. Dowry death.- (1) Where the death of a woman is
      caused by any burns or bodily injury or occurs otherwise
      than under normal circumstances within seven years of
      her marriage and it is shown that soon before her death
      she was subjected to cruelty or harassment by her
      husband or any relative of her husband for, or in
      connection with, any demand for dowry, such death shall
      be called "dowry death", and such husband or relative
      shall be deemed to have caused her death.

Crl.Appeal.224/2006.
                                   12

      Explanation.-For the purposes of this sub-section,
      "dowry" shall have the same meaning as in section 2 of
      the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961 (28 of 1961).
      2) Whoever commits dowry death shall be punished with
      imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than
      seven years but which may extend to imprisonment for
      life."




             12. The Explanation shows that for the purpose of

the sub-section dowry shall have the            same meaning as in

Section 2 of the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961. Then it becomes

necessary to       refer to the said provision.     Section 2 of the

Dowry Prohibition Act reads as follows:

             "2. Definition of 'dowry'.-    In this Act, "dowry"
      means any property or valuable security given or agreed
      to be given either directly or indirectly.
             (a) by one party to a marriage to the other party to
      the marriage; or
             (b) by the parent of either party to a marriage or
      by any other person, to either party to the marriage or to
      any other person,

Crl.Appeal.224/2006.
                                  13



      at or before or any time after the marriage in connection
      with the marriage of the said      parties, but does not
      include dower or mahr in the case of persons to whom
      the Muslim Personal Law (Shariat) applies.
             Explanation II- The expression "valuable security"
      has the same meaning as in Section 30 of the Indian
      Penal Code (45 of 1860)."

It is obvious that a mere reading of the two provisions will

show that the demand should be in relation to a marriage

before or after. The marriage therefore is a sine qua non for

offence under Section 304B of I.P.C. Mere cohabitation does

not lead to the conclusion that there is a valid marriage even

though long cohabitation between two persons and society

recognizing them as husband and wife may               give rise to

presumption of marriage. But that presumption may not have

any application to the facts of the present case. Fortunately,

the court below has not found the accused guilty of offence

under Section 304B of I.P.C., though for a different reason.

Crl.Appeal.224/2006.
                                  14

             13. The question then arises for consideration is

whether the finding of the court below that offence under

Section 498A of I.P.C. is attracted is justified. It is no doubt

true that P.W.1, the mother, P.W.2, the sister, P.W.6, a friend of

the victim and P.W.7, a relative of the victim speak about the

demand made by the parents of the accused for dowry and

also about the demand for Rs.50,000/- for doing house

surgency.        It is significant to notice that most of the

allegations are made against the parents of the accused.

P.Ws.1, 2, 6 and 7 claimed to have gone to the house of the

victim for the marriage though it may be noticed that P.Ws.1

and 2 have no case that P.W.7 had accompanied them. P.W.7

would claim to have only hearsay knowledge that the parents

of the accused had taunted        them and pointed out that, had

their son married from their caste, they would have got much

dowry.

Crl.Appeal.224/2006.
                                15

             14. The role of the accused is spoken to by P.Ws.1,

2 and 7 only. According to P.W.1 on a day the victim came

home and told her that she has come home for getting

Rs.50,000/- as demanded by the accused for doing his house

surgency.      One may here again recollect that according to

P.Ws.1 and 2 when they visited the house of the accused no

such demand was made. The accused has specifically put in

dispute the claim that the demand was made for doing house

surgency. The Investigating Officer has not bothered to find

out as to when the accused had done his house surgency. The

accused has a definite case that he could join only after 2002

that is after 3 years of the incident.    There was no attempt

from the side of the prosecution to ascertain the same and

that has caused prejudice to the accused.

             15. One has also to remember that the evidence of

P.W.1 is to the effect that she at no point of time came to

terms with the relationship between the victim and the

Crl.Appeal.224/2006.
                                 16

accused. She in no less terms deposes before court that she

did not like the marriage between the two.

             16. Therefore, the role attributed to the accused of

having demanded Rs.50,000/- is open to serious doubt.

             17. Apart from the above fact, as rightly pointed

out by the learned counsel for the appellant, there was no

charge under Section 498A of I.P.C. Section 498A of I.P.C. also

deals with a case where a husband or relatives of the husband

subject the victim to cruelty. There also marriage plays an

important role. As already noticed, there is no valid marriage

as per the records available between the victim and the

accused.       Moreover, a stray incident of cruelty cannot be

brought within the ambit of Section 498A of I.P.C. Further, the

ingredients of Section 498A and Section 304B of I.P.C. may

have some elements         in common but they operate in two

different fields. In fact, it may be remembered that P.W.10 had

in no less terms deposed that he was unable on the materials

Crl.Appeal.224/2006.
                                  17

made available to him to come to the conclusion that offence

under Section 304B of I.P.C. is attracted.       He confined his

opinion for the commission of offence under Section 498A of

I.P.C.

               18.   Apart from the fact that there is want of

evidence to show that there is continuous acts of cruelty by

the accused on the victim, which was likely to drive her to

commit suicide or to endanger her life so as to attract Section

498A of I.P.C. The only allegation against the accused is that

he asked the victim to get Rs.50,000/- from her house for

doing house surgency.        There is no allegation that he had

assaulted or ill-treated the victim in any manner. If that be so,

offence under Section 498A of I.P.C. cannot stand.

             In the result, this appeal is allowed, the conviction

and sentence passed by the court below for the offence under

Section 498A of I.P.C. are set aside and it is held that the

accused is not guilty of the offence alleged against him. He

Crl.Appeal.224/2006.
                             18

stands acquitted of the offence alleged against him. His bail

bond shall stand cancelled and he is set at liberty. If he has

paid the fine amount, the same shall be refunded to him.




                                           P. BHAVADASAN,
                                                JUDGE

sb.



