
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                      PRESENT:

                           THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE V.K.MOHANAN

             TUESDAY,THE 10TH DAY OF SEPTEMBER 2013/19TH BHADRA, 1935

                                           Crl.MC.No. 3900 of 2013 ()
                                           ------------------------------------

     AGAINST THE ORDER IN CC 876/2012 of JUDICIAL FIRST CLASS MAGISTRATE
                                             COURT-III, KOTTAYAM
                CRIEM NO.844/2012 OF THE KOTTAYAM WEST POLICE STATION
                                                      ---------------

PETITIONERS/ACCUSED 1 & 2:
--------------------------------------------

        1. CHANDRA BABU , AGED 50 YEARS,
            S/O. KUMARAN ACHARI,
            KARAONICA APARTMENTS NO.157/D1A1,
            MUTTAMBALAM VILLAGE, KOTTAYAM.

        2. SUKUMARAN, AGED 55 YEARS,
            S/O. KUMARAN ACHARI, ROHINI APARTMENTS, FLAT NO.6B,
            VATTIYOORKAVU, THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

            BY ADV. SRI.SREEJITH S.NAIR

RESPONDENTS/DEFACTO COMPLAINANT AND STATE :
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

        1. RAJALAKSHMI, AGED 43 YEARS,
            D/O. SANTHA LAKSHMI, CHITHIRA HOUSE, CHETTUPUZHA P.O.
            THRISSUR, PRESENTLY RESIDING AT H2, OLIVE YARD,
            WEXCO HOMES, PUTHANANGADI, KOTTAYAM-686 001.

        2. STATE OF KERALA,
            REPRESENTED BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR,
            HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM-682 031.

            R1 BY ADV. SRI.ANIL VINCENT
            R2 BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SMT.S.HYMA

            THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE HAVING COME UP FOR ADMISSION
            ON 10-09-2013, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE FOLLOWING:




PJ

Crl.MC.No. 3900 of 2013 ()
-----------------------------------

                                           APPENDIX

PETITIONER(S)' EXHIBITS
-------------------------------------

ANNEXURE 1 : COPY OF THE FIR IN CRIME NO.844/12.

ANNEXURE 2 : COPY OF THE FINAL REPORT IN CRIME NO.844/12.

ANNEXURE 3 : MEDIATION REPORT FILED BEFORE THE FAMILY COURT, KOTTAYAM.

ANNEXURE 4 : AFFIDAVIT DTD.29.8.13 OF THE 1ST RESPONDENT.

RESPONDENT(S)' EXHIBITS
---------------------------------------

                     NIL.


                                                         / TRUE COPY /


                                                         P.S. TO JUDGE

PJ


                     V.K.MOHANAN, J.
                  -------------------------------
                 Crl.M.C.No.3900 of 2013
                  -------------------------------
      Dated this the 10th day of September, 2013.


                          O R D E R


       The above petition is filed under Section 482 of the

Criminal Procedure Code (for short 'Cr.P.C.') at the

instance of the petitioners, who are accused Nos.1 and 2 in

C.C.No.876/2012 of the Judicial First Class Magistrate

Court-III, Kottayam, which is a case instituted upon the

police report [in Crime No.844/12 of Kottayam West Police

Station] for the offences punishable under Section 498 A

r/w 34 of I.P.C. with a prayer to quash Annexure 1 FIR and

Annexure 2 final report registered by the Kottayam West

Police Station against the petitioners and the entire

proceedings now pending trial C.C.No.876/2012 before

JFCM court-III, Kottayam, as the matter is settled out of

court.

       2.    The allegation in the above case is that the 1st

Crl.M.C.No.3900 of 2013
                              2

petitioner after having married the de facto complainant,

subjected her to physical and mental cruelties by

demanding more dowry. Now, the case of the petitioners is

that the matter is settled out of court through mediation

and now the spouses are living together as husband and

wife with their children and to prove the settlement

through mediation, Annexure 3 Mediation report is

produced. Besides the above, the 1st respondent/de facto

complainant had sworn into Annexure 4 affidavit, stating

that she has no objection in quashing the proceedings

pending against the petitioners.

         3. Heard the learned counsel for the petitioners as

well as the 1st respondent. I have also heard the learned

Public Prosecutor.

         4.       The learned counsel for the petitioners

submitted that during the pendency of the above case, the

matter is settled amicably between the parties to the

dispute which is the subject matter of the above case.

Therefore, the continuation of the proceedings in the above

Crl.M.C.No.3900 of 2013
                               3

case is abuse of process of law and proceedings.

         5.    The learned counsel for the 1st respondent who

on the basis of specific instruction received from the

respondent submitted that the above respondent, who is

the de facto complainant does not intend to proceed any

further against the petitioners and she has no grievance

against them.

         6.    I    have carefully  considered     the above

submissions of the respective counsel. I have verified the

documents and materials produced along with the above

petition. In the given facts and circumstances of the case

and especially in the light of the settlement arrived

between the parties to the dispute, the learned Public

Prosecutor has also no objection in allowing the above

petition.

         7. Having regard to the facts and circumstances

involved in the case, it can be seen that the offences

involved in the above case are only under Section 498 A r/w

34 of I.P.C. which are more or less personal in nature and

Crl.M.C.No.3900 of 2013
                                  4

no public interest is involved. It is pertinent to note that

though such offences are involved, the real parties to the

dispute approached this Court after having amicably

settled the matter.       From the submission made by the

counsel for the 1st respondent, it appears to me that the de

facto complainant has no further grievance against the

petitioners/accused in the light of the settlement arrived by

them. In this juncture, it is relevant to note the decisions of

the Honourable Apex Court reported in Gian Singh v.

State of Punjab [2012(4) KLT 108(SC)]               and Jitendra

Raghuvanshi and Others v. Babita Raghuvanshi and

another [2013 (1) KLD 817 (SC)]. In Gian Singh's case, the

Supreme Court has held as follows:-

                "57. The position that emerges from the
         above discussion can be summarised thus:
         the power of the High Court in quashing a
         criminal proceeding or FIR or complaint in
         exercise of its inherent jurisdiction is distinct
         and different from the power given to a
         criminal court for compounding the offences
         under S.320 of the Code. Inherent power is of
         wide plenitude with no statutory limitation
         but it has to be exercised in accord with the
         guideline engrafted in such power viz;(i) to

Crl.M.C.No.3900 of 2013
                                    5

         secure the ends of justice or (ii) to prevent
         abuse of the process of any Court. In what
         cases power to quash the criminal proceeding
         or complaint or F.I.R. may be exercised where
         the offender and victim have settled their
         dispute would depend on the facts and
         circumstances of each case and no category
         can be prescribed."

It is further held as follows:-

         ".........  But   the   criminal   cases   having
         overwhelmingly and pre-dominatingly civil
         flavour stand on different footing for the
         purposes      of   quashing,    particularly the
         offences arising from commercial, financial,
         mercandile, civil, partnership or such like
         transactions or the offences arising out of
         matrimony relating to dowry etc. or the
         family disputes where the wrong is basically
         private or personal in nature and the parties
         have resolved their entire dispute.       In this
         category of cases, High Court may quash
         criminal proceedings if in its view, because of
         the compromise between the offender and
         victim, the possibility of conviction is remote
         and bleak and continuation of criminal case
         would put accused to great oppression and
         prejudice and extreme injustice would be
         caused to him by not quashing the criminal
         case despite      full and complete settlement
         and compromise with the victim........"

Further, in        Jitendra Raghuvanshi's case,           the Apex

Court has held as follows:-

                 "7. It is not in dispute that matrimonial
         disputes have been on considerable increase

Crl.M.C.No.3900 of 2013
                                    6

         in   recent     times   resulting   in  filing  of
         complaints under Sections 498A and 406 of
         I.P.C. not only against the husband but also
         against the relatives of the husband.         The
         question is when such matters are resolved
         either by the wife agreeing to rejoin the
         matrimonial home or by mutual settlement of
         other pending disputes for which both the
         sides approached the High Court and jointly
         prayed      for   quashing    of   the   criminal
         proceedings or the FIR or complaint by the
         wife under Sections 498A and 406 of I.P.C.,
         whether the prayer can be declined on the
         sole ground that since the offences are non-
         compoundable under Section 320 of the
         Code, it would be impermissible for the court
         to quash the criminal proceedings or FIR or
         complaint.
                8. It is not in dispute that in the case on
         hand subsequent to the filing of the criminal
         complaint under Sections 498A and 406 of
         IPC and Sections 3 and 4 of the Dowry
         Prohibition Act, 1961, with the help and
         intervention of family members, friends and
         well-wishers, the parties concerned have
         amicably      settled   their   differences   and
         executed a compromise/settlement. Pursuant
         thereto,     the   appellants   filed   the   said
         compromise before the Trial Court with a
         request to place the same on record and to
         drop the criminal proceedings against the
         appellants herein. It is also not in dispute
         that in additional to the mutual settlement
         arrived at by the parties, respondent/-wife
         has also filed an affidavit stating that she did
         not wish to pursue the criminal proceedings
         against the appellants and fully supported the
         contents of the settlement deed.         It is the
         grievance of the appellants that no only the
         Trial Court rejected such prayer of the

Crl.M.C.No.3900 of 2013
                                   7

         parties but also the High Court failed toe
         exercise its jurisdiction under Section 482 of
         the Code only on the ground that the criminal
         proceedings relate to the offences punishable
         under Sections 498A and 406 of IPC which
         are non-compoundable in nature."
                "12. In our view, it is the duty of the
         Courts to encourage genuine settlements of
         matrimonial disputes, particularly, when the
         same are on considerable increase. Even if
         the offences are non-compoundable, if they
         relate to matrimonial disputes and the Court
         is satisfied that the parties have settled the
         same amicably and without any pressure, we
         hold that for the purpose of securing ends of
         justice, Section 320 of the Code would not be
         a bar to the exercise of power of quashing of
         FIR, complaint or the subsequent criminal
         proceedings.
                13.    There has been an outburst of
         matrimonial disputes in recent times.         The
         institution of marriage occupies an important
         place and it has an important role to play in
         the society. Therefore, every effort should be
         made in the interest of the individuals in
         order to enable them to settle down in life
         and live peacefully.      If the parties ponder
         over their defaults and terminate their
         disputes amicably by mutual agreement
         instead of fighting it out in a Court of law, in
         order      to  do  complete     justice   in  the
         matrimonial matters, the Courts should be
         less hesitant in exercising its extraordinary
         jurisdiction. It is trite to state that the power
         under Section 482 should be exercised
         sparingly and with circumspection only when
         the Court is convinced, on the basis of
         material      on record,    that   allowing   the
         proceedings to continue would be an abuse of
         the process of the Court or that the ends of

Crl.M.C.No.3900 of 2013
                                 8

         justice require that the proceedings ought to
         be quashed."

Considering the particular facts and circumstances in this

case, it can be seen further that the criminal proceedings

are initiated consequent to the matrimonial dispute arose

among the parties and both the disputes are now amicably

settled between the parties. According to me, in the light

of the facts and circumstances involved in the present case

and particularly in view of the settlement arrived in the

present case, the dictum laid in the above decisions will be

squarely applicable in the present case. According to me,

as the parties to the dispute settled the issues amicably, it

is the duty of this Court to promote such settlement,

instead of compelling the parties to go on with the dispute.

It is pertinent to note that since the matter is settled out of

court, in the event of proceeding with the trial, there would

not have any fruitful prosecution, resulting the conviction

of the accused, rather the net result would be sheer waste

of judicial time and abuse of process of the court and

Crl.M.C.No.3900 of 2013
                                 9

proceedings.          Thus, according to me, following the

decisions cited supra, this Crl.M.C.can be allowed granting

the relief as sought for.

         In the result, this Crl.M.C. is allowed, quashing

Annexure 1 FIR and Annexure 2 final report and all further

proceedings         pending   against   the petitioners  in

C.C.No.876/2012 before JFCM court-III, Kottayam, in

Crime No. 844/12 of Kottayam West Police Station.

                                                  Sd/-
                                           V.K.MOHANAN,
                                               Judge
ami/
                           //True copy//

                           P.A. to Judge



