
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                      PRESENT:

                          THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE P.BHAVADASAN

            TUESDAY, THE 19TH DAY OF NOVEMBER 2013/28TH KARTHIKA, 1935

                                           CRL.A.No. 325 of 2006 ( )
                                         ----------------------------------------

      AGAINST THE ORDER/JUDGMENT IN SC 236/2005 of ADDL.SESSIONS COURT
                                (ADHOC)-II, KOTTAYAM DATED 23.01.2006

APPELLANT(S)/ACCUSED:
---------------------------------------

            PADMARAJAN @ RAJU, S/O.RJAGOPALAN,
            KARUTHEDATHU VEEDU, VALIYAPARA BHAGOM
            MANNAKKANADU KARA, KURICHITHANAM.

            BY ADVS.SRI.P.VIJAYA BHANU
                          SRI.P.M.RAFIQ

RESPONDENT(S)/COMPLAINANT AND STATE:
-------------------------------------------------------------------

            STATE OF KERALA,
            REPRESENTED BY THE PUBLIC PROSECUTOR,
            HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM.


           BY GOVERNMENT PLEADER, SRI.DHANESH MATHEW MANJOORAN


            THIS CRIMINAL APPEAL HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD ON 19-11-2013, THE
            COURT ON THE SAME DAY DELIVERED THE FOLLOWING:




DG


                      P. BHAVADASAN, J.

                   ....................................

                Crl.Appeal No. 325 of 2006

              ...............................................

       Dated this the 19th day of November, 2013

                            JUDGMENT

  A short lived marriage between the accused and the

  victim by name Manju ended up by landing the accused

  in the dock facing prosecution for the offences

  punishable under Section 498A and 306 of the Indian

  Penal Code.




2.It would appear to be a case of love lost after marriage.

  As per the prosecution allegations, the accused and the

  victim developed a fancy for each other ending in their

  marriage on 09.11.1999.              On 15.01.2001, the victim

  committed suicide in the matrimonial house.                      The

  prosecution allegation is that it was due to the mental

  torture meted out by the accused that the victim was

  constrained to take the extreme step.                      To be more

  precise the allegation is that the accused did not shower

  the love which he showed earlier and the victim

  suspected that he had illicit relationship with a

Crl.Appeal No. 325 of 2006

                              2



   neighbourhood lady namely, Rema. Further allegation

   is that the accused did not cherish the relationship

   between him and victim. A short while after marriage,

   the victim almost remained neglected and there was a

   mediation talk in which a settlement was reached. As a

   part of the compromise the victim was to stay in her

   house for a week and thereafter the accused was go

   and fetch her back. The accused did not do so. The

   mediators questioned his conduct. He replied that he

   had no intention to continue the marital relationship but

   in order to honour the undertaking given by mediation,

   he would bring back his wife.      Even after she was

   brought back, neglect and disinclination to have

   matrimonial life continued, ultimately, resulting in the

   victim committing suicide.




3.P.W.1, is the maternal grandfather of the accused laid

   Ext.P1 First Information Statement.    P.W.10 recorded

   the statement given by P.W.1 and as per that statement

Crl.Appeal No. 325 of 2006

                              3



   registered crime as per Ext.P1(a) F.I.R. P.W.10 and 12

   took over investigation. Inquest was conducted and

   Ext.P2 is the inquest report. P.W.6 conducted autopsy

   and furnished Ext.P3 certificate.     P.W.10 prepared

   Ext.P5 scene mahazar.      He seized Ext.P7 marriage

   register, which showed that the marriage between the

   victim and the accused.      He recorded statement of

   witnesses, completed investigation and laid charge

   before court.




4.The court, before which, final report was laid took

   cognizance of the offences and finding that the offences

   are exclusively triable by a court of Sessions, the case

   was committed to Sessions Court, Kottayam. The said

   court made over the case to Additional Sessions Court,

   Fast Track Court, (Adhoc)-II, Kottayam for trial and

   disposal. The latter court on receipt of records and on

   appearance of the accused framed charges for the

   offences punishable under Sections 306 and 498A of

Crl.Appeal No. 325 of 2006

                              4



   IPC, to which, the accused pleaded not guilty and

   claimed to be tried.       The prosecution, therefore,

   examined P.Ws.1 to 12 and had Exts.P1 to P7 marked.

   M.Os 1 to 3 series were got identified and marked.




5.After the close of prosecution evidence, and accused

   was questioned under Section 313 Cr.P.C. He denied all

   the incriminating circumstances brought out in evidence

   against him and maintained that he is innocent. Finding

   that the accused could not be acquitted under Section

   232 Cr.P.C. He was asked to enter on his defence. He

   chose to adduce no evidence




6.The court below having been considerably impressed by

   the testimony of P.Ws.2, 3, 4 and 7 and also the

   contents of M.O.3 came to the conclusion that the victim

   was severely and mentally harassed and that had driven

   the victim to commit suicide. Though, the court below

   was of the opinion that there was no evidence of

Crl.Appeal No. 325 of 2006

                               5



   instigation, there was ample evidence to prove the

   cruelty meted out by the victim and therefore found the

   accused guilty of the offence under Section 498A of IPC

   and sentenced him to undergo rigorous imprisonment

   for three years and set off as per law was allowed.




7.The learned counsel appearing for the appellant

   assailed the findings on several grounds. The learned

   counsel went on to find out that except for a vague

   hunch or doubt as the case may be about the illicit

   relationship, which the accused is alleged to have had

   with one Rema, there is nothing else to show that there

   was any rift between the couple. Even that was only a

   suspicion and there was no evidence to show that in

   reality there was any such relationship. May be that,

   the accused was less affectionate to the victim and the

   victim who expected the same quantity and amount of

   love as before did not get that and might have been

   frustrated or in other words the learned counsel pointed

Crl.Appeal No. 325 of 2006

                                  6



   out that she might have been craving for more love and

   affection. When she did not get the same, she might

   have committed suicide but that is far from saying that

   she was driven to commit suicide due to the mental

   harassment meted out by the accused.          The learned

   counsel appearing for the appellant pointed out that the

   evidence shows that there was mediation talks in which

   the father and the mother of the victim were the main

   participants.      Surprisingly, enough neither of them is

   examined before court so as to ascertain what actually

   transpired during the mediation and what was the

   occasion and necessity for the mediation. According to

   the learned counsel even assuming all that the

   prosecution says is true and that it is not sufficient to

   attract Section 498A of IPC.




8.The learned Public Prosecutor on the other hand pointed

   out that the evidence is clear to the effect that the

   things were not so rosy and colourful as before, after

Crl.Appeal No. 325 of 2006

                                7



   the marriage between the victim and the accused.

   Reality took the place of fantasy and that turned out a

   shock for the deceased. It reached the level that the

   victim was almost ignored and that created frustration

   in the victim. Added to that was the illicit relationship

   which the accused had with one Rema, who is a

   neighbour. The learned Public Prosecutor went on to

   point out that no wife can tolerate such a relationship

   and if after much objection and effort if the husband

   continue to insist with the relationship and the wife is

   driven to take the extreme step it can be nothing but

   mental cruelty. The frustration and the crave for love is

   well reflected in M.O.3 letter which is alleged to have

   been written by the victim to the accused. The learned

   Public     Prosecutor   pointed  out   that  the   cruelty

   contemplated under Section 498A of IPC          need not

   necessarily be physical cruelty and it would be mental

   cruelty as well. The conduct of the accused was such

   that it had given rise a feeling in the mind of the victim

Crl.Appeal No. 325 of 2006

                              8



   that she was no longer wanted by him and that in fact

   he wanted to get rid of her. The evidence of P.Ws.2, 4

   and 7 are clear to this effect and the court below was

   therefore perfectly justified in holding that offence

   under Section 498A IPC is made out.




9.Surprisingly in the case on hand there is no allegation

   that there was complaint of lack of beauty or

   inadequate dowry. The only grievance appears to be

   that the love which the husband had before marriage

   did not continue after marriage and it is also attributed

   that he developed an illicit relationship with a

   neighbour. The victim strongly doubted that the alleged

   illicit relationship with Rema was the cause for her

   agony and finding that the accused had no intention to

   sever the relationship.




10.It is true that P.Ws.2, 3, 4 and 7, who speak about the

   so called relationship between the accused and a

Crl.Appeal No. 325 of 2006

                              9



   neighbour, Rema. In fact P.W.7 would say that on one

   occasion when she stayed in the matrimonial house of

   the victim the accused pointed out at Rema and told

   P.W.7 that he had been in love with her.




11.P.W.2 and 3 speak about the difference of opinions that

   developed between the couple and the situation that

   arose which necessitated mediation by them. Going by

   their evidence the the cause from the rift was the

   suspected relationship with Rema. A compromise was

   reached whereby the couple agreed to bury the past

   and for easing the tension, it was decided that Manju,

   the victim, may go and reside in her house for a week.

   Thereafter the accused was to go and fetch her back.

   P.Ws.2 and 3 say that after one week had elapsed, the

   accused has showed no inclination to bring back his

   wife. His conduct was questioned by them. He replied

   that he had no intention to maintain the relationship but

   in order to honour the undertaking he would bring back

Crl.Appeal No. 325 of 2006

                               10



   his wife and she was brought back. P.W.3 in fact goes

   to the extent of saying that he and P.W.2 had on a

   particular day in order to verify the allegation of illicit

   relationship with Rema kept a watch and they happened

   to locate the accused returning from the house of Rema

   at about 10 p.m. P.W.4, is the wife of P.W.3. She claims

   to be a close friend of the victim. According to her the

   accused had relationship with neighbour Rema and also

   that her definite case is that the accused, two days prior

   to the date of incident while going out with his uncle,

   had cautioned the victim that when he returns home

   she shall not be found there. This, according to P.W.4

   had caused considerable pain to the victim.       It was

   because of that reason according to P.W.4, the victim

   had committed suicide.




12.P.W.7, is the sister of the victim. As per her testimony

   she was given to understand that it was out of

   vengeance that the accused had married the victim.

Crl.Appeal No. 325 of 2006

                                 11



   One fails to understand what is meant by P.W.7 she

   says that it was with a vengeance he married the

   victim. It remains unanswered. P.W.7 says that the

   victim was in the habit of confiding everything to her

   mother and her mother was in the know of all that

   transpired in the matrimonial house.




13.One cannot omit to note that in the mediation talks

   spoken to by P.Ws.2 and 3, the main participants from

   the side of the victim were her parents. It might be

   noticed here that the victim was the daughter of the

   mother of P.W.7 in her first husband, who left her and

   then she had remarried the father of P.W.7. It is strange

   to note that the prosecution did not feel it necessary to

   examine either         the father or the mother who had

   participated in the mediation talks and who could have

   thrown considerable light regarding the real cause for

   the suicide.        At any rate, going by the evidence

   furnished by P.W.7, the victim confided in her mother

Crl.Appeal No. 325 of 2006

                              12



   and if that be so her mother would have been the best

   person to enlighten the court as to what really

   transpired between the two.




14.The court below has extracted the contents of M.O3 a

   writing said to have been made by the victim which is

   undated, un-addressed and un-mailed. Assuming it is

   admissible in evidence and its contents can be looked

   into, there is nothing to show that the victim suspected

   the accused having any illicit relationship with Rema.

   The writing though a lengthy one contains time without

   number her complaints for not getting the sufficient love

   and affection and attention at the hands of her husband.

   She also remembers the days before marriage when

   they were in love. What is significant is that there is no

   accusation made against the accused of having done

   anything to cause any mental harassment or cruelty or

   ill-treatment as contemplated under the provisions of

   law.

Crl.Appeal No. 325 of 2006

                              13



15.At the end of the day all that one has, is a vague hunch

   or even assuming that there is some substance. There

   is only the allegation of the accused having a fancy for

   his neighbour Rema and also that he had neglected his

   wife.




16.There is some evidence in this case to show that the

   victim was keen to go for employment.         She was a

   qualified nurse. It would appears from the records that

   after marriage she worked for two months in a hospital

   and she had to resign due to the compulsion of the

   accused. The accused was of the view that since there

   was nobody at home she needs to remain at home. It

   was also come out in evidence that the victim was very

   keen to go to Delhi on employment, which was also not

   to the liking of the accused. Frustration could have well

   creeped in that account also.




17.Whatever that be, the evidence is totally insufficient to

Crl.Appeal No. 325 of 2006

                                14



   come to the conclusion that the conduct of the accused

   is such that it amounts to cruelty even assuming mental

   cruelty which would be sufficient to attract Section 498A

   IPC.




   The result is that this court is unable to uphold the

   findings of the court below in this regard. This appeal is

   allowed. The conviction and sentence passed by the

   court below for the offence under Section 498A of IPC

   against the accused is set aside, he is acquitted of the

   said charges. His bail bond, shall stand cancelled and

   he is set at liberty. If he has paid fine amount, the same

   shall be refunded to him.




                                                  sd/-
                                    (P. BHAVADASAN, JUDGE)
AMV/


                                      /TRUE COPY/




                                      P.A.TO JUDGE



