
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                      PRESENT:

                          THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE P.BHAVADASAN

               TUESDAY,THE 22ND DAY OF OCTOBER 2013/30TH ASWINA, 1935

                                           CRL.A.No. 351 of 2003 ( )
                                            ----------------------------------
  CC 322/1999 of JUDICIAL FIRST CLASS MAGISTGRATE COURT I, THAMARASSERY .
                                                         ..........

APPELLANT(S)/COMPLAINANT:
------------------------------------------------

            SAFIYA, D/O.UNNIMOYI, OMASSERY VEEDU,
            THIRUVAMBADY AMSOM DESOM.

            BY ADV. SRI.K.A.SALIL NARAYANAN

RESPONDENT(S)/ACCUSED AND STATE:
----------------------------------------------------------------

        1. MUHAMMED, S/O.BEERAN KUTTY,
            KARIMBILIKKADU VEEDU, KODIYATHU AMSOM.

        2. KADEEJA, W/O.SEETHY, MULASSERY VEEDU,
            PANNIKKODE.

        3. AYISHA, W/O.B.P.MUHAMMED,
            KARIAMOLIKKAD VEEDU.

        4. STATE OF KERALA, REP.BY PUBLIC
            PROSECUTOR, HIGH COURT OF KERALA.

            R1-3 BY ADVS. SRI.K.M.FIROZ
                                  SMT.M.SHAJNA
            R4 BY GOVT.PLEADER SRI.DHANESH MATHEW MANJOORAN


            THIS CRIMINAL APPEAL HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD ON 22-10-2013,
            THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY DELIVERED THE FOLLOWING:


tss


                      P.BHAVADASAN, J.
              ---------------------------------------
                 Crl. Appeal No.351 OF 2003
              ---------------------------------------
          Dated this the 22nd day of October, 2013.


                        J U D G M E N T


     Four persons were prosecuted for the offences punishable

under Sections 406, 498A read with Section 34 of Indian Penal

Code. Among them, the 4th accused died during the pendency of

the proceedings and the charge against him stood abated.

     2. The proceedings originated on a private complaint and

cognizance of which was taken by the court below after following

necessary procedures.    The 1st accused is the husband of the

complainant, the 2nd accused is the wife of the 4th accused and 3rd

accused is the mother-in-law of the complainant. The allegation

was that at the time of marriage, 25 sovereigns of gold

ornaments and a sum of Rs.25,000/- were given as dowry which

was misappropriated by the accused persons.            The further

allegation is that right from the day of marriage, the accused

persons have been ill treating the victim and that made her life in

the matrimonial house miserable. The demand to bring more

Crl. Appeal No.351/2003          2


money was very frequently made and when the complainant was

unable to heed to the demand, she was brutally beaten. While

her husband, the 1st accused, was employed abroad, the other

accused ill treated her and ultimately on 29.10.1999, the

complainant left to her house.

       3.      On appearance of the accused, all formalities were

complied with. Proceedings were taken and charge was laid for

offences punishable under Sections 406, 498A read with Section

34 IPC. The accused persons pleaded not guilty. Therefore, the

complainant examined PWs 1 to 4 and had Ext.P1 marked. The

defence had Exts.D1 to D10 marked through the complainant.

       4. The court below, on an appreciation of the evidence in

the case, came to the conclusion that the complainant had

miserably failed to establish the averments made in the

complaint and there is nothing to show that the money and gold

ornaments alleged to have been given were in fact given to the

accused persons and that there were no independent convincing

evidence to show that PW1 was ill treated.       Accordingly, the

accused were acquitted. The said acquittal is challenged in this

Crl. Appeal No.351/2003           3


appeal.

       5. Learned counsel appearing for the appellant-complainant

contended that the evidence of PWs 1 and 2 are sufficient to

show the ill treatment meted out to PW1 in her matrimonial

house and there is no reason to disbelieve them. PW1, the victim

has given a vivid description of what had transpired in the

matrimonial house and the frequent beating she received at the

hands of the 1st accused as well as other accused when she

refused to bring more money and gold as demanded by the

accused persons. PW1, to a considerable extent, gets support

from the evidence of PW2 who is the paternal uncle of PW1.

PW4, the brother of the victim also states about the ill treatment

meted out to the complainant. Learned counsel went on to point

out that the court below was not justified in discarding the

evidence of PWs 1, 2 and 4 and searching for documentary

evidence regarding the ill treatment etc. Learned counsel went

on to point out that the offences have been made out by the

accused persons.

       6.     Learned counsel appearing for the party respondents

Crl. Appeal No.351/2003           4


contended that the court below has analysed the evidence in

considerable detail and has come to the conclusion that there is

absolute want of evidence to show that at the time of marriage,

25 sovereigns of gold ornaments and Rs.25,000/- was paid to

1st accused as claimed by the complainant. Learned counsel drew

the attention of this Court to Ext.D7 which is an order in a

proceedings initiated by the complainant for return of gold

ornaments and money alleged to have been given at the time of

marriage.          The court found against the complainant and

dismissed the petition. That would show, according the learned

counsel, that the claim now made regarding the gold and money

is false.

       7. As regards the ill treatment meted out to the victim, it is

contended by the learned counsel appearing for the party

respondents that no independent evidence has been adduced and

if what PW1 says is to be believed, she must have suffered

severe injuries and she must have taken treatment. There is

nothing to show that she had ever taken treatment for any hurt

caused to her as a result of the act committed by the accused

Crl. Appeal No.351/2003          5


persons. Learned counsel also pointed out that the couple have

three children in the wedlock and none of them were examined to

prove the claim of PW1.

       8. Relying on Exts.D2 and D3 letters, it was contended by

the learned counsel for the party respondents that those letters

written by PW1 and the daughter of the couple would clearly

show that the ill treatment claimed by PW1 is totally false. These

aspects were properly appreciated by the court below and there

is no reason to interfere with the findings, it is contended.

       9. It is no doubt true that PW1, the victim gives a vivid

description of the ill treatment meted out to her in the

matrimonial house right from the day of marriage. If she is to be

believed, she was being thrashed almost every day and she was

being harassed demanding more money and gold. PW1 had to

admit that she initiated proceedings before the appropriate court

for return of gold ornaments and money alleged to have been

given at the time of marriage.          It was contested by the

respondents therein and ultimately after taking evidence, it was

found that there was no evidence for the claim made by PW1 that

Crl. Appeal No.351/2003          6


at the time of marriage 25 sovereigns of gold ornaments and

Rs.25,000/- was paid to the 1st accused and the petition was

dismissed. Ext.D7 is the relevant document. Like in Ext.D7, here

also except for the interested testimony of PW1, there is

absolutely no evidence to show that the claim regarding gold and

money made by PW1 is true. In the light of Ext.D7, the burden is

heavy on the complainant to show that what she says is true.

The court below was therefore justified in placing reliance on

Ext.D7 to come to the conclusion that there is no evidence

regarding the gold ornaments and money said to have been given

at the time of marriage.

       10. As regards the ill treatment, it is no doubt true that

PW2, the paternal uncle of the victim and PW4, the brother of the

victim, to a certain extent, support the evidence of PW1.

However, it needs to be noticed that their information regarding

ill treatment is what is alleged to have told to them by PW1.

They do not speak about any incident which has been witnessed

by them. Neither the children of the couple nor any neighbours

have been examined to establish the so called ill treatment said

Crl. Appeal No.351/2003            7


to have been meted out to PW1.           It is here that, as rightly

pointed out by the learned counsel for the party respondents,

Exts.D2 and D3 assume importance.              Ext.D2 is a letter

admittedly written by PW1 to her husband. A reading of that

letter would belie her claim of ill treatment. Equally loving is the

letter written by the daughter which is produced as Ext.D3, which

is not disputed by PW1. If these two letters are read, it becomes

difficult to accept the plea of the complainant that she was

constantly ill treated demanding more and more dowry.

       11. There is yet another aspect. When the 1st accused is

alleged to have taken PW1 to her house and left her there on the

last occasion, going by the complaint, the 1st accused is alleged

to have told Basheer, the brother of the victim that unless

payments are made, she would remain in her house. One would

have expected the complainant to examine the said Basheer.

But, for the reasons best known to the complainant, that was not

done.

       12. It was the above circumstances which made the court

below to come to the conclusion that the claim regarding giving

Crl. Appeal No.351/2003             8


of gold and money at the time of marriage is not established and

that the story of ill treatment has also not been proved. It must

be remembered that the court below which had the opportunity

to watch the demeanour of the witnesses has found it difficult to

accept the uncorroborated testimony of PW1 regarding the ill

treatment.         As far as gold and money are concerned, that is

covered by Ext.D7 document.

       13.      The court below has given convincing and cogent

reason as to why the evidence of PW1 is insufficient to come to

the conclusion that there was cruelty and breach of trust. Even

assuming that a different view is possible, this Court should

remind itself that it is sitting in appeal against acquittal and if the

view taken by the court below is a possible view, it will not be

justified in interfering in appeal.

       In the result, this appeal is without merits and it is liable to

be dismissed. I do so.




                                         P.BHAVADASAN
                                               JUDGE


smp



