
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                              PRESENT:

                 THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE P.BHAVADASAN

   WEDNESDAY, THE 6TH DAYOF NOVEMBER 2013/15TH KARTHIKA, 1935

                                     CRL.A.No. 1611 of 2006
                                        ---------------------------

     SC NO.239/2005 OF ADDITIONAL SESSIONS COURT (ADHOC) NO.1,
                                          THODUPUZHA
                                                  ....
  CP NO.2/2005 OF CHIEF JUDICIAL MAGISTRATE COURT, THODUPUZHA
                                                  ....

     APPELLANT(S)/ACCUSED NO.1:
     --------------------------------------------------

      RAJU,S/O.MANI,
      THOTTIPARAMBIL VEEDU, VENGALOOR KARA,
      KUMARAMANGALAM VILLAGE.

      BY SRI.GRASHIOUS KURIAKOSE,SENIOR ADVOCATE
      ADV.SRI.RAJESH RAJAN

     RESPONDENT(S)/COMPLAINANT:
     ----------------------------------------------------

      STATE OF KERALA,
      REPRESENTED BY THE PUBLIC PROSECUTOR,
      HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM.

      BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SRI. DHANESH MATHEW MANJOORAN


      THIS CRIMINAL APPEAL HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD
      ON 06-11-2013, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY DELIVERED
      THE FOLLOWING:

Kss


                       P. BHAVADASAN, J.
                - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                Crl.Appeal. No. 1611 of 2006
                 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
           Dated this the 6th day of November, 2013.

                            JUDGMENT


          A son and his mother were prosecuted for the

offences under Sections 498A and 306 read with Section 34

of Indian Penal Code. After trial, the mother was acquitted of

the charge and the first accused was found guilty of offence

under Section 498A I.P.C. He was acquitted of offence under

Section 306 of I.P.C.      He was therefore        convicted and

sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for one year and

to pay fine of Rs.3000/-, in default, to undergo simple

imprisonment for six months.

          2. The marriage between the first accused and the

victim, namely, Sreedevi, was solemnized on 9.6.2002. The

couple had a child in the wedlock. The allegation is that the

accused   persons    were    engaged       in   the business  of

confectioneries and for that they have to rise early in the

Crl.Appeal.1611/2006.
                                 2

morning every day, to which the victim was not accustomed

to.    It is alleged that there used to be quarrels between the

first accused and the victim and the first accused used to

assault her and ultimately on 3.3.2004 the victim consumed

poison and she passed away. Ext.P1 was lodged by P.W.1 who

is none other than the uncle of the first accused. It was

recorded by P.W.14 and he registered crime as per Ext.P9 FIR.

Inquest was conducted by the Tahsildar concerned and after

inquest, the body was sent for autopsy.         P.W.9 conducted

autopsy and prepared Ext.P6 report. Statements of witnesses

were recorded by P.W.14 and after investigation he laid charge

before court.

             3. The court, before which final report was laid took

cognizance of the offences.       Finding that the offences are

exclusively triable by a court of Sessions, the said court

committed the case to Sessions Court, Thodupuzha. The said

court made over the case to Additional District and Sessions

Crl.Appeal.1611/2006.
                                3

Court (Adhoc-I), Thodupuzha for trial and disposal.

             4. The latter court, on receipt of records and on

appearance of the accused framed charge for the offences

punishable under Section 498A       and 306 of I.P.C. To the

charge, the accused pleaded not guilty and claimed to be tried.

The prosecution, therefore, had P.Ws.1 to 15 examined and

had Exts.P1 to P10 marked. After the close of the prosecution

evidence, the accused were questioned under Section 313

Cr.P.C.      They denied all the incriminating circumstances

brought out in evidence against them and maintained that

they were innocent. Finding that the accused could not be

acquitted under Section 232 Cr.P.C., they were asked to enter

on their defence. They chose to adduce no evidence.

             5.    The court below presumably based on the

evidence of P.Ws.8 and 12 and 15, who are neighbours of the

first accused, came to the conclusion that the first accused

used to ill-treat the victim and as a result of which she was

Crl.Appeal.1611/2006.
                                  4

driven to commit suicide. Accordingly, he was found guilty of

thy,e offence under Section 498A of I.P.C., and sentenced him

as already mentioned.

             6. Learned Senior Counsel Shri. Gracious Kuriakose

appearing for the appellant contended that the evidence of

P.Ws.8, 12 and 15, even if taken on the face value, is

insufficient to attract the offence under Section 498A I.P.C.

According to him, none of them had direct knowledge about

the incident as spoken to by them and their information is

only hearsay.        The evidence of P.W.8 is to the effect that she

was told by the late victim that she was used to be beaten by

the first accused . The evidence of P.W. 12 is to the effect that

there were quarrels between the couple and on one occasion

he saw the first accused taking the victim inside the house.

As far as P.W.15 is concerned, her evidence is to the effect

that she saw the victim crying and the victim is alleged to

have shown him by signs that she was slapped by the first

Crl.Appeal.1611/2006.
                                5

accused. These are the items of evidence which, according

to the learned Senior Counsel, persuaded the court below to

come to the conclusion that there was cruelty meted out to

the victim by the first accused.     It is significant to notice,

according to the learned Senior Counsel, the father, mother

and brother of the victim did not support the           case of

ill-treatment and cruelty.    Had there been ill-treatment or

harassment of the victim, the most competent persons who

would have come to know about the same were her parents

and the brother. Except for the stray statements made by

P.Ws.8, 12 and 15, there is no acceptable evidence to come to

the conclusion that the victim was treated cruelly so as to

attract the offence.

             7. According to the learned Public Prosecutor, the

evidence of P.Ws.8, 12 and 15        is sufficient to show the

ill-treatment meted out by the accused and that is sufficient to

attract offence under Section 498A of I.P.C. According to him,

Crl.Appeal.1611/2006.
                                  6

there is no reason to disbelieve P.Ws.8, 12 and 15. According

to the learned Public Prosecutor, there is also nothing to show

that they had any oblique motive for implicating the accused.

According to the learned Public Prosecutor, the court below

has chosen to accept the evidence of P.Ws.8, 12 and 15 and

there is no reason why this court should take a different view.

             8.    At the outset itself, it must be said that the

finding of the court below that offence under Section 498A of

I.P.C. is made out is not sustainable. On an appreciation of

the evidence, there is absolute want of evidence to come to

the conclusion that the victim was ill-treated by the first

accused so as to attract offence under Section 498A of I.P.C.

As rightly pointed out by the learned Senior Counsel for the

appellant,      there is only the evidence of P.Ws.8, 12 and 15.

As far as P.W.8 is concerned, his evidence is only to the effect

that the victim had told P.W.8 that she was beaten on two

occasions by the first accused.         P.W.12 only says that he

Crl.Appeal.1611/2006.
                                7

happened to see the quarrel between the first accused and

the victim       and on one occasion he saw the first accused

taking the victim inside the house.        As far as P.W.15 is

concerned, he saw the victim crying on a particular day and

the victim is alleged to have shown him by signs that she was

slapped by the first accused. The above are the three items of

evidence. As rightly pointed out by the learned counsel for the

appellant, even assuming all the claims to be true, that is too

insufficient to constitute the offence under Section 498A of

I.P.C. Stray incidents of quarrel or even assault cannot amount

to cruelty as contemplated under Section 498A of I.P.C. There

is nothing to indicate that the victim was driven to commit

suicide due to the ill-treatment of the first accused. There is

no case for the prosecution that there was any demand for

dowry and that the victim was ill-treated as a result of which

she was driven to commit suicide. In fact in the evidence of

P.Ws.3, 4 and 5 among whom P.Ws.3 and 4 are the parents

Crl.Appeal.1611/2006.
                                 8

and P.W.5 is the brother, there is nothing to indicate that the

victim was ill-treated by the in-laws. According to P.W.3, her

daughter was living happily in the matrimonial house. It is in

the context of the evidence furnished by the parents and the

brother of the victim that the stray incidents made mention of

by P.Ws.8, 12 and 15 will have to be appreciated. As rightly

pointed out by the learned counsel for the appellant, if as a

matter of fact, there was ill-treatment and cruelty meted out

to the victim, the first persons who came to know were the

parents and brother.

             9.     Considering the evidence furnished by the

prosecution, it is difficult to come to the conclusion that

cruelty as contemplated under Section 498A of I.P.C. has been

made out in the case on hand.

             10. For the above reasons, this Court is unable to

uphold the finding of the court below that offence under

Section 498A of I.P.C. has been made out.

Crl.Appeal.1611/2006.
                                9

             In the result, this appeal is allowed and the

conviction and sentence of the first accused for the offence

under Section 498A of I.P.C. is set aside and he stands

acquitted      of the said offence. His bail bond shall stand

cancelled and he is set at liberty.   If he has paid the fine

amount, the same shall be refunded to him.




                                          P. BHAVADASAN,
                                                JUDGE

sb.



