
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                   PRESENT:

                        THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE ANTONY DOMINIC
                                                         &
                             THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE P.D.RAJAN

                  TUESDAY,THE 30TH DAY OF JULY 2013/8TH SRAVANA, 1935

                                        Mat.Appeal.No. 52 of 2012 (C)
                                            -----------------------------


  AGAINST THE ORDER IN OP 112/2011 of FAMILY COURT,KOZHIKODE DATED 4/10/11


APPEALLANT/RESPONDENT:
------------------------------------------

            MRS.K.SHEWETHA PAI
            W/O. ARUN R.NAIK, D/O. K.SANTHAPPA PAI
            C/O. SHALI HARIDAS, INDEEVARAM, POST PAROPADY
            VELLIMADUKUNNU, KOZHIKODE, NOW RESIDING AT 33/305 JC
            MANAKKAL HOUSE, KUNIYIL THAZHATH PARAMBA
            P.O. MALAPARAMBA, CALICUT 673009

            BY ADVS.SRI.V.V.SURENDRAN
                          SRI.P.A.HARISH

RESPONDENT/PETITIONER:
-----------------------------------------

            ARUN R.NAIK
            S/O. RAMDAS NAIK, 1/3758A, BILATHIKULAM ROAD
            KACHERI AMSOM DESOM, POST ERANHIPALAM, CALICUT 673006

            R1 BY ADV. SRI.M.P.SREEKRISHNAN
            R1 BY ADV. SMT.SHAHNA KARTHIKEYAN

            THIS MATRIMONIAL APPEAL HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD ON 30-07-2013,
THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY DELIVERED THE FOLLOWING:


              ANTONY DOMINIC & P.D.RAJAN, JJ.
              ========================
                 Mat. Appeal No. 52 OF 2012
              =======================

             Dated this the 30th day of July, 2013

                        J U D G M E N T


Antony Dominic, J.

      The appeal arises from the order of the Family Court,

Kozhikode in OP No.112/11.

      2.   The   marriage   between   the   appellant  and   the

respondent was solemnized on 25/2/2003 as per Hindu religious

rites. Thereafter, they were residing at the matrimonial home.

Meanwhile, a female child was born in the wedlock on 30/4/2004.

The parties are at loggerheads and from September, 2009, they

are living separately.

      3.   According to the respondent/husband who filed the OP,

right from the commencement of their matrimonial life, the

appellant/ wife was behaving in a strange, rude, arrogant manner

and she was suffering from severe behaviour disorder. She was

not amenable to any counselling. It is also alleged that the

appellant used to pick up quarrels on silly matters, that the

appellant was not co-operating in any family functions, that she

used to be cruel to the parents of the respondent, that she is a

Mat.Appeal No.52 /12
                               : 2 :



sadist, that whenever the respondent was worried and sad, the

appellant was enjoying the same, that her behaviour to her own

parents was very bad and that she used to shout and insult them.

It is also alleged that she used to misbehave and ill-treat his

parents and that she never allowed even the respondent to come

anywhere near the child.

      4.    According to the respondent, she has misbehaved with

his relations and friends, who visited his house and quarrelled

with the maid servant. It is also alleged that on account of the

indifferent and cruel behaviour, the peaceful atmosphere of the

respondent's house was spoiled completely and that he could not

derive any sexual pleasure and enjoyment. According to him,

though these problems were informed to her parents and that

they advised the appellant to lead a peaceful life, those advices

were ignored by her. It is also alleged that, on 14/9/2008, when

the respondent attempted to fondle the child, without any

provocation, the appellant attacked the respondent and slapped

him on his face and forcefully snatched away the child from him.

It is alleged that she used to throw utensils, coconut shells etc.,

on the respondent and even used to spray boiled water on him.

Mat.Appeal No.52 /12
                                  : 3 :



     5.     He also alleged that once she took a knife and

threatened to stab him and also threatened to commit suicide

after killing the child. Finally, mediation attempts were made and

that also failed on account of the adamant attitude of the

appellant. Ultimately, she deserted him in September, 2009 and

started living at Hyderabad where her parents are residing,

thereafter at Mangalore and finally at Calicut. It was with these

allegations, respondent filed the OP seeking divorce on the

ground of cruelty and desertion.

     6.     Counter statement was filed by the appellant.

According to the appellant, she was forced to take shelter in a

rented house as she was not allowed to stay in the matrimonial

home peacefully. It is stated that at the time of marriage, she

was given 105 sovereigns of gold ornaments and that her father

had spent `2,10,000/- for marriage expenses. According to the

appellant, on the first day of the marriage, when she called the

respondent by his name, he slapped her on her face. It is stated

that despite the arrogance and indifference shown by the

respondent and the members of his family, she tolerated the

misbehaviours and cruelties to save the family from ruin. She

Mat.Appeal No.52 /12
                              :  4 :



denied the allegation of behavioral disorder alleged by the

respondent. According to the appellant, the respondent was

entirely under the control of his parents and he had no

independent decision of his own.      It is also alleged that he

behaves strangely in the presence of his parents, particularly his

mother and was normal when he was alone. On this basis, she

described him as a split personality and a robot. The appellant

alleges that the respondent did not like to accompany her except

on occasions when his mother permitted him to do so.          It is

alleged that her mother-in-law was not allowing her even to enter

the kitchen and that the parents of the respondent did not give

her any freedom in the matrimonial home. The allegation that the

appellant did not co-operate in the family functions and that she

misbehaved with the parents, relatives and friends of the

respondent also has been denied. On the other hand, according to

the appellant, she could not participate in the family functions as

she was not permitted by her mother-in-law to do so. The

allegation of the respondent that the appellant used to misbehave

with her parents also has been denied.

Mat.Appeal No.52 /12
                               : 5 :



      7.   Before the Family Court, on behalf of the respondent,

PWs 1 to 3 were examined and the appellant was examined as

RW1. Exts.A1 to A3(c) were also produced. After considering the

matter, the Family Court rendered the impugned order rejecting

the ground of desertion alleged by the respondent and passed a

decree of divorce accepting his case on the ground of cruelty. It is

aggrieved by this order, the wife, the respondent before the

Family Court, has filed this appeal.

      8.   We heard the learned counsel for the appellant and

also the learned senior counsel appearing for the respondent.

      9.   Although various acts of cruelty have been pleaded by

the respondent and evidence in support of the case of both sides

was also adduced, the Family Court has accepted the case of

cruelty only on the basis that the appellant had made reckless

allegations in her pleadings and evidence. According to the Family

Court, in her pleadings and evidence, the appellant had described

the respondent as a robot having some abnormality and

behavioral disorder. She has also stated that he is a split

personality and    having no respect for any truth.     The Family

Court has also taken note of the fact that since the last four years,

Mat.Appeal No.52 /12
                              :  6 :



they were living separately and therefore their marriage has

broken down irretrievably. Considering all these, the Family Court

found that the wild allegations raised by the appellant caused

mental cruelty to the respondent and that therefore the

respondent was held entitled to a decree of divorce.

     10. During the course of hearing, learned counsel for the

appellant submitted that the alleged reckless allegations relied on

by the Family Court were the answers given by the appellant to

the case pleaded by the respondent or descriptions used by her to

explain her contentions. According to the appellant, such answers

or descriptions could not have been considered in isolation and

treated as allegations causing mental cruelty entitling the

respondent for a decree of divorce. He also argued that equally

grave allegations were raised by the respondent in the OP filed by

him.  On the other hand, pleadings and evidence before the

Family Court were referred to by the learned senior counsel

appearing for the respondent to sustain the judgment of the

Family Court.    Learned senior counsel also relied on the

judgment of the Bombay High Court in Manisha Sandeep Gade v.

Sandeep Vinayak Gade (AIR 2005 Bombay 180), the Apex Court

Mat.Appeal No.52 /12
                                :  7 :



judgment in V.Bhagat v. D.Bhagat (AIR 1994 SC 710), Srinivas

Rao v. D.A.Deepa (2013(1) KHC 647) and the judgment of this

Court in M. v. R (2001(2) KLT 653).

     11. We have considered the rival submissions made. The

judgments relied on by the learned senior counsel appearing for

the respondent lays down the principle that reckless allegations

raised by a party in his pleadings and evidence can be accepted

by a Court to hold that mental cruelty has been caused to the

spouse against whom those allegations are raised. However, in so

far as this case is concerned, the question is whether in the facts

of this case, it can be said that the allegations relied on by the

Family Court can be taken as causing mental cruelty.

     12. In paragraph 3 of the petition filed by the respondent,

he has alleged that the appellant is suffering from severe

behaviour disorder and he has detailed his allegations thus;

    "But from the date of marriage itself, the respondent was
    found suffering from severe behaviour disorder. The
    respondent's parents and other relatives were fully aware
    of the same. The petitioner had occasion to notice the
    strange, rude and arrogant manner in which the respondent
    was behaving towards the respondent's parents and other
    relatives. The respondent's attitude, behaviour and conduct
    towards the petitioner and his parents were very abnormal,
    cruel and unbearable. The petitioner was aware that the
    respondent's attitude and behaviour towards her parents,

Mat.Appeal No.52 /12
                                 : 8 :



    sister and brother were also very cruel and in an abnormal
    manner Even though the petitioner had tried his level best
    several times, to take the respondent for counselling and
    other necessary steps, the respondent was never willing for
    the same and she used to make a hue and cry about the
    same. When the petitioner appraised the respondent's
    parents about the same, they agreed with the petitioner
    that it is absolutely necessary to take the respondent for
    counselling and necessary follow up procedures. But the
    respondent's parents miserably failed in their attempt to
    persuade the respondent to go for counselling either at
    Calicut or at Hyberabad or even at Mangalore, where some
    of her relatives are residing".

     13. In the subsequent paragraph also, he has made further

allegations against the appellant.

     14. It was in answer to these allegations in the petition

that in para 4 of the counter statement filed, the appellant has

stated thus;

    4.     With reference allegations made in para 3 of the
    petition respondent admits that both the parties are Hindus
    and hail from Gowda Saraswatha Brahmin community and
    that the marriage between the parties was solemnized on
    25.2.2003 at Sukratindra Kala Mandir, Calicut, within the
    jurisdiction of this Hon'ble Court. The respondent was
    presented with 75 tolas (nearly 105 sovereigns) of gold in
    the form of gold ornaments at the time of marriage. A sum
    of Rs.2,10,000/- was expended by the respondent for the
    marriage. It is true immediately after the marriage
    respondent joined the petitioner at his parent's place
    (respondent's in-law's place). From day one of the marriage,
    the petitioner started troubling the respondents. When the
    respondent tried to address the petitioner by his name, he
    showed his arrogance by slapping her on her face. The
    respondent was taken aback at the first encounter
    immediately after the marriage. However, respondent kept

Mat.Appeal No.52 /12
                                 :  9 :



    quiet thinking that as a woman, she should not make it an
    issue that too, without completely knowing him, his likes,
    dislikes, attitude, moods etc. The respondent did not like
    others to know about the happenings and make other worry
    for the respondent. As the respondent, as a member of the
    family had to cope up with the situation and gradually get
    herself adjusted. The claim of the petitioner that there was
    any abnormality on the part of the respondent or behavioral
    disorder is false. In fact the boot is on the other leg and the
    petitioner has no independence even to think. He does not
    care for his wife and child even as on date. Each and every
    aspect of his daily routine is controlled by his mother. The
    petitioner acts like a robot being controlled by his mother
    either in his movements, taking food, talking to others etc,.
    In fact he has split personality. In the presence of his
    mother and father petitioner acts strangely and as
    controlled by his mother. It is only in the absence of his
    parents from the house, he is normal with the respondent in
    his behaviour, like any other husband and wife. The
    allegation that the respondent is rude or arrogant or acts
    strangely is an absolute falsehood. The petitioner has no
    respect for truth. The claim of of the petitioner that the
    respondent's behaviour and conduct towards petitioner and
    his parents and sister was cruel and abnormal is without any
    substance. The petitioner is building up a case by levelling
    false allegations. The petitioner was not even liking to
    accompany the respondent to her parent's place. He used to
    accompany only at the instance of his mother. He was
    always commenting that this respondent 's father did not
    give dowry to spend in taking the respondent to Hyderabad
    etc. The respondent used to keep quiet with a view to avoid
    it becoming a big issue. Therefore the respondent was
    never forcing the petitioner to take her anywhere. It is only
    when the petitioner agreed, the respondent used to pack his
    bag as well as her baggage and used to go together. The
    respondent emphatically denies that the petitioner has
    appraised of the situation to the respondent's parents and
    that they in their turn used to agree with the petitioner
    stating that counseling is necessary. When the petitioner
    and his mother are adamant, the respondent's parents
    could not do anything. The claim that the respondent's
    attitude, behaviour and conduct towards petitioner and his

Mat.Appeal No.52 /12
                                :  10 :



    parents was very abnormal cruel and unbearable is
    absolutely false. The entire petition is a bundle of lies.
    Petitioner, at the instance of his mother somehow or the
    other wants to get rid of the respondent. There was nothing
    in the attitude of respondent that required counseling. The
    claim that the petitioner informed respondent's parents that
    the respondent requires counseling that they agreed and
    thereafter miserably failed to persuade the respondent to
    go for counseling at Calicut as well as at Hyderabad is false.
    The respondent is having sufficient educational qualification
    and she has joined service after coming back to Kerala
    when the petitioner did not allow her to join him. In the
    absence of his parents, petitioner behaves normally. In their
    presence, petitioner looks upon the respondent like an
    unwanted person. Therefore according to respondent all the
    petition allegations are made as per his mother's version
    and not that of the petitioner's personal views. Respondent
    submits that from the date of marriage itself, petitioner was
    behaving arrogantly. On the first night itself petitioner
    slapped the respondent when the respondent called him by
    name. The respondent was shocked at this, however, she
    kept quite thinking that as a wife she has to bear it and
    should not make it an issue. She also did not broach the
    subject with anybody i.e., either with her mother and father
    or mother-in-law. There has been nothing abnormal or any
    disorder in mental or physical condition of respondent.
    Petitioner does not like the respondent to go to her parent's
    place as it is at a long distance. It is at his mother's
    instance, he was accompanying the respondent. He used to
    complain that he is not having respondent's father's money
    to spend for trips to Hyderabad.

     15. In her evidence in the Family Court also, both sides

have reiterated these allegations.

     16. Essentially therefore, what emerges from the factual

situation available in this case is that, in his pleadings and

evidence, the respondent husband made various allegations,

Mat.Appeal No.52 /12
                               : 11 :



including that of mental disorder, against the wife and the wife

has also made equally grave allegations against the respondent

husband.    In the course of making such allegations, she has

described him as a split personality and a robot. We do agree

that neither of the parties are expected to make wild allegations

against the other, but however, in so far as this case is concerned,

both of them are guilty of making wild allegations against each

other. In such a situation, the Family Court is not justified in

relying on the allegations made by one of the parties and find

cruelty on her part and grant divorce to the other. Therefore, in

the facts of this case, we are unable to uphold the course adopted

by the Family Court.

     17. Reading of the order shows that apart from holding

that the allegations raised by the appellant against the

respondent caused mental cruelty to him, the Family Court has

not examined the factual allegations of cruelty raised by the

husband in the petition filed by him or the contentions of the wife

in the counter statement filed by her or the evidence adduced by

both sides. In other words, the order has been rendered without

adverting to the pleadings and evidence.

Mat.Appeal No.52 /12
                                 :  12 :



     18. In such circumstances, as we have already held the

reasoning of the Family Court untenable, the only option is to set

aside the order and remit the matter back to the Family Court for

a fresh consideration of the matter duly adverting to the

pleadings of the parties and the evidence that is adduced.

     Accordingly, the appeal is disposed of setting aside the

order of the Family Court, Kozhikode in OP No.112/11 and

remitting the matter back to the Family Court to reconsider the

matter in the manner as directed above. It is directed that fresh

orders as above shall be passed at any rate within three months

of receipt of a copy of this judgment.

     Parties will appear before the Family Court on 16/8/13.

                                                    Sd/-
                                            ANTONY DOMINIC, Judge

                                                   Sd/-
                                               P.D.RAJAN, Judge
Rp


                               //True Copy//

                              PA TO JUDGE



