
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                         PRESENT:

                 THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE V.K.MOHANAN

    WEDNESDAY, THE 7TH DAY OF AUGUST 2013/16TH SRAVANA, 1935

                                  Crl.MC.No. 136 of 2013
                                    --------------------------
    AGAINST THE ORDER/JUDGMENT IN CMP.NO.4687/2010 AND
    CMP.NO.301/2012 IN MC.NO.76/2009 OF ADDL.CHIEF JUDICIAL
    MAGISTRATE COURT, THIRUVANANTHAPURAM
                                        .......
    Crl.MC 4389/2010 of HIGH COURT OF KERALA DATED 02-11-2010
                                        ......

    PETITIONER(S):
    --------------------------

      BISMI SAINUDHEEN,
      W/O. SHAHUL HAMEED,
      T.C.NO.13/705. SHAHINA MANZIL, KUNNUKUZHI,
      VANCHIYOOR P.O., THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

      BY ADV. SRI.K.ABDUL JAWAD

    RESPONDENT(S):
    ------------------------------

   1. P.K.NABEESA BEEVI,
      D/O.FATHIMA BEEVI, T.C.6/193(4),
      NETHAJI ROAD, VATTIYOORKAVU,
      THIRUVANANTHAPURAM - PIN-695 009.

   2. SHAHUL HAMEED,
      S/O. M.IBRAHIMKUTTY, T.C.13/705,
      SHAHINA MANZIL, KUNNUKUZHI, VANCHIYOOR P.O.,
      THIRUVANANTHAPURAM-35.

   3. STATE OF KERALA,
      REP. BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR,
      HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM.

      R1 BY ADVS. SMT.SREEDEVI KYLASANATH
                           SRI.ACHUTH KYLAS
                           SRI.P.VISHNU SANKAR
                           SRI.R.SARATHKRISHNAN
      R2 BY ADV. SRI.S.MOHAMMED AL RAFI
      R3 BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SRI.RAJESH VIJAYAN

      THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD
      ON 17/07/2013, THE COURT ON 07/08/2013 PASSED THE
     FOLLOWING:

Kss

Crl.M.C.No.136/2013

                                APPENDIX


PETITIONER'S ANNEXURES:


ANNEX.A:     COPY OF THE AFFIDAVIT AND PETITION FILED BY THE
             1ST RESPONDENT IN CMP NO.3689/10.

ANNEX,B:     COPY OF THE OBJECTION FILED BY THE 2ND RESPONDENT.

ANNEX.C:     COPY OF THE ORDER DTD. 15/10/2010 IN CMP NO.3689/10
             IN M.C.76/09 ON THE FILE OF ADDL.CHIEF JUDICIAL
             MAGISTRATE, THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

ANNEX.D:     COPY OF THE ORDER DTD. 2/11/2010 IN CRL.M.C.NO.4389/2010
             ON THE FILE OF THIS HON'BLE COURT.

ANNEX.E:     COPY OF THE ORDER DTD. 15/12/2012 IN CMP NO.4687/10
             ON THE FILE OF ADDL.CHIEF JUDICIAL MAGISTRATE COURT,
             THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

RESPONDENT'S ANNEXURES:

ANNEX.R1(A):       COPY OF THE SALE DEED DTD. 29/03/1985.

ANNEX.R1(B):       COPY OF ORDER DTD. 21/08/2009 OF THE HON'BLE
                   SESSIONS COURT, THIRUVANANTHAPURAM IN
                   CRL.APPEAL NO.517/2009.

ANNEX.R1(C):       COPY OF THE ORDER DTD. 15/02/2010 IN CRL.M.C.3829/09.

ANNEX.R1(D):       COPY OF THE ORDER DTD. 24/02/2011 IN CRL.M.C.3829/09.

ANNEX.R1(E):       COPY OF JUDGMENTS OF THE HON'BLE SUPREME COURT
                   OF INDIA DTD. 18/07/2011.

ANNEX.R1(F):       COPY OF ORDER DTD. 9/01/2012 OF THE HON'BLE
                   SUPREME COURT OF INDIA IS PRODUCED HEREWITH
                   AND MARKED.

ANNEX.R1(G):       COPY OF THE JUDGMENT IN TP(CRL.)12/2011 OF THE
                   HON'BLE HIGH COURT OF KERALA.

ANNEX.R1(H):       COPY OF THE COMMON COMPLAINT DTD. 12/03/2012
                   SUBMITTED BEFORE THE POLICE AUTHORITIES.

ANNEX.R1(I):       COPY OF THE AFFIDAVIT SWORN BY MY ELDEST
                   DAUGHTER ON 23/06/13.


                                                  /TRUE COPY/

                                                  P.A.TO JUDGE
Kss


                                                       "CR"
                     V.K.MOHANAN, J.
                  -------------------------------
                  Crl.M.C.No.136 of 2013
                  -------------------------------
         Dated this the 7th day of August, 2013.


                          O R D E R


      A very crucial question that arose for consideration in

the above M.C. is, whether the "wife" or "daughter in law"

would come within the definition of "Respondent"

contained in Section 2(q) of the Protection of Women from

Domestic Violence Act, 2005 (hereinafter referred to for

short as "the Act" only). In order to answer the above

question, brief facts which led to the filing of the above

M.C. are inevitable, which follows as:

     2.   The challenge in this M.C. is against an order

dated 15.12.2012 in C.M.P.No.4687/10 in M.C.No.76/09 on

the file of the court of Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate-

Thiruvananthapuram, filed by the mother-in-law of the

present petitioner, by which the learned Magistrate

                              2
Crl.M.C.No.136 of 2013


allowed the petition, impleading the petitioner, who is the

wife of the 2nd respondent in the above M.C. and the

daughter in law of the petitioner therein. The petitioner

herein, for convenience hereinafter referred to as, the wife/

daughter in law and the 1st respondent as, the aggrieved

person, and her son, who is the husband of the petitioner,

as the 2nd respondent.

      3.    According to the petitioner herein, the aggrieved

person       approached   the    court   below     by   filing

C.M.P.No.3689/10, after one year from the date of filing of

M.C.No.76/09 under Section 12 of the Act.       Thus, besides

pointing out the delay in filing the petition for impleading

the petitioner, it was contended before the court below that

the same was filed to disturb harmonious matrimonial

relationship between herself and the 2nd respondent, who is

the son of the aggrieved person.          According to the

petitioner, her father-in-law, namely the husband of the

aggrieved person, was the Managing Director of a Public

Sector Undertaking and thus the aggrieved person is

                               3
Crl.M.C.No.136 of 2013


earning `10,000/- as family pension and her other daughters

are well settled and the aggrieved person is residing along

with one of her daughters. Thus stating all the above facts,

the petitioner had filed an objection against the impleading

petition. Copy of C.M.P.No.3689/10 filed by the aggrieved

person for impleading the petitioner and the affidavit sworn

into by her, and the objections subsequently filed therein by

the petitioner are produced as Annexures A and B.

Annexure C is the order of the learned Additional Chief

Judicial Magistrate, in C.M.P.No.3689/10 filed by the

aggrieved person, wherein cost was ordered to be paid by

the aggrieved person to the 2nd respondent, for the

inordinate delay in filing the petition. It is the further case

of the petitioner that, against Annexure C order, by filing

Crl.M.C.No.4389/10, she approached this Court, but the

same was disposed by this Court, granting liberty to the

petitioner to appear before the court below raising the

contention that she will not come under the purview of

"respondent" as defined under the Act, and Annexure D is

                               4
Crl.M.C.No.136 of 2013


the said order of this Court. It is the specific case of the

petitioner that in terms of Annexure D, the wife/daughter-in-

law,     who       is  the  petitioner herein,    has    filed

C.M.P.No.4687/10 in the court below, challenging the

maintainability of the complaint filed by the 1st respondent

against the wife/daughter-in-law and the said petition was

heard by the predecessor Magistrate, who issued summons

to the wife/daughter-in-law on two occasions for being

examined as witness from the side of the 2nd respondent.

According to the petitioner, the wife/daughter-in-law, after

the assumption of charge by the present Magistrate, the

said petition was dismissed without hearing the petitioner or

her counsel, which order is produced here as Annexure E.

      4.    The case of the aggrieved person is that, she is a

senior citizen and a widow, residing in an orphanage. Her

husband Ibrahim Kutty had expired on 21.4.2004. Besides

the 2nd respondent, she has two daughters and another son,

as her children. According to her, she was residing along

with her husband and children in Shahina Manzil,

                               5
Crl.M.C.No.136 of 2013


T.C.No.13/705, for more than 13 years and the said house

and property having an extent of about 6 cents stands in the

name of her deceased husband, which was purchased by

him through a valid sale deed. Her daughters and the other

son are residing separately.     According to the aggrieved

person, her son - the 2nd respondent, in collusion with his

wife, harassed, humiliated and threatened her and has

finally driven her out of her own house with the ulterior

motive of grabbing the property.          According to the

aggrieved person, she being a widow who was residing in

Shahina Manzil, the house and the property which were in

the name of her deceased husband, proposed to spend rest

of her life in the said house, as she has got sentiments with

such house where she lived along with her deceased

husband.       According to the aggrieved person, the above

property is in the name of her deceased husband and he had

not executed any Will giving the right over it to anybody

including her son, who is the 2nd respondent herein.

      5.     According to the aggrieved person, as the

                                6
Crl.M.C.No.136 of 2013


misbehavior and ill-treatment towards her was so cruel, she

initially approached the State Women's Commission and on

getting notice from the Commission, the wife/daughter in

law has filed M.C.No.54/09 before the court of Additional

Chief     Judicial    Magistrate, Thiruvananthapuram     and

obtained an ex parte protection order, but later the M.C.

was dismissed. According to the aggrieved person, as the

mental and physical harassment continued against her, she

preferred a petition under section 12 of the Act and thus

M.C.No.76/09 was instituted in the court below and the

court below passed an interim order, and dissatisfied with

the order of the learned CJM, she preferred an appeal

before the Sessions Court, Thiruvananthapuram, which

resulted in the order dated 21.8.2009 in Crl.A.No.517/09.

As the 2nd respondent - the son of the aggrieved person, had

failed to comply with the interim order, cognizance was

taken for the offence punishable under Section 31 of the

Act, against which, the 2nd respondent approached this

Court by filing Crl.M.C.No.3829/09, which was disposed of

                               7
Crl.M.C.No.136 of 2013


by this Court by order dated 15.2.2010 and subsequently,

Crl.M.C.No.3829/09 was reopened suo motu by order dated

24.2.2011. It is also the case of the aggrieved person that

against the order of this Court, referred above, her son

preferred a Special Leave Petition before the Honourable

Supreme Court, which resulted in the order dated 18.7.2011

upon the Special Leave to Appeal (Crl.) No(s).2460/11 and

thereafter, the 2nd respondent filed T.P.(Crl.)No.12/11 before

this Court, for transfer of the case from the court of learned

Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate and the same was

dismissed by this Court by order dated 4.3.2011 and

subsequently, the said order was again challenged in the

Honourable Supreme Court, but by order dated 9.1.2012 in

the petition for Special Leave to Appeal (Crl.) No(s).

5800/2011, the same was dismissed.        As the harassment

continued, according to the aggrieved person, she preferred

W.P.(C) No.8550/12 before this Court, seeking police

protection and subsequently the same was withdrawn as

this Court directed the parties to appear for mediation.

                              8
Crl.M.C.No.136 of 2013


      6.       According  to the   aggrieved  person,    the

maltreatment and harassment done by her son - the 2nd

respondent, was at the instance of his wife, since she was

interested in grabbing the property and the person behind

all the vexatious litigation was her daughter-in-law and in

the said circumstances, she moved an application as

C.M.P.No.4687/10 before the court of Additional Chief

Judicial Magistrate, Thiruvananthapuram, to implead the

petitioner herein as additional respondent in M.C.No.76/09,

which was allowed by the court below as per the impugned

order.

      7.      According to the petitioner, who is the wife/

daughter in law, she would not come under the purview of

"Respondent" as defined under Section 2(q) of the Act.

Therefore, the above M.C. is filed under section 482 of

Cr.P.C., with a prayer to set aside Annexure E order in

C.M.P.No.4687/10.

      8.       I have heard Adv.Sri.K.Abdul Jawad, learned

counsel for the petitioner and Adv.Sri.Achuth Kylas, learned

                                9
Crl.M.C.No.136 of 2013


counsel for the 1st respondent herein, who is the aggrieved

person and also Adv.Sri.Mohammed Al Rafi, learned counsel

appearing for the 2nd respondent herein. I have also heard

Adv.Sri.Rajesh Vijayan, the learned Public Prosecutor.

        9.     Adv.Sri.K.Abdul Jawad, learned counsel for the

petitioner, the wife/daughter in law, in his persuasive

arguments, after taking me through the various provisions

of the Act and the circumstances under which the above Act

is enacted, has submitted that the petitioner being the wife

of the son of the aggrieved person, at no stretch of

imagination will come under the definition of Section 2(q),

more particularly, even as per the proviso to Section 2(q),

because of the marital status of the petitioner with the son

of the aggrieved person, the wife/daughter-in-law is out of

the extended definition of the term "respondent" as

contemplated under the Proviso. In support of the above

contentions raised by the counsel for the petitioner, he

relied upon the following decisions, reported in Afzalunnisa

Begum and others Vs. State of A.P. and another (2009

                                 10
Crl.M.C.No.136 of 2013


KHC 5824) and also in, Manju A.Nair Vs. State of

Kerala (2012(4) KLT 39).

      10. Whereas, learned counsel for the 1st respondent/

aggrieved person strenuously submitted that, the Act itself

was adopted by the Parliament to give protection to women

as a whole, from domestic violence and there is no meaning

for a further classification, by excluding the wife or

daughter-in-law from the ambit of Section 2(q) of the Act,

and it will be against the object to be achieved by above

enactment.          In support of his contentions, the learned

counsel relied upon the following decisions : Kusum Lata

Sharma Vs. State and another (2011 KHC 2921),

Sandhya        Manoj     Wankhade     Vs.  Manoj     Bhimrao

Wankhade and others [(2011) 3 Supreme Court Cases

650], an order of this Court dated 2.12.2009 in

Crl.M.C.No.2225 of 2009, Kanai Lal Sur. Vs. Paramnidhi

Sadhukhan [AIR 1957 S.C. 907 (Y 44 C 135 Dec.)],

Archana Hemant Naik Vs. Urmilaben I.Naik and

another (2010 KHC 7159), Chandan Singh Vs. Shyam

                             11
Crl.M.C.No.136 of 2013


Sunder Agrawal (2006(4) AWC 4192) and Directorate

of Enforcement Vs. Deepak Mahajan and another

{(1994) 3 Supreme Court Cases 440}.

      11. Sri.Rajesh Vijayan, the learned Public Prosecutor,

after taking me through various provisions including the

definition Clause under Sections 2(a), 2 (q), 3 and

particularly the Section 19 of the Act, has submitted that, a

harmonious interpretation of various provisions are required

so as to give effect to the object to be achieved, for which

the Act is enacted.      The learned Public Prosecutor in

support of his contentions, placed reliance on the following

decisions Kanai Lal Sur. Vs. Paramnidhi Sadhukhan

[AIR 1957 S.C. 907 (Y 44 C 135 Dec.)] and B.Shah Vs.

Presiding Officer, Labour Court Coimbatore and

others (AIR 1978 SC 12).

      12. I have carefully considered the submissions made

by both the counsel for the petitioner as well as the

respondents and also the arguments advanced by the

learned Public Prosecutor. I have also perused the order

                              12
Crl.M.C.No.136 of 2013


impugned and the other materials produced in the above

petition that are produced from the side of the petitioner

and the contesting respondents.       I have carefully gone

through the authorities cited at the Bar.

      13.    From the facts stated above, it can be seen that

the aggrieved person approached the court below during

the year 2009 seeking various reliefs under the Act. In spite

of the mandate that is contained in Sub Section (5) of

Section 12 of the Act, by which it is stipulated that, "The

Magistrate shall endeavour to dispose of every application

made under sub- section (1) of section 12, within a period of

60 days from the date of its first hearing", the matter is still

pending in the court below without any substantial progress.

Several proceedings that are initiated, both at the instance

of the aggrieved person as well as the other respondents,

and also the present petitioner - the wife/ daughter in law,

would show the several rounds of litigation, including the

petitions filed before the Honourable Supreme Court on two

occasions.

                                  13
Crl.M.C.No.136 of 2013


      14. This Court is fully aware of the fact that several

petitions are being filed before this Court on similar ground

by the wife or daughter-in-law, contending that no action

would lie against them under the above Act, as they will not

come under the definition of "Respondent".                  Hence,

according to me, the question involved in the present case,

is a serious question of law bearing general importance and

involving public interest.

      15.    The statement of objects and reasons for the

enactment of the above Act says that,

            "1. Short title, extent and commencement. -- (1)
            This Act may be called the Protection of Women from
            Domestic Violence Act, 2005.

            (2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of
            Jammu and Kashmir.

            (3)    It shall come into force on such date* as the
            Central Government may, by notification in the Official
            Gazette, appoint."

The above Act is adopted by the Parliament to achieve the

following objects :

            " (i) It covers those women who are or have been
            in a relationship with the abuser where both
            parties have lived together in a shared household

                                 14
Crl.M.C.No.136 of 2013


            and are related by consanguinity, marriage or
            through a relationship in the nature of marriage or
            adoption.    In addition, relationships with family
            members living together as a joint family are also
            included.    Even those women who are sisters,
            widows, mothers, single women, or living with the
            abuser are entitled to legal protection under the
            proposed legislation. However, whereas the Bill
            enables the wife or the female living in a
            relationship in the nature of marriage to file a
            complaint under the proposed enactment against
            any relative of the husband or the male partner, it
            does not enable any female relative of the husband
            or the male partner to file a complaint against the
            wife or the female partner.
            (ii) It defines the expression "domestic violence"
            to include actual abuse or threat or abuse that is
            physical, sexual, verbal, emotional or economic.
            Harassment by way of unlawful dowry demands to
            the woman or her relatives would also be covered
            under this definition.
            (iii) It provides for the rights of women to secure
            housing. It also provides for the right of a woman
            to reside in her matrimonial home or shared
            household, whether or not she has any title or
            rights in such home or household. This right is
            secured by a residence order, which is passed by
            the Magistrate.
            (iv)      It empowers the Magistrate to pass
            protection orders in favour of the aggrieved person
            to    prevent  the   respondent    from  aiding  or
            committing an act of domestic violence or any
            other specified act, entering a workplace or any
            other place frequented by the aggrieved person,
            attempting to communicate with her, isolating any
            assets used by both the parties and causing
            violence to the aggrieved person, her relatives or

                                 15
Crl.M.C.No.136 of 2013


            others who provide her assistance from the
            domestic violence.

            (v)     It provides for appointment of Protection
            Officers and registration of non-governmental
            organisations as service providers for providing
            assistance to the aggrieved person with respect to
            her medical examination, obtaining legal aid, safe
            shelter, etc."   (Emphasis supplied).

Thus, on a consideration of the circumstances under which

the Act promulgated and the objects sought to be achieved,

it is crystal clear that the main object is to protect the

women as a whole and according to me, that is why the Act

itself named and projected as "The Protection of Women

from Domestic Violence Act". It is relevant to note that,

Section 2(a) of the Act defines an "aggrieved person", which

reads as follows :

            "aggrieved person" means any woman who is, or
            has been, in a domestic relationship     with the
            respondent and who alleges to have been
            subjected to any act of domestic violence by the
            respondent."

A plain reading of the section indicates, particularly in view

of the emphasised portion of the object, that any woman in a

domestic relationship with the respondent can invoke the

                                  16
Crl.M.C.No.136 of 2013


provisions of the Act, provided, the other conditions are

satisfied. It is relevant to note that the definition "aggrieved

person" is not confined to a lady, or woman, based upon her

marital status alone.         So, the definition of "aggrieved

person" cannot be interpreted by giving a narrow meaning

as 'wife' only.

      16.         It is true, in Section 2(q), where the term

"respondent" defines, states as,

                   "respondent" means any adult male person
                   who    is, or has    been, in    a domestic
                   relationship with the aggrieved person and
                   against whom the aggrieved person has
                   sought any relief under this Act:
                   Provided that an aggrieved wife or female
            living in a relationship in the nature of a marriage
            may also file a complaint against a relative of the
            husband or the male partner;"

But, by incorporating the proviso, the said definition is

extended against the relative of the husband or the male

partner.      So, according to me, the proviso given under

Section 2(q), is not only extending the class of persons

coming under the term "respondent", but the same is also

extending the definition of "aggrieved person" contained in

                              17
Crl.M.C.No.136 of 2013


Section 2(a). In the proviso, what stated and provided are

that, an aggrieved wife or female, living in a domestic

relationship in the nature of marriage, can file complaint

against a relative of the husband or against the male

partner.

      17.        According to me, the definition "aggrieved

person" that is contained in section 2(a), unless the same is

exclusively meant for wife/daughter-in-law alone and until

excludes other women who are relatives of the husband, it is

incorrect to hold that the wife/daughter-in-law will not come

under the definition of "respondent" as defined in Section 2

(q).    In this juncture, it is relevant to note that the

Honourable Apex Court has held in the decision reported in

Sandhya        Manoj    Wankhade      Vs.   Manoj     Bhimrao

Wankhade and others [(2011) 3 SCC 650] that,

"legislature never intended to exclude female relatives from

ambit of complaint that could be made under 2005 Act."

      18. In the present case, it is relevant to note that there

is no challenge against the institution of the petition, at the

                                     18
Crl.M.C.No.136 of 2013


instance of the aggrieved person, who is the mother of the

2nd respondent and the mother-in-law of the petitioner

herein, under Section 12(1) of the Act. At this juncture, as

rightly pointed out by the learned counsel for the

respondent, Section 19(1)(c) of the Act is relevant. Section

19, with the caption "Residence orders" reads as follows :

        "While disposing of an application under Sub-section
        (1) of Section 12, the Magistrate may, on being
        satisfied that domestic violence has taken place, pass
        a residence order--
        (a) xxxxxx xxxxxxx xxxxxxxx
        (b) xxxxxxx xxxxxxx xxxxxxx
        (c) restraining the respondent or any of his relatives
        from entering any portion of the shared household in
        which the aggrieved person resides ; "


According to the learned counsel, if wife or daughter-in-law

is not impleaded as respondent, she can prevent the

aggrieved person from enjoying an order under section 19

(1)(c) of the Act. Hence, if a domestic violence is committed

by the wife/daughter-in-law, she being a female person

would also come within the ambit of the definition

"respondent". Otherwise, as in the present case, if an order

                               19
Crl.M.C.No.136 of 2013


is passed under Section 19(1)(c) against the original

respondent alone, who is the son of the aggrieved person,

the son's wife, ie., the daughter-in-law of the aggrieved

person, who is the petitioner herein, can very well defeat

the order of the court under section 19(1)(c). It is not out of

context to refer to the facts agitated by the aggrieved

person in support of her claim and the alleged domestic

violence committed against her and the various litigations

said to have initiated against her, at the instance of the

petitioner herein. So, one of the objectives aimed by the Act

can be defeated, if a narrow interpretation to Section 2(q) is

given, excluding the wife/daughter in law from the definition

of "respondent".       It is to be noted that, the Act never

contemplates to give any privilege or protection to a lady,

whatever may be her family status, to commit any domestic

violence against another female, who is in domestic

relationship with the respondent.      Except the male, all

victims, against whom domestic violence is meted out can

be included in the definition of "aggrieved person", vice

                              20
Crl.M.C.No.136 of 2013


versa all persons irrespective of their marital status, who

meted out the domestic violence against any female member

of the family, can be included in the term "respondent" and

the exclusion of any woman for the sole reason that she is

the wife or daughter-in-law, is against the very object and

purpose of the Act. Suppose the victim is a major female or

her "step mother" or "a woman living in a relationship in the

nature of a marriage", such victim can file a complaint

against those persons, who meted out domestic violence.

The concept of the society about "Mother" is being

subjected to change and incidents are being reported that

even the "Mother" is presenting her own daughter for flesh

trade.     Thus, while giving protection to women, a check

measure has to be adopted to prevent such women from

subjecting the female members of the same family to

domestic violence. Hence, under the guise of being 'wife' or

'daughter-in-law', they cannot be given privilege or be

allowed to escape from the liability under the provisions of

the above Act, if she has committed any "domestic

                                21
Crl.M.C.No.136 of 2013


violence". Thus, if the second wife or wife, who being the

step mother or even if a real mother, meted out domestic

violence against a major daughter, they along with her

father has to be arrayed as respondent, in an action under

the provisions of the above Act.

      19.      In this juncture it is relevant to note that the

learned counsel appearing for the petitioner, heavily relied

upon the decision of a Division Bench of this Court reported

in (2012(4) KLT 39) cited supra, wherein it is held that,

"An adult female person could be made a respondent only if

the complaint is filed either by an aggrieved wife or a

female living in a relationship in the nature of a marriage".

In the said decision, it is relevant to note that the question

referred by a learned Single Judge of this Court was

whether a mother could proceed against her daughter

under the provisions of the Act, taking note of the the two

decisions of this Court reported in Remadevi Vs. State of

Kerala (2008(4) KLT 105) and Vijayalekshmi Amma Vs.

Bindu (2010(1) KLT 79). So, according to me, the factual

                                22
Crl.M.C.No.136 of 2013


inputs in the present case are entirely different from the

facts involved in the decisions of the Division Bench referred

to above and hence the same are not relevant and

applicable in the present case.

       20. It is relevant to note that a learned Single Judge of

the Delhi High Court in the decision reported in (2011 KHC

2921) cited supra, in a similar situation and answering a

similar question of law, has held that, "A mother who is

being maltreated and harassed by her son would be an

"aggrieved person".       If the said harassment is caused

through the female relative of the son, ie., his wife, the said

family     relative   will fall  within   the  ambit    of  the

"respondent" , and it is further held that, "this phenomenon

of the daughters-in-law harassing their mothers-in-law

especially who are dependant is not uncommon in the

Indian society". The facts involved in the case on hand are

identical to the facts involved in the above decision.

      21. As rightly observed by the learned Single Judge of

the Delhi High Court, it is beyond dispute that, with respect

                              23
Crl.M.C.No.136 of 2013


to the matrimonial issues and domestic violence, it is a

shocking factor that, 95% of such disputes are originated

from simple and petty reasons, which pave way to difference

of opinion among the spouses or among the members of

their family, which ultimately lead to filing of petition for

divorce or for maintenance, or filing of even criminal cases,

irrespective of their caste, creed or religion. Absence of

proper understanding about the institution of marriage,

social realities and poor economic background etc. are some

of the basic reasons for such disputes.         However, as I

indicated earlier, irrespective of the religion, caste or creed,

the victims are always the women.       The discrimination or

hostility against women starts from the womb of her mother

and it is very shocking to hear that there is tendency to

abort a female foetus in the womb itself. After birth, the

females are discriminated from males and the same

continues through out her life cycle, notwithstanding the

fact whether she is a daughter, daughter-in-law, wife or

mother. A society wherein the status of a woman is not

                              24
Crl.M.C.No.136 of 2013


recognized in par with that of man, or where man and

woman are not recognized equally, such litigation are likely

to continue and the same cannot be prevented or reduced,

unless the mind set of people is brought to comprehensive

and drastic change and progress through the social,

educational, economic changes in the society as a whole.

Since, harassment, maltreatment and cruelty against the

women are being increased day by day, the legislature

thought of, adopting a new legislation to give protection to

the women as a class in their domestic affairs as necessary

and the said object is spelled out from the objects contained

in the Bill, which I referred earlier. So, at no stretch of

imagination it can be concluded that, various measures and

protection contemplated in various provisions of the Act,

are only for wife or female living in marital relationship with

the male partner. In the decision reported in (2011) 3 SCC

650 cited supra, the Apex Court has held that, "no

restrictive meaning can be given to expression "relative"

nor has said expression been defined to make it specific to

                              25
Crl.M.C.No.136 of 2013


males only" and further held that, "Legislature never

intended to exclude female relatives of the husband or the

male partner from the ambit of complaint that could be

made under the provisions of the Act".

      22.    Considering the object sought to be achieved, as

spelled out from the reason and object introduced in the

Bill, it is crystal clear that the Bill was introduced,

purportedly to give protection to women as a whole in the

areas covered by the Act and it is unconstitutional to further

classify "woman" to give rigid meaning as 'wife' and limiting

various protective measures meant for women, to the wife

or daughter-in-law alone, especially when the definition

under Section 2(a), "an aggrieved person" does not confine

to such category of woman, ie., wife or daughter-in-law

alone. Thus, it can be safely concluded that the law making

authority never intended to make a further classification

among the women and to exclude the class of woman,

namely, the wife or daughter-in-law, in fixing the liability, if

the aggrieved persons are subjected to domestic violence by

                                 26
Crl.M.C.No.136 of 2013


such person.

      23. As rightly pointed out by the learned Public

Prosecutor that, as the Act intended to achieve the object

of doing social justice to woman, a beneficial interpretation

is required. In the decision reported in AIR 1978 SC 12

cited supra, it has held that :

            "xxxxx  xxxIt has also to be borne in mind in this
           connection that in interpreting provisions of
           beneficial pieces of legislation like the one in hand
           which is intended to achieve the object of doing
           social justice to women workers employed in the
           plantations and which squarely fall within the
           purview of Art. 42 of the Constitution, the
           beneficent rule of construction which would enable
           the woman worker not only to subsist but also to
           make up her dissipated energy, nurse her child;
           preserve her efficiency as a worker and maintain
           the level of her previous efficiency and output has
           to be adopted by the Court".

Similarly, in another decision reported in AIR 1957 S.C.

907 (Y 44 C 135 Dec.) cited supra, in the third paragraph

of para (6) it is observed that,

                  "However, in applying these observations to
           the provisions of any statute, it must always be
           borne in mind that the first and primary rule of
           construction is that the intention of the Legislature
           must be found in the words used by the Legislature

                                27
Crl.M.C.No.136 of 2013


           itself. If the words used are capable of one
           construction only then it would not be open to the
           Courts to adopt any other hypothetical construction
           on the ground that such hypothetical construction
           is more consistent with the alleged object and
           policy of the Act.

                  The words used in the material provisions of
           the statute must be interpreted in their plain
           grammatical meaning and it is only when such
           words are capable of two constructions that the
           question of giving effect to the policy or object of
           the Act can legitimately arise. When the material
           words are capable of two constructions, one of
           which is likely to defeat or impair the policy of the
           Act whilst the other construction is likely to assist
           the achievement of the said policy, then the Courts
           would prefer to adopt the latter construction."

As the real object of the Act is to give protection to the

women, connected with domestic violence and related

issues, the term "respondent" has to be interpreted, so as to

extend the protection to all the victims of domestic violence

who are females, irrespective of the fact whether such

domestic violence is meted out by the wife, or female living

in a relationship in the nature of a marriage or step mother,

particularly       when  the  definition  "aggrieved    person"

contained in Section 2(a) is not confined to wife or

                              28
Crl.M.C.No.136 of 2013


daughter-in-law. I am of the firm view that, it is

unreasonable to restrict the protection and privilege to a

woman, considering her marital status alone or till she

become a mother-in-law.      According to me, as long as a

woman satisfies with the other conditions contemplated by

the Act, she is entitled to get the protection, as envisaged

therein, irrespective of the fact whether she is a wife or

mother-in-law and if she commits any domestic violence, she

is liable to be prosecuted for such guilt of domestic violence

as well, because, todays "wives" are tomorrow's "mothers-

in-law".     Following the dictum laid down in the above

authorities and in the light of the above discussion, any

interpretation giving a restrictive meaning to the definition

of "respondent" under section 2(q), that a complaint can be

filed only against a relative of the husband or the male

partner, excluding the wife or daughter in law, is quite

unreasonable and against the Constitutional Mandates that

are enshrined in Articles 14 and 15 of the Constitution of

India.     So, the resultant conclusion is that, a wife or

                               29
Crl.M.C.No.136 of 2013


daughter-in-law or a female living in a relationship in the

nature of a marriage, will also come under the definition of

"respondent" contained in Section 2(q).

        In the result, the above M.C. is dismissed upholding

Annexure-E order dated 15.12.2012 in C.M.P.No.4687/10 in

M.C.No.76/09 on the file of the court of Additional Chief

Judicial Magistrate-Thiruvananthapuram.

                                                 Sd/-
                                             V.K.MOHANAN,
                                                 Judge
ami/

          The following corrections are carried out in the final
order dated 7.8.2013 in Crl.M.C.No.136/2013, vide order
dated 12.9.2013 in Crl.M.A.No.6750/2013 in Crl.M.C.
No.136/2013 :

           The 3rd sentence occurring in paragraph 4 ie.
"Besides the 2nd respondent, she has two daughters
and another son, as her children" is corrected as
"Besides the 2nd respondent, she has two daughters as
her children".

           The 5th sentence occurring in paragraph 4 at page 5
ie., "Her daughters and the other son are residing
separately" is corrected as "Her daughters are residing
separately".
                                                   Sd/-
                                           Registrar (Judicial)



