
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                      PRESENT:

                          THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE P.BHAVADASAN

            TUESDAY, THE 12TH DAY OF NOVEMBER 2013/21ST KARTHIKA, 1935

                                           CRL.A.No. 341 of 2005 ( )
                                           -------------------------------------


AGAINST THE ORDER/JUDGMENT IN SC 729/2002 of ADDITIOINAL SESSIONS COURT
                                   FAST TRACK COURT-1, ALAPPUZHA
                                                     ----------------


APPELLANT(S)/ACCUSED:
--------------------------------------

            RAVI, S/O.KRISHNAN NAIR,
            THEZHUKOTTU THEKKETHIL VEEDU, MEZHUVELI VILLAGE,
            ELAVUMTHITTA VILLAGE, PATHANAMTHITTA DISTRICT.

            BY ADVS.SRI.B.RAMAN PILLAI
                          SRI.GEORGE PHILIP
                          SRI.R.ANIL
                          SRI.RAJU RADHAKRISHNAN
                          SRI.ANIL K.MOHAMMED
                          SRI.DELVIN JACOB MATHEWS

RESPONDENT(S)/COMPLAINANT:
------------------------------------------------

        1. STATE OF KERALA, REPRESENTED BY
            PUBLIC PROSECUTOR, HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM.

        2. THE SUB INSPECTOR OF POLICE,
            MANNAR, CHENGANNUR.


            THIS CRIMINAL APPEAL HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD ON 12-11-2013,
            THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY DELIVERED THE FOLLOWING:




PJ

CRL.A.No. 341 of 2005 ( )
-------------------------------------


                                          APPENDIX


PETITIONERS' ANNEXURES

ANNEXURE A1: TRUE COPY OF THE MEDICAL RECORDS IN RESPECT OF
                      APPELLANT'S MOTHER ALONG WITH THE CASH BILLS, ISSUED BY
                      C.S.I. MISSION HOSPITAL, PUNNAKKAD, KOZHENCHERRY.


RESPONDENTS' ANNEXURE

                     NIL.


                                                                / TRUE COPY /


                                                                P.S. TO JUDGE


PJ


                     P.BHAVADASAN, J.
              ---------------------------------------
                 Crl. Appeal No.341 OF 2005
              ---------------------------------------
         Dated this the 12th day of November, 2013.


                        J U D G M E N T


      A mother and son were prosecuted for the offences

punishable under Sections 304B and 498A read with Section 34

of Indian Penal Code.     It so happened, the mother, the 1st

accused, died during the pendency of the proceedings before the

trial court and therefore, the charge against her stood abated.

The 2nd accused, who is the husband of the victim, alone faced

trial. He was found guilty on both counts and was therefore

convicted for the offences punishable under Sections 304B and

498A IPC and sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for a

period of seven years under Section 304B IPC and also sentenced

to undergo rigorous imprisonment for a period of three years and

to pay a fine of Rs.5,000/- with default clause of simple

imprisonment for three months under Section 498A IPC.       The

substantive sentences were directed to run concurrently. Set off

as per law was allowed.

Crl.Appeal No.341/2005            2


       2. The marriage between the victim, who is the sister of

PW1 and the daughter of PW3, with the 2nd accused in the case

was solemnised on 23.01.2000.             As per the prosecution

allegations, soon after the marriage, the victim began to be ill-

treated by the accused persons demanding more dowry.

Ultimately, on 18.08.2000, it is alleged that the 2nd accused in

the case dropped the victim in her house and pulled off the thali

chain and left the place. On 19.08.2000, the victim was found to

be in an unconscious state and was removed to St. Gregorious

Mission Hospital, Parumala. PW8, the doctor there examined the

victim and referred her to Pushpagiri hospital as she had to be

put on ventilator.      There she was attended to by the doctor,

PW13 who issued Ext.P6 certificate. Right from the time when

she found unconscious in the house on 19.08.2000 till her date of

death, she remained in an unconscious state.

       3.     After the death of the victim, PW1 laid Ext.P1 First

Information Statement which was recorded by PW10 who

registered a crime as per Ext.P1(a) First Information Report.

Inquest of the body was conducted by the Tahsildar concerned

Crl.Appeal No.341/2005           3


and autopsy was conducted by PW14 who issued Ext.P7

certificate. PW14, at the time of autopsy, collected the viscera

and the same was sent for chemical examination.           In his

certificate, he reserved the final opinion pending receipt of

chemical analysis report. It appears that the chemical analysis

report was not obtained and the tentative opinion given in Ext.P7

is that the victim died due to consumption of poison.

       4. PW15 took over the investigation. He prepared Ext.P5

mahazar. He had the various certificates collected from various

authorities and after the arrest of the accused, he filed Ext.P9

report. He recorded the statement of witnesses, completed the

investigation and laid charge before court.

       5. The court before which final report was laid took

cognizance of the offence and on finding that the offences are

exclusively triable by a Court of Sessions, the case was

committed to Sessions Court, Alappuzha under Section 209

Cr.P.C. The said court made over the case to Additional Sessions

Court Fast Track - I, Alappuzha for trial and disposal. The latter

court, on receipt of records and on appearance of the accused,

Crl.Appeal No.341/2005            4


framed charges for the offences already made mention of. To the

charge, the accused pleaded not guilty and claimed to be tried.

The prosecution therefore had PWs 1 to 15 examined and Exts.P1

to P9 marked.

       6. After the close of the prosecution evidence, the accused

was questioned under Section 313 Cr.P.C.        He denied all the

incriminating circumstances brought out in evidence against him

and maintained that he is innocent. He also stated that he is an

agriculturist by profession and that he along with his wife and the

mother were residing happily in the matrimonial house. His wife,

the victim, wanted to sell the property where they were residing

and also wanted to shift their residence near her house to which,

the mother was not amenable. His mother, the 1st accused, had

been taking treatment for her eyes.       On 17.08.2000, the 2nd

accused says that he dropped medicine in the eye of his mother,

immediately the mother fell down on the floor and she began to

cry due to pain. He would say that soon thereafter his wife, the

victim was seen attempting to threw away the bottle from which

the medicine was poured in the eye of his mother.             DW2

Crl.Appeal No.341/2005           5


snatched the bottle from the hands of the victim and handed it

over to the accused. His mother was taken to hospital and on

examination, the doctor opined that acid had fallen into her eyes

and she suffered permanent damage to her eyes. He would say

that on 18.08.2000, when he returned after agricultural

operations in the noon, he was informed that his wife had taken a

vehicle and gone to her house. He went to bring her back but

she did not accede to his demand. He says that he is innocent.

       7. On finding that the accused could not be acquitted under

Section 232 Cr.P.C, he was asked to enter on his defence. The

defence had DWs 1 to 3 examined and Exts.D1 and D2 marked.

       8. The court below, presumably impressed by the evidence

of PWs 1, 3, 4 and 7, came to the conclusion that the victim was

ill-treated and harassed and cruelty was meted out to her

demanding more dowry and it is a case of dowry death.

Accordingly, the accused was found guilty of the offences

punishable under Sections 304B and 498A IPC and the conviction

and sentence as already mentioned followed.

Crl.Appeal No.341/2005           6


       9. Learned counsel appearing for the appellant assailed the

findings of the court below on several grounds. It is contended

by the learned counsel that the court below had not taken pains

to carefully scrutinise the evidence in the case and had it so

done, it could understand that the prosecution has no consistent

case at all. It is significant to notice, according to the learned

counsel, that when it was found that the victim was unconscious

on 19.08.2000 and she was removed to hospital, there was no

complaint made to the Police and the complaint for the first time

comes into existence only on 29.08.2000, i.e. after the death of

the victim.

       10. Referring to Ext.P1 First Information Statement

furnished by PW1, who is none other than the sister of the victim,

it is contended that the initial allegation or complaint was that

the victim was being tortured demanding more dowry. But, at

the time of evidence, PW1 had a totally different case. She gave

a go bye to what is stated in Ext.P1 and came forward with a new

story that there was a Bank deposit of an amount of Rs.1 lakh in

the name of Girija, the victim, and the accused wanted to encash

Crl.Appeal No.341/2005            7


the same and since the victim was not amenable, she was being

tortured and ill-treated.

       11. Referring to the evidence of PW3, the mother of the

victim, learned counsel for the appellant contended that the

mother had no case that there was any fixed deposit in the name

of the victim and she also does not say that her daughter, the

victim was harassed demanding more dowry.

       12. Referring to the evidence of PW7, who is the husband of

the sister of the victim, it is contended that his evidence shows

an entirely different story.     He claims to have visited the

matrimonial house of the victim. According to him, the complaint

of the victim was that the accused used to do only what was told

to him by his mother and the victim was not allowed to prepare

food and serve food to her husband. Learned counsel went on to

point out that PW7 has no case that there was any demand for

dowry or demand for encashment of Rs.1 lakh. It is significant to

notice, according to the learned counsel, that even though a

claim was put forward by PWs 1 and 7 that a sum of Rs.1 lakh

was deposited in the name of Girija which was sought to be

Crl.Appeal No.341/2005           8


encashed by the accused, no evidence showing any such deposit

is seen produced by the prosecution. There is nothing to show

that there was any such deposit at all.

       13. Referring to the evidence of PW4, it is pointed out by

the learned counsel for the appellant that his evidence is mainly

hearsay and it does not warrant consideration at all. Except the

inconsistent versions given by the prosecution witnesses

regarding the ill-treatment, there is no consistent, cogent or

convincing account of what had transpired in the matrimonial

house to warrant a conclusion that the victim was ill-treated

demanding more dowry or that the accused was insisting that the

deposit standing in the name of the victim namely, Girija be

encashed. According to the learned counsel, the court below has

acted on conjectures and surmises and not on legal evidence and

therefore, the conviction and sentence obviously cannot stand.

       14. Learned Public Prosecutor, on the other hand,

contended that the evidence of PWs 1, 3, 4 and 7 are sufficient to

show that the life of the victim in the matrimonial house was far

from happy. It is evident that she was being ill-treated may be

Crl.Appeal No.341/2005            9


for one reason or other.      The evidence also discloses that on

18.08.2000, she was dropped in the house of PW1 by the

accused who snatched away her thali chain and left the place

asking her to do whatever she wanted.        This conduct of the

accused speaks volume about the cruelty meted out to the victim

and there is clear indication that she was being ill-treated. It is

very evident, according to the learned Public Prosecutor, that the

life of the victim was miserable in the house of the accused and

the victim had refused to return to the matrimonial house. Even

assuming, according to the learned Public Prosecutor, there may

be want of evidence to attract the offence under Section 304B

IPC, there is clear and cogent evidence regarding commission of

offence under Section 498A IPC. According to the learned Public

Prosecutor, the court below has chosen to accept the evidence of

PWs 1, 3, 4 and 7 and unless it is shown that the findings are

either perverse or are contrary to the evidence on record, it may

not be appropriate for this Court to interfere at the appellate

stage.      Accordingly, it is contended that the conviction and

sentence have to stand.

Crl.Appeal No.341/2005           10


       15. Before going into the evidence of PWs 1, 3, 4 and 7,

certain facts will have to be noticed. On 19.08.2000, the victim

was found lying unconscious in her house and was removed to

St.Gregarious Missions Hospital. The doctor there attended to

the victim and had given her treatment. It is surprising to note

that the investigating agency did not seize the documents

relating to the victim from that hospital. It is also surprising to

note that the doctor at the St.Gregarious Missions Hospital,

though knowing fully that the condition of the victim was

precarious, did not think it necessary to inform the matter to

Police. The doctor, PW8 finding that the condition of the victim

was precarious and that she needs to be put on ventilator

referred the patient to Pushpagiri hospital.      She underwent

treatment in that hospital for nine days and she breathed her last

on 28.08.2000. It is also surprising to note that even from the

said hospital, no intimation was sent to the Police. It is shocking

that the case sheet regarding the treatment given to the victim

in the Pushpagiri hospital was also not produced.       PW13 was

examined to prove the certificate Ext.P6 which speaks about the

Crl.Appeal No.341/2005            11


treatment given to the victim. One fails to understand the failure

on the part of the investigating officer to seize those crucial

documents.          As the court below has chosen to accept the

evidence of PWs 1, 3, 4 and 7, it becomes necessary to refer to

their evidence.

       16. PW1 is the sister of the victim who laid Ext.P1 First

Information Statement. She says that she had signed in Ext.P1

after it was read over to her and also after knowing its contents.

PW1, at the time of evidence, says that she was given to

understand from her sister that she was being ill-treated by the

accused demanding that the fixed deposit of Rs.1 lakh standing in

the name of her sister be encashed and the money be given to

him. PW1 says that after the marriage, Girija used to visit the

house occasionally and on all those occasions, she used to inform

PW1 that the life in the matrimonial house was far from pleasant

and peaceful and the accused insisted that she should encash the

fixed deposit receipt and when she refused to do so, she was ill-

treated. PW1 also says that the victim used to complain over

telephone to her about the ill-treatment by the accused persons.

Crl.Appeal No.341/2005             12


She then speaks about the accused dropping the victim on

18.08.2000 in a car near her house and snatching away the thali

chain from the neck of the victim. But, her evidence regarding

snatching of thali is only hearsay since at the relevant time, she

was not at home.

       17. What is significant in the evidence of PW1 is that in

chief examination, there is no whisper by PW1 that there was any

demand for more dowry by the accused.           She confines her

testimony to the demand made by the accused for encashing the

Fixed Deposit receipt. Her attention was therefore drawn to the

statement in Ext.P1 of which she is the author and it is pointed

out to her that in Ext.P1, there is no mention of encashment of

Fixed Deposit receipt and on the contrary, the allegation was that

there was demand for more dowry and because of the failure on

the part of the victim to bring more dowry, she was being ill-

treated. She had no explanation for the same. Her evidence also

says that the victim used to reveal her agony to her sister

Rajalakshmi, and her brother Sivasankara Pillai was not in terms

with the family.       It could thus be seen that there is nothing

Crl.Appeal No.341/2005           13


common in the evidence of PW1 and what she has stated in

Ext.P1.      PW1 takes an entirely different stand at the time of

evidence.

       18. It must be remembered that Ext.P1 First Information

Statement was given after the death of the victim and with the

full knowledge of what had transpired. At that point of time,

there was no case for PW1 that any amount was deposited in the

name of Girija or that she had fixed deposit in her name or that

the accused demanded that the fixed amount be encashed. The

story of fixed deposit is a totally new case put forward at the

time of evidence giving a go bye to the earlier allegation of

demand for more dowry.       Obviously, the omission cannot be

treated as insignificant or unimportant.         It amounts to

contradiction as envisaged in law and it makes her evidence in

court open to serious doubt.

       19. Coming to the evidence of PW3, the mother of the

victim, it is even more surprising. She says that she came to

know that there were quarrels in the matrimonial house. She

does not speak about any reason for the same and she has no

Crl.Appeal No.341/2005          14


case that the accused demanded that the fixed deposit standing

in the name of Girija be encashed and the money be given to the

accused. In fact, she says that she does not even know whether

there was any deposit in the name of Girija at all. She also does

not speak about any demand for dowry as alleged by PW1 in

Ext.P1 which is given a go bye by PW1 at the time of evidence.

Obviously, if there was any such demand, it would not have

escaped the notice of PW3, the mother to whom Girija would

have been surely informed about the conduct of the accused.

       20. The evidence of PW4 does not serve much purpose.

Except the statement made by him that the accused had dropped

the victim in her house on 18.08.2000, the rest of his evidence

are of hearsay evidence.      In fact, the conversion alleged is

between the victim and his father who was no more at the time

of evidence.

       21. Coming to the evidence of PW7, it is even more baffling.

He is a person who claims to have visited the matrimonial house

of Girija. According to him, as per his information, the mother

was the dominating factor in the matrimonial house and the son

Crl.Appeal No.341/2005             15


used to obey only what the mother stated. The mother used to

prepare food and serve it to the son and the victim was not

allowed to participate in either cooking or serving it to the

accused.       He, significantly enough, does not speak about any

demand for dowry by the accused nor does he say any word with

regard to the demand made by the accused for encashment of

the Fixed Deposit receipt. The above is the only oral evidence

available in the case.       To say least, at least one would have

expected the investigating officer to find out there was any Fixed

Deposit.       That was also not done.     There is no consistency

between the First Information Statement given by PW1 and her

evidence in court. There is no mention of any demand for dowry

or demand for encashment of Fixed Deposit receipt, by PW1. The

evidence of PW4 is hearsay and the evidence of PW7, as already

referred to above, is entirely a different reason for the unpleasant

marital life of the victim in the matrimonial house.

       22. Under the above circumstances, it is not possible to

understand how the court below had come to the conclusion that

the offences had been made out.         In order to attract Section

Crl.Appeal No.341/2005          16


304B IPC, it has to be shown that soon before the death of the

person concerned, she was ill-treated demanding more dowry or

in other words, there has to be a nexus between the demand and

the death and obviously, there was no evidence to show that

there was any demand for dowry or that she was ill-treated on

the ground of inadequate dowry or demanding more dowry.

Learned Public Prosecutor, in the above situation, pointed out

that even assuming that offence under Section 304B IPC is not

attracted, offence under Section 498A IPC is clearly made out.

Even according to PWs 1, 3 and 7, there was ill-treatment in the

house of the accused. Though the argument may look attractive,

on a close scrutiny of the evidence, it looks otherwise. Section

498A IPC deals with a situation where the husband ill-treats his

wife wilfully leading the wife to commit suicide under the two

circumstances made mention of in that Section.

       23. It may be remembered here that initially the allegation

was one of demand for more dowry which was given a go bye at

the time of evidence by PW1. Except for saying that the victim

was ill-treated, there is no specific instance or incident pointed

Crl.Appeal No.341/2005           17


out by any of the witnesses indicating that there was any ill-

treatment by the accused, of the victim. It is also significant to

notice that there is no allegation of any physical assault, and only

mental torture is alleged against the accused persons.

       24. In the light of the inconsistencies pointed out in the

prosecution case that at the time of registering the case, First

Information Statement shows that demand for more dowry was

the reason for the death of the victim while at the time of

evidence that is non encashment of the Fixed Deposit receipt, it

will be extremely hazardous to enter a finding that the accused is

guilty of any of the offences. It is difficult to say that the

evidence of PW1 is so convincing and cogent so as to enable the

court to safely come to a conclusion that either the offence under

Section 304B or Section 498A IPC is made out. The defence

attempted to show that the victim was responsible for pouring of

acid in the bottle which contained medicine for the eye ailment of

the mother of the 2nd accused who is the 1st accused in this case.

They also produced documents to show that the medicine poured

in the eye of the mother, 1st accused, who is no more was in fact

Crl.Appeal No.341/2005           18


acid and that has caused severe damage to her eyes.             The

defence says that because it was done by the victim, she left the

house and refused to return. Even assuming that the defence

had not established that case beyond reasonable doubt, that does

not help the prosecution. It is well settled that the prosecution

has to establish its case beyond reasonable doubt. In the case

on hand, the presumption available under Section 113B of the

Indian Evidence Act is also not applicable.           Under these

circumstances, this Court is unable to accept the finding of the

court below that offences under Sections 304B and 498A IPC

have been made out.

       25. It is sad that the marital life of the victim was very

short. But, that by itself is not a ground to mulct liability on the

accused. At best, one could be said that some suspicion is cast

on the accused. But that is far from saying that the victim was

led to commit suicide due to the ill-treatment meted out by the

accused persons.

       26. For the above reasons, this Court is unable to uphold

the conviction and sentence passed by the court below for the

Crl.Appeal No.341/2005           19


offences under Sections 304B and 498A IPC.

       In the result, this appeal is allowed. The conviction and

sentence passed by the court below for the offences under

Sections 304B and 498A IPC are set aside. It is held that the

prosecution has not established its case beyond reasonable

doubt. The accused shall stand acquitted of both the offences.

His bail bond shall stand cancelled and he is set at liberty. If he

has paid the fine amount, the same shall be refunded to him.




                                               Sd/-

                                       P.BHAVADASAN
                                               JUDGE


smp

                                       // True Copy //




                                       P.A. to Judge.



