
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                              PRESENT:

         THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE S.S.SATHEESACHANDRAN

      MONDAY, THE 2ND DAY OF SEPTEMBER 2013/11TH BHADRA, 1935

                                  Bail Appl..No. 5399 of 2013
                                      -------------------------------
CRIME NO. 541/2013 OF KASARAGOD POLICE STATION , KASARAGOD DISTRICT
                                             ...


     PETITIONER/ACCUSED NO.2:
     --------------------------------------------

       PREMA, AGED 31 YEARS,
       W/O.RATHEESH, RESIDING AT SUNAMI COLONY, BIRANTHBAIL,
       KASABA VILLAGE, KASARAGOD TALUK AND DISTRICT.

       BY ADV. SRI.A.ARUNKUMAR

     RESPONDENTS/COMPLAINANT & STATE:
     --------------------------------------------------------------

    1. STATE OF KERALA,
       REPRESENTED BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR,
       HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM.

    2. THE STATION HOUSE OFFICER,
       KASARAGOD POLICE STATION(CRIME NO.541 OF 2013),
       KASARAGOD.

   R1 & R2 BY DIRECTOR GENERAL OF PROSECUTION SRI.T.ASAF ALI


       THIS BAIL APPLICATION HAVING COME UP FOR ADMISSION
      ON 27/08/2013, THE COURT ON 02/09/2013 PASSED THE
       FOLLOWING:


Kss


                                                          'CR'
                S.S.SATHEESACHANDRAN, J.
                    -------------------------------
                   B.A.No.5399 OF 2013 ()
                   --------------------------------
         Dated this the 2nd day of September, 2013

                            O R D E R
                            ~~~~~~~

      Petitioner is the second accused in a crime registered

at    Kasaragod    Police    Station,     which    is now under

investigation. She has filed the above application seeking

her release on bail under Section 439 of the Code of

Criminal Procedure (for short 'the Code').

      2.   Petitioner filed a complaint before police alleging

ill-treatment and harassment, both physical and mental, by

her husband, his mother and sister. She alleged that two

children were born to the spouses in their wedlock and both

of them boys are aged 1= years and five months

respectively. While she underwent treatment in a hospital

at Mangalore her husband took away the eldest child and,

later, informed her that the infant died of illness. A few

days earlier he took her with the youngest child to Bombay

by train, and during the journey she was in the ladies

B.A.No.5399/2013                2


compartment and her husband with the child in the general

compartment. When she reached Bombay, her husband and

child were not to be seen and she reported their missing to

the railway police. They sent her back to her native place

the next day. That night her husband came to the house,

manhandled her and left the place taking some articles. The

next morning, date of filing of her complaint, her

mother-in-law and sister-in-law, both coming together,

abused and threw her out of the house directing her to

return only with the dowry amount.        Her complaint with

allegations as aforesaid led to registration of the crime

under Section 498A of the Indian Penal Code naming three

accused persons, her husband and his mother and sister.

     3.     First accused viz., Ratheesh, husband of de facto

complainant, was arrested. His interrogation and materials

collected     in  investigation   revealed  that  de    facto

complainant, already mother of three children, cohabitated

with him, who was then father of two children, and while

B.A.No.5399/2013              3


they lived as husband and wife two children were born to

them. While the first child was aged three months, he sold

that infant for a sum of Rs.60,000/- and the next child,

when it was aged six months old, was also sold for a price

of Rs.One lakh, and both such sales of infants were done

with the consent and knowledge of de facto complainant.

     4.     Removing the second and third accused from the

crime, petitioner (de facto complainant) was thereupon

implicated as second accused, and investigation of crime

continued incorporating the offences punishable under

Sections 317 and 370A of IPC deleting 498A of IPC

incorporated earlier. Petitioner was arrested on 5.7.2013,

and on production before the magistrate she was remanded

to judicial custody. Her request for bail having been turned

down by the magistrate and also Sessions Judge, she has

moved the above application for her release from custody.

     5.     I have requested Sri.S.Rajeev to assist the court

as amicus curie to examine what offence would lie on the

B.A.No.5399/2013                4


allegations     raised.  Learned    counsel   for   petitioner,

Adv.Sri.A.Arunkumar, learned State Public Prosecutor,

Sri.T.Asaf      Ali  and    the   amicus   curie    appointed,

Adv.Sri.S.Rajeev, were heard.

     6.     Allegations in the crime imputing that the parents

sold two infants receiving money for such illegal sale are no

doubt shocking and revolting to human values and, if true,

show the unpardonable moral depravity of the culprits.

But, at this stage, when investigation is continuing and one

among the accused proceeded against has applied for bail

with reference to the allegations imputed, what, if any, is

the offence committed by her calls for examination. Crime

was registered on her complaint imputing the offence of

matrimonial cruelty against her husband and his mother and

sister.   Investigation of the crime disclosed she with her

husband sold two children, born out of their relationship,

receiving money, and, thereupon, with her husband she is

proceeded for offences punishable under Sections 317 and

B.A.No.5399/2013                 5


370A of the IPC.

     7.     Section 370A of the Penal Code has been brought

in along with new provision of Section 370, substituting the

previous section 370, on the recommendations made by the

Justice Verma Commission, which was appointed in the

wake of rape and murder of a girl in Delhi. Section 370A

IPC brought in by amendment, and Section 317 IPC, the

offences with which the accused in the crime are proceeded

against, have to be taken note of.

     Section 370A of Indian Penal Code reads thus:

     "370A.       Exploitation of a trafficked person:-

            (1)   Whoever, knowingly or having reason
            to believe that a minor has been trafficked,
            engages such minor for sexual exploitation
            in any manner, shall be punished with
            rigorous imprisonment for a term which
            shall not be less than five years, but which
            may extend to seven years, and shall also be
            liable to fine.
            (2)   Whoever,   knowingly   by   or  having
            reason to believe that a person has been
            trafficked, engages such person for sexual

B.A.No.5399/2013                    6


            exploitation in any manner, shall be punished
            with rigorous imprisonment for a term
            which shall not be less than three years,
            but which may extend to five years, and
            shall also be liable to fine."

     Section 317 of Indian Penal Code reads thus:

    "317. Exposure or abandonment of child under
    twelve years, by parent or person having care of it:-

            Whoever being the father or mother of a
            child under the age of twelve years, or
            having the care of such child, shall expose
            or leave such child in any place with the
            intention of wholly abandoning such child,
            shall be punished with imprisonment of
            either description for a term which may
            extend to seven years, or with fine, or with
            both."

     8.     Not much dilation is required to take a view that

on the allegations imputed over the sale of two infants by

their parents the aforesaid penal offences may not lie.

Learned State Public Prosecutor, Sri.T.Asaf Ali, fairly

submitted that the allegations imputed in the crime as such

would not disclose exposure or abandonment of children

B.A.No.5399/2013              7


covered under Section 317 of the Penal Code or of their

exploitation covered under Section 370A of that Code. The

investigation of crime revealed that the infants were sold by

the parents to some persons with the assistance of an

intermediary, an advocate in Mangalore, according to

learned State Public Prosecutor.     Both children are now

retrieved from persons who purchased them and infants are

now in proper care and custody, is the further submission of

learned State Public Prosecutor. What is the offence when

sale of a child is done by its parent or any other person is

the pointed question that emerges for consideration, at this

stage, where it is shown that the offences imputed in the

crime, namely, 317 and 370A of the Penal Code, as such

may not lie. Despite the substitution of previous section 370

of the Penal Code by the new provision, an offence

thereunder would lie only when there is exploitation as

under any of the clauses specified in the section. A mere

sale of an infant by a parent for value would not fall as an

B.A.No.5399/2013                8


exploitation of the child under Section 370 of the Penal

Code.

     9.     For the time being, it is noticed, neither Penal

Code nor any other statute contain provision to penalise a

person over the sale of women and children.          The Law

Commission of India, after taking note of the pervading

social evil of sale of women and children existing in certain

parts of the country and absence of any penal provision to

punish the offenders thereof, took up the subject suo motu,

and in its 146th report, recommended amendment of the

Penal Code introducing provisions for punishment of selling

of woman or minor. Laudable recommendations made by

the Law Commission in the above report are yet to be

adopted and incorporated in the Penal Code. Penal Code

contain certain provisions to deal with trafficking of persons

but they are confined to cases of one or other specified

matter and those provisions are hardly sufficient to combat

with the social evil of sale of women and children, for which

B.A.No.5399/2013                9


a number of social economic causes are attributable, and, it

being taken note of, the Commission felt that new

provisions specifically penalising sale of women and children

should be incorporated in the Penal Code.       Women and

children who are vulnerable to exploitation needs special

care     and    protection,   was    the   basis  for   such

recommendations. Though some changes have been made,

substituting previous Section 370 and incorporating 370A in

the Penal Code on the basis of recommendations made by

Justice Verma Commission, to deal with the social evil of

sale of women and children no penal provision has been

brought hitherto. Commission for Protection of Child Rights

Act, 2005, Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children)

Act, 2000, Right of Children to Free and Compulsory

Education Act 2009 (Central Act 35 of 2009) and Child

Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986 are some of

the enactments which have come into being to protect and

safeguard the interest of children.     Though some of the

B.A.No.5399/2013              10


above Acts were legislated upon recognizing 'the rights of

children' in terms of the United Nations Declaration of Rights

of Children, to which India is also a signatory, no provision

has been brought in any of such Acts to penalise those

involved in the sale of children.         Article 23 of the

Constitution of India prohibits trafficking in human beings.

Expression 'trafficking in human beings' in that article,

necessarily, has to be given a wide meaning including sale

of women or children, whatever be the purpose. However,

the above article prohibiting human trafficking states that

any contravention thereof 'shall be an offence punishable in

accordance with law'.     So far as trafficking of women or

children for exploitation of the nature specified new

provision of Section 370 of Indian Penal Code is applicable.

But, so far as the sale of children, as of now, there is no

offence punishable in accordance with law has been brought

into force. Recommendations given by the Law Commission

in its 146th report for incorporating penal provisions to

B.A.No.5399/2013             11


eradicate the social evil of sale of women and children

deserve immediate attention by all stakeholders who are

interested in the welfare of children and women. Stringent

procedures and guidelines for adoption of children from

India have been brought into force by the Central Adoption

Resource Authority in the wake of the directions given by

the Apex Court in Lakshmi Kant Pandae v. Union of India

(AIR 1984 SC 469) and recommendations made by a task force

constituted later under the chairmanship of a former Chief

Justice of India. However, so far as the sale of children

inspite of bringing of several enactments to protect the

interest of children, no penal provision has so far been

brought in, that too, even after recommendations for the

urgent need to do so have been made by the Law

Commission in its 146th report.

     10. On the facts and circumstances presented in the

case, where the offences imputed under Sections 317 and

370A are prima facie found inapplicable and no other

B.A.No.5399/2013                 12


offence punishable under law is shown at this stage of

investigation of crime, I find, petitioner has to be released

on bail. If investigation discloses that she has filed a false

complaint before police suppressing the sale of her children

with her husband or for any other offence punishable under

law, no doubt, she can be proceeded with for such offence.

But, at this stage, in the given facts of the case, she is

entitled to be released on bail.

     Petitioner is directed to be released on bail subject to

the following conditions:

         i)    Petitioner  shall   execute   a    bond   for
         Rs.15,000/- with two solvent sureties for the like
         sum, by each of them, to the satisfaction of the
         Judicial First Class Magistrate, Ksasaragod.
         ii)   Petitioner   shall   report    before     the
         investigating officer once in a week on every
         Sunday at a time between 10.00 a.m. and 12.00
         noon for a period of eight weeks or till completion
         of investigation of crime, whichever is earlier.
         iii)  Petitioner shall not leave the State for a
         period of six months or till completion of
         investigation of crime, whichever is earlier.

B.A.No.5399/2013              13


     I place on record my appreciation for the valuable

assistance rendered by learned counsel for petitioner,

Adv.Sri.A.Arunkumar, learned State Public Prosecutor,

Sri. T.Asaf Ali and the amicus curie appointed in the case,

Sri.S.Rajeev, for disposing this petition.

     Copy of the Order shall be sent to the Secretary,

Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment, Union of India,

for taking appropriate steps to give effect to the

recommendations given by the Law Commission in its 146th

report on 'Sale of Women and Children'.

     Petition is allowed.




                               S.S.SATHEESACHANDRAN
                                          JUDGE

ps/2/9



