
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                      PRESENT:

                           THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE V.K.MOHANAN

                  TUESDAY,THE 9TH DAY OF JULY 2013/18TH ASHADHA, 1935

                                            Crl.MC.No. 2802 of 2013
                                            -----------------------------------

                  CRIME NO. 454/2013 OF OCHIRA POLICE STATION , KOLLAM
                                                      --------------

PETITIONER(S)/ACCUSED:
--------------------------------------

            BIJU @ SAJI, AGED 38 YEARS,
            HARI BHAVANAM, NJAKKANAL P.O, OACHIRA VILLAGE,
            KOLLAM DISTRICT.

            BY ADV. SRI.K.B.ARUNKUMAR

RESPONDENTS/COMPLAINANT(S) & STATE:
---------------------------------------------------------------

        1. STATE OF KERALA,
            REPRESENTED BY SUB INSPECTOR OF POLICE,
            OACHIRA POLICE STATION THROUGH PUBLIC PROSECUTOR,
            HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM.

        2. LEKHA,
            D/O.VIJAYAMMA, AGED 35 YEARS, CHAKKALAYIL VEEDU, NJAKKANAL P.O
            OACHIRA VILLAGE, KOLLAM DISTRICT- 691 309.


            R1 BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SMT.S. HYMA
            R2 BY ADV. SRI.K.SIJU

            THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE HAVING COME UP FOR ADMISSION
            ON 09-07-2013, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE FOLLOWING:




PJ

Crl.MC.No. 2802 of 2013
----------------------------------

                                           APPENDIX

PETITIONER(S)' EXHIBITS
-------------------------------------

ANNEXURE 1. COPY OF FIR WITH FIS IN CRIME NO. 454/2013 OF OACHIRA POLICE
                     STATION.

ANNEXURE 2. COPY OF AFFIDAVIT SWORN BY THE 2ND RESPONDENT DATED
                     29.4.2013.

RESPONDENT(S)' EXHIBITS
---------------------------------------


                     NIL.




                                                       / TRUE COPY /


                                                       P.S.TO JUDGE


PJ


                       V.K.MOHANAN, J.
           ----------------------------------------
                 Crl.M.C. No. 2802 of 2013
           ----------------------------------------
            Dated this the 9th day of July, 2013

                           ORDER

        The above petition is filed under Section 482 of the

Criminal Procedure Code (for short 'Cr.P.C.') at the instance of

the petitioner, who is an accused in Crime No. 454/2013 of

Oachira Police Station for the offences punishable under

Sections 498A, 326 and 188 of I.P.C., with a prayer to quash

Annexure-1 FIR in Crime No. 454/2013 of Oachira Police

Station and all further proceedings thereto as the matter is

settled out of court.

        2.      The allegation in the above case is that the

marriage between the petitioner and the second respondent

who is the defacto complainant was solemnized on 26/10/2002

and thereafter they were living together as husband and wife

in the matrimonial house during which difference of opinion

arouse among the spouses and the defacto complainant

according to the allegation subjected to physical harassment

demanding more money and when the defacto complainant

approached     the   Judicial First Class   Magistrate   Court,

Karunagappally by filing M.C.(DV)No.65/2013, the accused

attacked her at about 7 a.m on 01/04//2013 and the accused

Crl.M.C. No. 2802 of 2013
                               2

beaten the defacto complainant on his left hand and legs,

resulting fracture to the left hand and thereby the accused

committed the offences punishable under Sections 498A, 326

and 188 of I.P.C. Now, the case of the petitioner is that the

matter is settled out of court and in terms of their settlement

they are residing together and leading a peaceful marital life.

The Second respondent, defacto complainant has sworn into

Annexure -A2 affidavit.

          3. Heard the learned counsel for the petitioner as

well as the second respondent. I have also heard the learned

Public Prosecutor.

          4. The learned counsel for the petitioner submitted

that during the pendency of the above case, the matter is

settled amicably between the parties to the dispute which is

the subject matter of the above case.           Therefore, the

continuation of the proceedings in the above case is abuse of

process of law and proceedings.

          5. The learned counsel for the second respondent who

on the basis of specific instruction received        from the

respondent submitted that the above respondent, who is the

de facto complainant does not intend to proceed any further

Crl.M.C. No. 2802 of 2013
                                3

against the petitioner and she has no grievance against him.

          6. I have carefully considered the above submissions

of the respective counsel. I have verified the documents and

materials produced along with the above petition. In the given

facts and circumstances of the case and especially in the light

of the settlement arrived between the parties to the dispute,

the learned Public Prosecutor has also no objection in allowing

the above petition.

          7.    Having regard to the facts and circumstances

involved in the case, it can be seen that the offences involved

in the above case are only Sections 498A, 326 and 188 of

I.P.C., which are more or less personal in nature and no public

interest is involved. It is pertinent to note that though such

offences are involved, the real parties to the dispute

approached this Court after having amicably settled the

matter.      From the submission made by the counsel for the

second respondent, it appears to me that the           de facto

complainant has no further grievance against the petitioner

accused in the light of the settlement arrived by them. In this

juncture, it is relevant to note the decisions of the Honourable

Apex Court reported in Gian Singh v. State of Punjab [2012

Crl.M.C. No. 2802 of 2013
                                     4

(4) KLT 108(SC)] and Jitendra Raghuvanshi and Others v.

Babita Raghuvanshi and another [2013 (1) KLD 817 (SC)].

In Gian Singh's case, the Supreme Court has held as follows:-

                  "57.  The position that emerges from the

          above discussion can be summarised thus:          the

          power of the High Court in quashing a criminal

          proceeding or FIR or complaint in exercise of its

          inherent jurisdiction is distinct and different from

          the power given to a criminal court for compounding

          the offences under S.320 of the Code.        Inherent

          power is of wide plenitude with no statutory

          limitation but it has to be exercised in accord with

          the guideline engrafted in such power viz;(i) to

          secure the ends of justice or (ii) to prevent abuse of

          the process of any Court. In what cases power to

          quash the criminal proceeding or complaint or F.I.R.

          may be exercised where the offender and victim

          have settled their dispute would depend on the facts

          and circumstances of each case and no category can

          be prescribed..



It is further held as follows:-


          ".........   But   the   criminal     cases    having

          overwhelmingly and pre-dominatingly civil flavour

          stand on different footing for the purposes of

          quashing, particularly the offences arising from

          commercial, financial,mercandile, civil, partnership

          or such like transactions or the offences arising out

          of matrimony relating to dowry etc. or the family

          disputes where the wrong is basically private or

Crl.M.C. No. 2802 of 2013
                                      5

          personal in nature and the parties have resolved

          their entire dispute. In this category of cases, High

          Court may quash criminal proceedings if in its view,

          because of the compromise between the offender

          and victim, the possibility of conviction is remote

          and bleak and continuation of criminal case would

          put accused to great oppression and prejudice and

          extreme injustice would be caused to him by not

          quashing the criminal case despite          full and

          complete settlement and compromise with the

          victim........"



Further, in Jitendra Raghuvanshi's case, the Apex Court

has held as follows:-


                  "7.   It is not in dispute that matrimonial

          disputes have been on considerable increase in

          recent times resulting in filing of complaints under

          Sections 498A and 406 of I.P.C. not only against

          the husband but also against the relatives of the

          husband. The question is when such matters are

          resolved either by the wife agreeing to rejoin the

          matrimonial home or by mutual settlement of other

          pending     disputes  for  which   both   the   sides

          approached the High Court and jointly prayed for

          quashing of the criminal proceedings or the FIR or

          complaint by the wife under Sections 498A and 406

          of I.P.C., whether the prayer can be declined on the

          sole ground that since the offences are non-

          compoundable under Section 320 of the Code, it

          would be impermissible for the court to quash the

          criminal proceedings or FIR or complaint.

                  8. It is not in dispute that in the case on

Crl.M.C. No. 2802 of 2013
                                      6

          hand subsequent to the filing of the criminal

          complaint under Sections 498A and 406 of IPC and

          Sections 3 and 4 of the Dowry Prohibition Act,

          1961, with the help and intervention of family

          members, friends and well-wishers, the parties

          concerned have amicably settled their differences

          and executed a compromise/settlement. Pursuant

          thereto, the appellants filed the said compromise

          before the Trial Court with a request to place the

          same     on   record  and    to   drop  the   criminal

          proceedings against the appellants herein.       It is

          also not in dispute that in additional to the mutual

          settlement arrived at by the parties, respondent/-

          wife has also filed an affidavit stating that she did

          not wish to pursue the criminal proceedings against

          the appellants and fully supported the contents of

          the settlement deed.     It is the grievance of the

          appellants that no only the Trial Court rejected such

          prayer of the parties but also the High Court failed

          toe exercise its jurisdiction under Section 482 of

          the Code only on the ground that the criminal

          proceedings relate to the offences punishable under

          Sections 498A and 406 of IPC which are non-

          compoundable in nature."

                  "12. In our view, it is the duty of the Courts

          to encourage genuine settlements of matrimonial

          disputes, particularly, when the same are on

          considerable increase.     Even if the offences are

          non-compoundable, if they relate to matrimonial

          disputes and the Court is satisfied that the parties

          have settled the same amicably and without any

          pressure, we hold that for the purpose of securing

          ends of justice, Section 320 of the Code would not

Crl.M.C. No. 2802 of 2013
                                       7

           be a bar to the exercise of power of quashing of

           FIR,   complaint    or   the   subsequent     criminal

           proceedings.

                  13.     There has been an outburst of

           matrimonial    disputes   in  recent  times.      The

           institution of marriage occupies an important place

           and it has an important role to play in the society.

           Therefore, every effort should be made in the

           interest of the individuals in order to enable them

           to settle down in life and live peacefully.     If the

           parties ponder over their defaults and terminate

           their disputes amicably by mutual agreement

           instead of fighting it out in a Court of law, in order

           to do complete justice in the matrimonial matters,

           the Courts should be less hesitant in exercising its

           extraordinary jurisdiction. It is trite to state that

           the power under Section 482 should be exercised

           sparingly and with circumspection only when the

           Court is convinced, on the basis of material on

           record, that allowing the proceedings to continue

           would be an abuse of the process of the Court or

           that   the   ends   of   justice  require  that    the

           proceedings ought to be quashed."

Considering the particular facts and circumstances in this case,

it can be seen further that the criminal proceedings are

initiated consequent to the matrimonial dispute arose among

the parties and both the disputes are now amicably settled

between the parties. According to me, in the light of the facts

and     circumstances       involved     in   the    present     case and

Crl.M.C. No. 2802 of 2013
                                8

particularly in view of the settlement arrived in the present

case, the dictum laid in the above decisions will be squarely

applicable in the present case. According to me, as the parties

to the dispute settled the issues amicably, it is the duty of this

Court to promote such settlement, instead of compelling the

parties to go on with the dispute. It is pertinent to note that

since the matter is settled out of court, in the event of

proceeding with the trial, there would not have any fruitful

prosecution, resulting the conviction of the accused, rather the

net result would be sheer waste of judicial time and abuse of

process of the court and proceedings. Thus, according to me,

following the decisions cited supra, this Crl.M.C.can be allowed

granting the relief as sought for.

          In the result, this Crl.M.C. is allowed, quashing

Annexure-1 and all further proceedings pending against the

petitioners in Crime No. 454/2013 of Oachira Police Station

and all further proceedings thereto.




                                         V.K.MOHANAN,
                                                   JUDGE



AS



