
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                     PRESENT:

                          THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE P.BHAVADASAN

             MONDAY,THE 11TH DAY OF NOVEMBER 2013/20TH KARTHIKA, 1935

                                            CRL.A.No. 99 of 2005 (A)
                                                -------------------------

                SC 15/2004 of ADDL.SESSIONS COURT (ADHOC)-II, ERNAKULAM

APPELLANT/1ST ACCUSED:
------------------------------------------------

            NASSER, S/O.ABDULLA,
            C.C.111/551, MADATHILPARAMBU, MATTANCHERRY VILLAGE.

            BY ADVS.SRI.MATHEW ABRAHAM
                          SMT.PRIYA S.RANI

RESPONDENT/COMPLAINANT:
--------------------------------------------

            STATE OF KERALA, REP. BY
            PUBLIC PROSECUTOR, HIGH COURT OF KERALA.

             BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SMT. P.MAYA

            THIS CRIMINAL APPEAL HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD ON 11-11-2013, THE
COURT ON THE SAME DAY DELIVERED THE FOLLOWING:


                       P. BHAVADASAN, J.
                 -Crl.Appeal.-No. - - - - - - - -
                   - - - - -  - -
                                  99 of 2005
                 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
          Dated this the 11th day of November, 2013.

                           JUDGMENT


          Two persons were prosecuted for the offence

punishable under Section 304B read with Section 34 of IPC.

Among them, the second accused was acquitted of all charges.

But the first accused was found guilty of the offence

punishable under Section 498A of IPC.            He was therefore

convicted and sentenced to suffer rigorous imprisonment for

one year and to pay a fine of  5,000/- with a default clause of

one month.

          2.   The marriage between the victim and the first

accused was solemnized on 24.08.1997.               As per the

allegations, at the time of marriage, ten sovereigns of gold

and  25,000/- was given. The couple, after marriage, had

taken up residence in the matrimonial house. The allegation

is that soon after the couple took up residence together,

Crl.Appeal. 99/2005.
                                2

differences of opinion arose between them. The first accused

began to ill-treat and torture the victim demanding more

dowry. It is further alleged that the accused told the victim to

leave the house so that he could marry another lady. Unable

to bear the torture and ill-treatment anymore, the victim

poured kerosene and set herself on fire and she died on

14.04.2002.

              3. Receiving information from the hospital, P.W.1

went to the hospital and recorded Ext.P7, First Information

Statement furnished by the victim.      As per Ext.P8, FIR, the

crime was registered initially for the offence under Section

498A read with Section 34 of I.P.C.         P.W.12 took over

investigation and prepared Ext.P9 mahazar and seized M.O.1

series from the place of occurrence. He had Section 304B read

with Section 34 of I.P.C. incorporated and deleted Section

498A of I.P.C. P.W.9, the Assistant Commissioner of Police

conducted further investigation of the case and after arrest of

the accused, necessary report was filed before the court. While

Crl.Appeal. 99/2005.
                                   3

the patient was undergoing              treatment in Government

Hospital, Ernakulam, on request by the Investigating Officer, a

dying declaration was recorded by P.W.13 and dying

declaration is marked as Ext.P12. The Investigating Officer,

P.W.15 had questioned the doctors who had treated the victim

and    obtained      necessary   certificate.    After  completing

investigation, final report was laid before court.

              4.    The court, before which the final report was

laid, took cognizance of the offence. Finding that the offence

is exclusively triable by a Court of Sessions, the case was

committed to Sessions Court, Ernakulam under Section 209 of

Cr.P.C. That court made over the case to Additional         District

and Sessions Court, Adhoc-II, Ernakulam for trial and disposal.

              5.    The latter court, on receipt of records, framed

charges for the offence punishable under Section 304B read

with Section 34 of IPC. To the charge, the accused pleaded

not guilty and claimed to be tried. The prosecution therefore

Crl.Appeal. 99/2005.
                                    4

had P.Ws. 1 to 17 examined and had Exts.P1 to 17 marked.

The defence had Ext.D1 marked.

              6.    After the close of the prosecution evidence, the

accused were questioned under Section 313 Cr.P.C.             They

denied all the incriminating circumstances brought out in

evidence against them and maintained that they were

innocent. First accused has stated that soon after marriage,

the victim suspected his conduct and that she used to pick up

quarrel everyday in the night. On one occasion, the sister of

the victim also joined her.         He would further say that the

victim had gone to her house and consumed kerosene. She

was taken for mental treatment on 13.03.2001. She was given

medicine and first aid. It was at his request, she was brought

back to the matrimonial house. On the date of incident, while

trying to rescue her, he also suffered burn injuries.            He

maintained that he is innocent.

Crl.Appeal. 99/2005.
                                   5

              7.    Finding that the accused could not be

acquitted under Section 232 Cr.P.C., he was asked to enter on

his defence. He chose to adduce no evidence.

              8. Presumably, on the basis of evidence furnished

by P.Ws. 1, 3, 4, 8 and 13 and based on Exts.P12 and P7, the

court below came to the conclusion that though the offence

under Section 304B of I.P.C. is not made out, the offence

under      Section    498A    of  I.P.C.  is clearly established.

Accordingly, the court below found the first accused guilty of

the same.        Conviction and sentence as already mentioned

followed.

              9.    Assailing the conviction and sentence, it was

contended that the court below was not justified in finding the

accused guilty of the offence punishable under Section 498A

of I.P.C. It was contended that there was want of evidence to

establish that the victim was treated cruelly by her husband

and that the acts are so severe so as to drive her to commit

suicide. The evidence of P.Ws. 1, 3, 4 and 8 are stated to be

Crl.Appeal. 99/2005.
                                6

hearsay evidence and they are of no value. There is nothing to

show, according to the appellant, that the victim was in a fit

position to give dying declaration. It is further pointed out

that Section 498A of I.P.C. is not a cognizable offence nor are

the ingredients of 498A of I.P.C. available in a charge of 304B

of I.P.C. Therefore, conviction and sentence cannot stand.

              10.   The learned Public Prosecutor on the other

hand contended that the evidence of P.Ws. 1, 3, 4, 8 and 13

clearly establish that the victim was driven to commit suicide

unable to bear the ill-treatment by the first accused. The First

Information Statement furnished by the victim herself which is

marked as Ext.P7 makes mention of these facts. It is further

fortified by Ext.P12 dying declaration recorded by P.W.13. She

has categorically stated in P.W.13 that it was because she was

unable to bear the ill-treatment, harassment and cruelty at the

hands of her husband that she was driven to commit suicide.

The court below has chosen to accept these items of evidence

and there is no reason to take a different view.

Crl.Appeal. 99/2005.
                                 7

              11.   The fact that Rejeena, the victim, poured

kerosene on herself and set herself on fire on 09.04.2004 is

not in dispute and she died on 14.04.2004.          P.W.1 is her

mother and P.W.3 is her sister and P.W.4 is her father. All of

them say that initially, things were alright but after the lapse

of 1 = months of marriage, problems began to surface. All of

them would say that she began to be ill-treated and she was

taunted and humiliated.        P.W.1 says that after the third

delivery, the relatives were approached for a mediation talk.

She stayed with P.W.1 first and it was after being assured that

no further ill-treatment could be meted out, she was taken to

the matrimonial house.

              12. P.W.2 is a neighbour who has only hearsay

knowledge.

              13. P.W.3 is the younger sister of the victim. She

would say that the victim had committed suicide unable to

bear the ill-treatment meted out by the accused. She says that

the accused         used to taunt the victim quite often.   The

Crl.Appeal. 99/2005.
                                  8

situation became acute after the second child was born. She

points out that during the four and half years of marriage, for

about four years the victim and her children were residing in

the paternal house of the victim. The accused used to find

fault with the victim on the slightest pretext and that fault

being conveyed to the first accused, he used to beat the

victim. After the third child was born, Rajeena stayed in her

house for six months. Then they had to seek the intervention

of the Mosque authority and they mediated. Thereafter she

was taken to the matrimonial house.

              14. P.W.4 is the father of the victim. He would also

depose that most of the time the couple were residing with

them and the children were in his house. After the third child

was born, the victim was taken to the matrimonial house. He

would say that the victim was turned out of the matrimonial

house. Then they contacted the Mosque Committee and on

their intervention the victim was taken to the matrimonial

house. He would say that when he went to the hospital and

Crl.Appeal. 99/2005.
                                  9

met her daughter, he asked what had transpired, then she

is alleged to have told him that it was due to the unbearable

treatment meted out by the accused persons that she had

taken the extreme step.

              15. P.W.5 who is the Mutavalli of the Mosque also

deposed that the Mosque Committee had intervened on a

complaint given to them by the victim's father of the

ill-treatment meted out by the accused persons.

              16. P.W.8 is the paternal uncle of the victim. He

speaks about the ill-treatment meted out to the victim.

              17. It is true that P.Ws.1, 3 and 4 did not exactly

say they had occasion to see the victim being ill-treated. But

the evidence of P.W.4 is to the effect that when he had gone to

the hospital she is alleged to have told him what had driven

her to take the extreme step. There was ill-treatment and

consequent complaint from the side of the victim is evident

from the testimony of P.W.5. P.W.13 is the learned Magistrate

who had occasion to record the dying declaration of the victim

Crl.Appeal. 99/2005.
                                 10

which is marked as Ext.P12. He speaks about the formalities

undergone before recording the statement.

             18. Ext.P7 is a statement given by the victim herself

when the police went over to the hospital to record her

statement. In no less terms she says that after two children

were born to the couple, they began to ill-treat her and

physical assault became a daily routine. Unable to bear the

torture any more, she stated that she had poured kerosene

and set herself on fire.

             19. Ext.P12 is the statement recorded by P.W.13.

She says about the ill-treatment meted out to her by the first

accused and she says that a lot of support used to be given by

the unmarried sister of the first accused. She is categoric in

her statement that it was due to her inability to put up with the

ill-treatment any more that she attempted to commit suicide.

             20. Even assuming that the evidence of P.Ws. 1, 3

and 4 have to be termed as hearsay, the evidence of P.Ws.5

and 13 stand on a different footing.         P.W.5 says having

Crl.Appeal. 99/2005.
                               11

intervened in a mediation talk based on a complaint submitted

by P.W.4. It has come out in evidence that it was after the said

mediation talk that the victim was taken to the matrimonial

house. Any doubt regarding the ill-treatment is cleared by

Ext.P12 dying declaration in which she categorically stated

that she had no choice but to commit suicide unable to bear

the ill-treatment meted out by the accused persons. In Ext.P7

she has stated that the accused used to mentally and

physically harass her and they used to physically assault her

also.

             21. The court below was therefore perfectly justified

in coming to the conclusion that the offence under Section

498A of I.P.C. is made out.

             22.    What now remains to be considered is the

question of sentence.       The court below was extremely

considerate with regard to the sentence      and the sentence

imposed appears to be just.

Crl.Appeal. 99/2005.
                                   12

             The result is that this appeal is without merits and it

is only to be dismissed. I do so.




                                               P. BHAVADASAN,
                                                     JUDGE

sb.



