
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                     PRESENT:

                           THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE V.K.MOHANAN

                 FRIDAY, THE 2ND DAY OF AUGUST 2013/11TH SRAVANA, 1935

                                           Crl.MC.No. 3250 of 2013 ()
                                               ---------------------------
 CC.NO. 387/2011 OF JUDICIAL FIRST CLASS MAGISTRATE COURT NO.II, PERAMBRA
                                                   ------------------

PETITIONERS/ACCUSED :
-------------------------------------

        1. FIROZ, AGED 37 YEARS
            S/O.ABDUL AZEEZ, THENOTH HOUSE, ATHOLY PO.,
            KOZHIKODE DISTRICT.

        2. RASNI, AGED 31 YEARS
            W/O.JALAL, MANJAL VALAPPIL HOUSE, VADAMA
            MALA (PO), TRICHUR DISTRICT.

        3. JALAL, AGED 43 YEARS,
            S/O.MUHAMMED, MANJAL VALAPPIL HOUSE, VADAMA
            MALA (PO), TRICHUR DISTRICT.

            BY ADV. SRI.JESWIN P.VARGHESE

RESPONDENTS/COMPLAINANT :
-----------------------------------------------

        1. STATE OF KERALA
            REPRESENTED BY THE PUBLIC PROSECUTOR
            HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM

        2. VAFEEN, AGED 29 YEARS
            W/O.FIROZ, PARAMBATH HOUSE, MANJAL PADAM PARAMBU
            CHERUVANNUR PO, KOLATHARA, KOZHIKODE DISTRICT
            PIN 673 524.

            R1 BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SMT.S. HYMA
            R2 BY ADV. SMT.G.VIDYA


            THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE HAVING COME UP FOR ADMISSION
            ON 02-08-2013, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE FOLLOWING:


Mn


                                                                              ...2/-

Crl.MC.No. 3250 of 2013 ()
-------------------------------------

                                                      APPENDIX

PETITIONERS' EXHIBITS :
-------------------------------------

ANNEXURE A THE CERTIFIED COPY OF FINAL REPORT IN CC NO. 387/2011 BEFORE
                     JFCM COURT NO.II, PERAMBRA DATED 5/10/2011.

ANNEXURE B THE AFFIDAVIT SWORN BY 2ND RESPONDENT DATED 30/7/2013.

RESPONDENTS' EXHIBITS :                          NIL
------------------------------------------------------

                                                                  //TRUE COPY//




                                                                  P.S. TO JUDGE

Mn


                       V.K.MOHANAN, J.
           ----------------------------------------
                 Crl.M.C.No.3250 of 2013
           ----------------------------------------
         Dated this the 2nd day of August, 2013

                           O R D E R

         The above petition is filed under Section 482 of the

Criminal Procedure Code (for short 'Cr.P.C.') at the instance of

the petitioners, who are accused in C.C.No.387/2011 of the

Judicial First Class Magistrate Court-II, Perambra which is a

case instituted upon the police report for the offences

punishable under Sections 498A, 406, 506(ii), r/w Section 34

of I.P.C., with a prayer to quash Annexure A final report and

all further proceedings in C.C.No.387/2011 on the files of

Judicial First Class Magistrate Court-II, Perambra as the matter

is settled out of court.

         2. The prosecution allegation is that the defacto

complainant is subjected to cruelty at her matrimonial home

by the petitioners and they have misappropriated 20

sovereigns gold ornaments and Rs.20,000/- given to the

defacto complainant by her father during marriage and thereby

committed the offences. Now, the case of the petitioners is

that during the pendency of the above crime the matter is

settled out amicably between the petitioner and the second

Crl.M.C.No.3250 of 2013
                               2

respondent who are husband and wife and now they are

residing together and leading a peaceful material life.

Annexure-B is the affidavit sworn into by the defaco

complainant who is the second respondent.

         3. Heard the learned counsel for the petitioners as

well as the second respondent. I have also heard the learned

Public Prosecutor.

         4. The learned counsel for the petitioners submitted

that during the pendency of the above case, the matter is

settled amicably between the parties to the dispute which is

the subject matter of the above case.          Therefore, the

continuation of the proceedings in the above case is abuse of

process of law and proceedings.

         5. The learned counsel for the second respondent who

on the basis of specific instruction received        from the

respondent submitted that the above respondent, who is the

de facto complainant does not intend to proceed any further

against the petitioners and she has no grievance against them.

         6. I have carefully considered the above submissions

of the respective counsel. I have verified the documents and

materials produced along with the above petition. In the given

Crl.M.C.No.3250 of 2013
                                 3

facts and circumstances of the case and especially in the light

of the settlement arrived between the parties to the dispute,

the learned Public Prosecutor has also no objection in allowing

the above petition.

         7.   Having regard to the facts and circumstances

involved in the case, it can be seen that the offences involved

in the above case are only Sections 498A, 406, 506(ii), r/w

Section 34 of I.P.C., which are more or less personal in nature

and no public interest is involved. It is pertinent to note that

though such offences are involved, the real parties to the

dispute approached this Court after having amicably settled

the matter. From the submission made by the counsel for the

second respondent, it appears to me that the           de facto

complainant has no further grievance against the petitioners

accused in the light of the settlement arrived by them. In this

juncture, it is relevant to note the decisions of the Honourable

Apex Court reported in Gian Singh v. State of Punjab [2012

(4) KLT 108(SC)] and Jitendra Raghuvanshi and Others v.

Babita Raghuvanshi and another [2013 (1) KLD 817 (SC)].

In Gian Singh's case, the Supreme Court has held as follows:-

               "57.  The position that emerges from the

Crl.M.C.No.3250 of 2013
                                      4

         above discussion can be summarised thus:           the

         power of the High Court in quashing a criminal

         proceeding or FIR or complaint in exercise of its

         inherent jurisdiction is distinct and different from

         the power given to a criminal court for compounding

         the offences under S.320 of the Code.        Inherent

         power is of wide plenitude with no statutory

         limitation but it has to be exercised in accord with

         the guideline engrafted in such power viz;(i) to

         secure the ends of justice or (ii) to prevent abuse of

         the process of any Court. In what cases power to

         quash the criminal proceeding or complaint or F.I.R.

         may be exercised where the offender and victim

         have settled their dispute would depend on the facts

         and circumstances of each case and no category can

         be prescribed..



It is further held as follows:-


          "......... But     the   criminal    cases    having

          overwhelmingly and pre-dominatingly civil flavour

          stand on different footing for the purposes of

          quashing, particularly the offences arising from

          commercial, financial,mercandile, civil, partnership

          or such like transactions or the offences arising out

          of matrimony relating to dowry etc. or the family

          disputes where the wrong is basically private or

          personal in nature and the parties have resolved

          their entire dispute. In this category of cases, High

          Court may quash criminal proceedings if in its view,

          because of the compromise between the offender

          and victim, the possibility of conviction is remote

Crl.M.C.No.3250 of 2013
                                    5

         and bleak and continuation of criminal case would

         put accused to great oppression and prejudice and

         extreme injustice would be caused to him by not

         quashing the criminal case despite          full and

         complete settlement and compromise with the

         victim........"

Further, in Jitendra Raghuvanshi's case, the Apex Court

has held as follows:-


                "7.    It is not in dispute that matrimonial

         disputes have been on considerable increase in

         recent times resulting in filing of complaints under

         Sections 498A and 406 of I.P.C. not only against

         the husband but also against the relatives of the

         husband. The question is when such matters are

         resolved either by the wife agreeing to rejoin the

         matrimonial home or by mutual settlement of other

         pending     disputes  for  which   both   the   sides

         approached the High Court and jointly prayed for

         quashing of the criminal proceedings or the FIR or

         complaint by the wife under Sections 498A and 406

         of I.P.C., whether the prayer can be declined on the

         sole ground that since the offences are non-

         compoundable under Section 320 of the Code, it

         would be impermissible for the court to quash the

         criminal proceedings or FIR or complaint.

                8. It is not in dispute that in the case on

         hand subsequent to the filing of the criminal

         complaint under Sections 498A and 406 of IPC and

         Sections 3 and 4 of the Dowry Prohibition Act,

         1961, with the help and intervention of family

         members, friends and well-wishers, the parties

Crl.M.C.No.3250 of 2013
                                    6

         concerned have amicably settled their differences

         and executed a compromise/settlement. Pursuant

         thereto, the appellants filed the said compromise

         before the Trial Court with a request to place the

         same   on   record   and    to  drop   the   criminal

         proceedings against the appellants herein.       It is

         also not in dispute that in additional to the mutual

         settlement arrived at by the parties, respondent/-

         wife has also filed an affidavit stating that she did

         not wish to pursue the criminal proceedings against

         the appellants and fully supported the contents of

         the settlement deed.     It is the grievance of the

         appellants that no only the Trial Court rejected such

         prayer of the parties but also the High Court failed

         toe exercise its jurisdiction under Section 482 of

         the Code only on the ground that the criminal

         proceedings relate to the offences punishable under

         Sections 498A and 406 of IPC which are non-

         compoundable in nature."

               "12. In our view, it is the duty of the Courts

         to encourage genuine settlements of matrimonial

         disputes, particularly, when the same are on

         considerable increase.    Even if the offences are

         non-compoundable, if they relate to matrimonial

         disputes and the Court is satisfied that the parties

         have settled the same amicably and without any

         pressure, we hold that for the purpose of securing

         ends of justice, Section 320 of the Code would not

         be a bar to the exercise of power of quashing of

         FIR,  complaint    or   the   subsequent     criminal

         proceedings.

               13.     There has been an outburst of

Crl.M.C.No.3250 of 2013
                                      7

          matrimonial    disputes   in  recent  times.      The

          institution of marriage occupies an important place

          and it has an important role to play in the society.

          Therefore, every effort should be made in the

          interest of the individuals in order to enable them

          to settle down in life and live peacefully.     If the

          parties ponder over their defaults and terminate

          their disputes amicably by mutual agreement

          instead of fighting it out in a Court of law, in order

          to do complete justice in the matrimonial matters,

          the Courts should be less hesitant in exercising its

          extraordinary jurisdiction. It is trite to state that

          the power under Section 482 should be exercised

          sparingly and with circumspection only when the

          Court is convinced, on the basis of material on

          record, that allowing the proceedings to continue

          would be an abuse of the process of the Court or

          that   the   ends   of   justice  require  that    the

          proceedings ought to be quashed."

Considering the particular facts and circumstances in this case,

it can be seen further that the criminal proceedings are

initiated consequent to the matrimonial dispute arose among

the parties and both the disputes are now amicably settled

between the parties. According to me, in the light of the facts

and    circumstances       involved     in   the    present     case and

particularly in view of the settlement arrived in the present

case, the dictum laid in the above decisions will be squarely

Crl.M.C.No.3250 of 2013
                                8

applicable in the present case. According to me, as the parties

to the dispute settled the issues amicably, it is the duty of this

Court to promote such settlement, instead of compelling the

parties to go on with the dispute. It is pertinent to note that

since the matter is settled out of court, in the event of

proceeding with the trial, there would not have any fruitful

prosecution, resulting the conviction of the accused, rather the

net result would be sheer waste of judicial time and abuse of

process of the court and proceedings. Thus, according to me,

following the decisions cited supra, this Crl.M.C.can be allowed

granting the relief as sought for.

         In the result, this Crl.M.C. is allowed, quashing

Annexure-A and all further proceedings pending against the

petitioners in C.C.No.387/2011 of the Judicial First Class

Magistrate Court, Perambra and all further proceedings

thereto.




                                                   Sd/-

                                            V.K.MOHANAN,
                                                  JUDGE
AS



