
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALAAT ERNAKULAM

                                                      PRESENT:

                         THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE ANTONY DOMINIC
                                                            &
                             THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE P.D.RAJAN

                WEDNESDAY, THE 19TH DAY OF JUNE 2013/29TH JYAISHTA 1935

                                         Mat.Appeal.No. 983 of 2010 ( )
                                              -------------------------------
        AGAINST THE JUDGMENT IN OP 1264/2004 of FAMILY COURT,TRIVANDRUM
                                                DATED 28-07-2010


APPELLANT(S)/APPELLANTS/RESPONDENTS::
-----------------------------------------------------------------

        1. S.SAROJAKUMAR, S/O.SUDHAKARAN,
            K.S.R.T.C. EMPLOYEE, MANGALA VILASAM, CHOVVARA
            KOTTUKAL VILLAGE, NEYYATTINKARA TALUK
            THIRUVANANTHAPURAM DISTRICT
            NOW RESIDING AT SUDHAKAR NIVAS
            CHOVVARA P.O.-695 120.

        2. S.SUDHAKUMAR, S/O.SUDHAKARAN,
            GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEE, MANGALA VILASAM, CHOVVARA
            KOTTUKAL VILLAGE, NEYYATTINKARA TALUK
            THIRUVANANTHAPURAM DISTRICT
            NOW RESIDING AT SUDHAKAR NIVAS, CHOVVARA-695 120.

        3. SASROJINI, D/O.CHELLAMMA, HOUSE WIFE,
            MANGSALA VILASAM, CHOVVARA, KOTTUKAL VILLAGE
            NEYYATTINKARA TALUK, THIRUVANANTHAPURAM DISTRICT
            NOW RESIDING AT SUDHAKAR NIVAS
            CHOVVARA P.O.-695 120.

            BY ADV. SRI.MILLU DANDAPANI

RESPONDENT(S)/PETITIONER::
----------------------------------------------------

            L.HADASSA, D/O.LEELA,
            SHALEM NIVAS, KUNNUVILA, THOZHUKKAL
            PERUMPAZHUTHOOR VILLAGE, NEYYATTINKARA TALUK
            NEYYATTINKARA P.O.
            THIRUVANANTHAPURAM DISTRICT-695 121.

            R BY ADV. SRI.SANTHAN V.NAIR
               BY ADV. SRI.V.V.MITHUN
               BY ADV. SRI.R.JAYASENAN

            THIS MATRIMONIAL APPEAL HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD ON 13-06-2013,
ALONG WITH               MA. 939/2010,              THE COURT ON 19.06.2013 DELIVERED THE
FOLLOWING:


             ANTONY DOMINIC & P.D.RAJAN, JJ.
                   -------------------------------------------
                 Mat.A.Nos.983 & 939 of 2010
                  -------------------------------------------
               Dated this the 19th day of June, 2013

                              JUDGMENT

Antony Dominic, J.


Mat.A.No.939/10


1.This appeal is filed against the judgment of the Family Court,

  Trivandrum in O.P.1191/04.                 The OP was filed by the

  respondent herein, seeking divorce, recovery of money and

  articles and for other consequential reliefs.



2.The appellant and the respondent belong to Christian

  community. Their marriage was solemnized on 3.12.1997 at

  S.N.Auditorium, Neyyattinkara. According to the respondent,

  as per the agreement between the parents of the parties,

  Rs.2,00,000/- was given to the appellant on 25.9.1997 and

  Ext.B3 settlement deed was executed by her father settling

  7.75 cents of property and a double storied building in favour

  of the respondent and the appellant. It is also stated that at

  the time of 'Adukkala kaanal', the marriage presentations

MA.983/10 & 939/10
                                2




  received by the respondent and all her dresses, which items

  are all scheduled in the petition, were given in the custody of

  the appellant.



3.After the marriage, the appellant had taken the respondent to

  the matrimonial home where the appellant's mother, elder

  brother, his wife and two children were also residing. It is

  stated that the respondent never got any love or affection from

  the appellant or his family members and that she was brutally

  harassed and tortured by them.        It is also stated that on

  1.3.2004, the appellant and his other family members tortured

  the respondent and on that day, at about 9 a.m., she was taken

  to her house with a demand that she should fetch Rs.10 lakhs

  and a car from her parents.      According to the respondent,

  although she had informed the appellant that her entire

  paternal share was given and that what is left with her parents

  is the share of her younger sister, the appellant still insisted on

  his demand.

MA.983/10 & 939/10
                                3




4.She also alleged that the appellant was continuing his

  illegitimate relationship with his elder brother's wife and was

  harassing the respondent sexually.          According to the

  respondent, the appellant had no sexual interest in her or in

  having any children. She contended that he was satisfied with

  the children of his elder brother. She also pleaded that the

  appellant was refusing to even share bed with him.



5. On account of all these cruelty, both physical and mental, the

  respondent filed C.M.P.4898/04 before the Judicial First Class

  Magistrate Court, Neyyattinkara and on the basis of the

  complaint, the Vizhinjam police registered Crime No.162/04

  for offences under Section 498 A read with Section 34 IPC.

  According to the respondent, the appellant wants only her

  money and property and he does not wish to lead an

  independent family life. She was only 20 years and was a

  Computer Engineering student at the time of marriage and

  that she having been brutally harassed and tortured

MA.983/10 & 939/10
                                  4




  apprehends that her life will be in danger. It is raising these

  allegations, she filed the petition.



6. The appellant entered appearance and admitted the marriage.

  Although he denied the allegations against him, he admitted

  that 7.75 cents of land and the building was settled in favour of

  himself and the respondent by her father and expressed his

  willingness to return his share to the respondent.            He

  contended that the story of payment of Rs.2 lakhs and

  entrustment of household articles and dresses were utter

  falsehood. It is also stated that the movables which belong to

  the respondent were all taken by her at the time when she

  deserted him. He also stated that his brother had shifted to a

  newly constructed building on 2.7.2001 and that therefore, the

  contention that he was interested only in a joint family life was

  wrong.



7. According to the appellant, he never treated the respondent

  with cruelty or demanded dowry or anything from her and he

MA.983/10 & 939/10
                                 5




 also denied the allegation that he had illicit relationship with

 his brother's wife, who, according to him, was like his mother.

 He admitted the pendency of Cr.No.162/04. He also alleged

 that the respondent had illicit relationship with her paramour

 by name Pramod, residing at Kanjiramkulam. He also raised a

 counter claim by stating that on 11.3.2001, in the presence of

 his elder brother, he gave Rs.3 lakhs to the respondent at her

 request, in order to clear off her parent's liabilities. According

 to him, this was on condition that the amount will be returned

 within a period of one year. He also stated that he made

 another payment of Rs.70,000/- to the respondent on

 15.4.2004.       Thus, according to him, Rs.3,70,000/- was due

 from the respondent and he sought a decree for recovery of

 the same. He also stated that the respondent was in the habit

 of insulting him by using cruel and abusive language, even in

 the presence of his relatives.      He concluded his written

 statement by contending that he was ready and willing to

 dissolve the marriage by filing a petition under Section 10A of

 the Divorce Act.

MA.983/10 & 939/10
                                 6




8. The respondent filed her written statement to the counter

  claim by contending that it was absolutely a false one.

  According to her, it was after three years and three months of

  their separation that the counter claim was filed on

  26.11.2007.       She also stated that her parents were

  Government employees and on their retirement, they got Rs.13

  lakhs as their terminal benefits. Therefore, according to her,

  they had no necessity to borrow any amount from the

  appellant.



9.On the pleadings of the parties, the family court framed the

  following points for consideration:



          (1) Whether the petitioner is entitled to get a decree of

             divorce on the ground of cruelty?

          (2)Whether the petitioner is entitled to get a decree of

             divorce on the ground of adultery?

MA.983/10 & 939/10
                                   7




          (3)Whether    the    petitioner is  entitled to    realise

             compensation for the damages from the respondent/

             husband and his assets?     If so what would be the

             quantum of compensation to be awarded?

          (4)Whether the petitioner is entitled to realise her

             household articles, clothes, presentation articles etc.

             as shown in the schedule attached to the petitioner

             from the respondent and his assets?

          (5)Whether    the    petitioner is  entitled to    realise

             Rs.2,00,000/- being the amount paid by the parents of

             the petitioner at the time of marriage from the 1st

             respondent and his assets?

          (6)Whether the petitioner is entitled to get a decree

             directing the respondent to convey his one half right

             over the petition schedule immovable property?

          (7)Whether the respondent is entitled to realise

             Rs.3,70,000/- from the petitioner and her assets as

             claimed in the counter claim?

          (8)Reliefs and costs.

MA.983/10 & 939/10
                                8




10.This case was jointly tried along with OP.1264/04 between

 the parties. The evidence in this case consists of the oral

 testimony of PWs.1 and 2 and CPWs.1 to 6. Exhibits A1 to A5

 and B1 to B3 were also marked. The family court considered

 the question whether the respondent is entitled to a decree of

 divorce on the grounds of cruelty. It made reference to the

 evidence of PW1, the respondent herself.           In the proof

 affidavit, she has re-iterated her contention in the petition and

 also detailed incidents of mental and physical cruelty that was

 meted out to her. She stated that it was the complaint of the

 appellant that the dowry brought by her was not sufficient and

 that she should fetch more.       According to her, when her

 parents obtained Rs.13 lakhs on their retirement, the

 respondent started harassing her physically, demanding Rs.10

 lakhs and a car. It was also specifically contended that being

 told that she was given her eligible share and that what was

 left is the share of her younger sister, she was brutally

 manhandled on 1.3.2004 and was taken to her home directing

 her that she should return only after fetching more dowry. It

MA.983/10 & 939/10
                               9




 was on that onwards, they were living separately. Apart from

 these factual statements, it was the admitted case of the

 parties that Cr.No.162/04 was charge sheeted by the

 Vizhinjam police as C.C.813/04 for offences under Section 498

 A read with Section 34 IPC.



11. Although the evidence adduced by the respondent was read

 out to us in the court, we could not find any element of

 unreliability in her deposition, despite the extensive cross

 examination to which she was subjected to.      Her evidence

 stood corroborated by that of PW2 who is a close relative who

 attended her marriage fixation ceremony, the marriage as also

 the 'Adukkala kanal'. According to him, he has witnessed an

 incident where the respondent was subjected to cruelty. His

 evidence also stood the test of cross examination. As against

 this evidence, the appellant adduced evidence as CW1 and was

 also supported by the evidence of CPWs.1 to 6.

MA.983/10 & 939/10
                                 10




12. Although the appellant has denied the allegation against him,

 in the proof affidavit filed by him, apart from a general denial,

 there was no specific denial of the incidents of cruelty alleged

 against him and his family members.           He admitted that

 C.C.813/04 was pending against him and his family members.

 As regards the incident on 1.3.2004, when the respondent was

 taken to her home, he only gave an evasive answer that the

 respondent left for her home on her own, without choosing to

 deny the allegation of manhandling on that day. CPWs.1 to 6

 are close relatives whose evidence were refused to be believed

 by the family court for the reason that they have chosen to

 deny the allegations of cruelty, despite the fact that CPW1, the

 appellant, did not specifically do so.      CPW.6 is the elder

 brother of the appellant whose evidence was declined to be

 taken at its face value. As mentioned by us during the hearing

 of the appeal, counsel for the appellant took us through the

 entire deposition and wanted us to hold that the evidence of

 the respondent was unreliable and contradictory. However,

 having considered the evidence available and after weighing

MA.983/10 & 939/10
                                11




 the same with the evidence that was adduced by the appellant,

 we are of the view that the respondent has satisfactory proved

 a case of cruelty entitling her for a decree of divorce.



13.The second point framed by the family court was whether the

 respondent was entitled to a decree on the ground of adultery.

 After discussing this issue, the family court held that the

 respondent failed to prove this contention and therefore, this

 issue was found in favour of the appellant.            Since the

 respondent has not challenged this finding of the family court,

 we are not called upon to examine this point in any manner.



14.The respondent has claimed damages of 12 lakhs from the

 appellant and it is on that claim, point No.3 has been framed.

 Considering this point, the family court has awarded Rs.3

 lakhs as damages and the correctness of this finding is called

 in question.      Admittedly, the cruelty on the part of the

 appellant has been found by the family court and we have also

 upheld this finding. As we have already stated, the respondent

MA.983/10 & 939/10
                               12




 was a 20 year old young girl at the time of her marriage. At

 the time when the case was decided by the family court, she

 was 33 years. By a spoiled marriage, her life itself is ruined

 and she has no possibility of getting a satisfactory alliance.

 During her matrimonial life, she suffered a lot without any

 element of happiness.      That apart, when evidence was

 adduced, the appellant had chosen to call her a person of loose

 morals       having affair with her    paramour.       In  such

 circumstances and also having regard to the fact that the

 marriage ended up in a divorce only upon the cruelty on the

 part of the appellant, the further question is whether in the

 absence of any specific provision in the Divorce Act, the family

 court could have awarded compensation. As rightly found by

 the family court, there is no provision in the Divorce Act

 entitling it to award compensation. However, provisions have

 been made in Section 26 of the Domestic Violence Act and

 Section 7 of the Family Courts Act, entitling the family court to

 award compensation to the victim like the respondent herein

 in any case, if the common law principles also entitles the

MA.983/10 & 939/10
                                  13




 victim for compensation. Thus, both on legal grounds and on

 factual      grounds,  the   respondent  was   entitled to   be

 compensated and the award of Rs.3 lakhs is perfectly justified.



15.The remaining issues pertaining to the realisation of Rs.2

 lakhs, recovery of the household articles and the conveyance

 of one half right over the petition schedule property. As far as

 the re-conveyance of one half right over the property settled

 by Ext.B3 document is concerned, the appellant has admitted

 his willingness to re-convey the property and therefore, that

 was an admitted fact. In so far as the payment of Rs.2 lakhs is

 concerned, while, according to the respondent, the amount

 was paid on the date of marriage engagement, the appellant

 contended that there was no such function and no such

 payment.         However, it is to be noted that in the written

 statement, the appellant had no plea that there was no

 marriage engagement. If that be so, the appellant could not

 have improved upon his case.

MA.983/10 & 939/10
                               14




16.As far as the movable items are concerned, in the petition, 53

 items were scheduled by the respondent.           Although the

 appellant had raised a plea of total denial, while examining as

 CPW1, he admitted that he had received 27 items of articles

 out of the scheduled 53 items and expressed his willingness to

 return the same. It was acting upon this admission, that the

 family court held that the respondent was entitled to the

 admitted movables only.     Having re-appreciated the entire

 evidence on this aspect, we do not find any reason to disagree

 with what has been found by the family court.



17.Now, what remains is the counter claim of the appellant for

 realising Rs.3,70,000/- from the respondent. As already stated,

 in so far as the alleged payment of Rs.3 lakhs is concerned, the

 case of the appellant was that he paid the amount in the

 presence of his elder brother who was examined as CPW6.

 However, in the proof affidavit of CPW6, he has not made such

 a claim. Although, according to the appellant, the payment

 was made with the understanding that the amount would be

MA.983/10 & 939/10
                                   15




  repaid in one year, it is the admitted position that before filing

  the counter claim, he had not demanded repayment, either

  orally or otherwise. Further, on the materials on record, it

  was a proved fact that on the retirement of her parents, they

  had Rs.13 lakhs towards their terminal benefits. When they

  received such a large amount, normally there was no necessity

  for them to have borrowed money to discharge any of their

  debts. It was also not proved whether they had any debts at

  all. Therefore, on facts, the payment is not proved and in law,

  the claim was a time barred one. In such circumstances, the

  family court is fully justified in rejecting the counter claim.



18.Resultantly, we do not find any substance in the appeal filed

  against the judgment in OP.1191/04. The appeal fails. It is

  accordingly dismissed.


Mat.A.983/10


1.This appeal arises from the judgment in OP.1264/04. This OP

  was also filed by the respondent against the appellants in this

MA.983/10 & 939/10
                                16




  appeal with a prayer that the sale deed bearing No.999/04

  dated 19.4.2004 executed by the first appellant husband in

  favour of his elder brother, the second appellant, is to be set

  aside. According to her, this document was executed to defeat

  her claims and to defraud her. In the pleadings, she stated

  that the first appellant expected that on desertion of the wife,

  it is likely that she would raise monetary claims against him.

  According to her, to defeat her such claims, he executed the

  document transferring his 1/3rd rights over the property in

  favour of his brother. It was also contended that the second

  appellant brother did not pay any consideration for the

  document and that he did not have the capacity to pay the

  consideration also.



2.However, the first appellant in his written statement

  contended that he transferred his right over the property

  before his separation with the respondent and that it was with

  her full knowledge.     According to him, he transferred the

  property to the second appellant for clearing off his debts

MA.983/10 & 939/10
                                 17




  created by the respondent and that the property was

  purchased by the second appellant for valid consideration.

  The second and third appellants in their written statement also

  supported the case of the first appellant and pleaded that

  there was no fraud in the execution of the document and that

  the document was executed with full knowledge of the

  respondent wife. The point for consideration framed by the

  family court was whether the respondent was entitled to get a

  decree declaring the sale deed null and void.



3. The parties filed their proof affidavits and evidence adduced

  was common to this OP and also OP.1191/04. On examination

  of the evidence adduced by the parties, it was found that the

  property was owned by the first appellant, second appellant

  and his mother and that the sale deed was executed

  transferring the 1/3rd right of the first appellant to his brother.

  From the evidence, it is seen that it was the case of the first

  appellant that out of the sale consideration received, be paid

  Rs.3 lakhs to the respondent on 11.3.2004 and Rs.70,000/- on

MA.983/10 & 939/10
                                18




 15.4.2004.       However, the sale deed was executed only on

 19.4.2004 and the second appellant did not have a case that he

 had paid any sale consideration in advance. While discussing

 the issues in relation to OP.1191/04, this Court has already

 endorsed the view taken by the family court that the theory of

 payment made by the first appellant to the respondent itself is

 untrue.       That apart, he could not have received the sale

 consideration on the dates when the payments were allegedly

 made. The dates mentioned above itself would indicate that on

 19.4.2004 he could not have received any sale consideration

 from the second appellant. Apart from that, neither the first

 appellant nor the second appellant has shown any evidence of

 monetary payment and the capacity of the second appellant to

 pay the sale consideration also has not proved in any manner.

 Added to this is the fact that the second appellant who was

 examined as CPW6 is only an Amin of a civil court in Tamil

 Nadu and it is very unlikely that he would have had such an

 amount with him, the source of which remains unexplained. In

 such circumstances, we are also of the view that if the

MA.983/10 & 939/10
                                19




 evidence adduced by the parties is appreciated, it can well be

 inferred that the sale deed was executed without receiving

 consideration and that it was intended to defeat the claims of

 the respondent.    If that be so, the family court cannot be

 faulted for setting aside the sale deed and allowing the OP.

 We do not find any illegality in the conclusion of the family

 court.


  The appeal fails. It is accordingly dismissed.


                                             Sd/-
                                      ANTONY DOMINIC, Judge.


                                             Sd/-
                                         P.D.RAJAN, Judge.
 kkb.



