
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                      PRESENT:

                          THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE P.BHAVADASAN

             TUESDAY,THE 10TH DAY OF SEPTEMBER 2013/19TH BHADRA, 1935

                                          Crl.MC.No. 1352 of 2013 (A)
                                          ---------------------------------------
          [CRIME NO. 1729/2012 DATED 10/12/2012 OF THALASSERY POLICE STATION ,
            KANNUR]
                                                    .......................


PETITIONERS/ACCUSED:
------------------------------------


        1. LAXMIDAS SONKAVDE, AGED 54 YEARS,
            B-5, FLAT NO.304, FOREST COLONY,
            NEAR CENTER POINT SCHOOL, SEMINARY HILL, NAGPUR.

        2. RAJASREE, AGED 45 YEARS,
            B-5, FLAT NO.304, FOREST COLONY,
            NEAR CENTER POINT SCHOOL, SEMINARY HILL, NAGPUR.


            BY ADV. SRI.SAIBY JOSE KIDANGOOR.


RESPONDENTS/STATE & DEFACTO COMPLAINANT:
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

        1. STATE OF KERALA,
            REPRESENTED BY THE PUBLIC PROSECUTOR,
            HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM, KOCHI-31.

        2. SUB INSPECTOR OF POLICE,
            THALASSERY POLICE STATION, THALASSERY,
            KANNUR DISTRICT - 670 101.

        3. SMT.REMA LAKSHMI DEVARAJAN,
            W/O.K.DEVARAJAN, AGED ABOUT 56 YEARS,KARTHIKA ILLATHATHAZA,
            P.O.TEMPLE GATE, THALASSERY, KANNUR DISTRICT-670 102.


            R1 & R2 BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SMT. MADHUBEN,
            R3 BY SRI.M.T.NANAIAH, SENIOR ADVOCATE,
                      SRI.GRASHIOUS KURIAKOSE, SENIOR ADVOCATE,
                     ADV. SRI.GEORGE MATHEWS.


            THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD
            ON 29-08-2013, THE COURT ON 10-09-2013 PASSED THE
            FOLLOWING:

Prv.

CRL.M.C. NO.1352/2013-A:




             APPENDIX


PETITIONER'S ANNEXURES:


ANNEXURE A:        COPY OF THE FIR NO.1729/2012 DTD. 10/12/2012.

ANNEXURE B:        COPY OF THE BAIL APPLICATION IN CRIME NO.375/2012
                   DTD. 27/09/2012.

ANNEXURE C:        COPY OF THE ORDER IN CRIME NO.375/2012 DTD. 28/09/2012.

ANNEXURE D:        COPY OF THE ORDER IN M.C.A. NO.1805/2012 DTD. 08/10/12
                   BEFORE THE ADDL. SESSIONS JUDGE, NAGPUR.

ANNEXURE E:        COPY OF THE COMPLAINT PREFERRED BY THE DEFACTO
                   COMPLAINANT DTD. 10/12/2012 BEFORE THE KANNUR
                   DISTRICT POLICE SUPERINTENDENT.




RESPONDENTS' ANNEXURES: NIL.




                                            //TRUE COPY//




                                            P.A. TO JUDGE.

Prv.


                 - - - -P.- - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                           BHAVADASAN, J.

                   Crl.M.C. No. 1352 of 2013
                  - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
           Dated this the 10th day of September, 2013.

                                ORDER


           This is a petition filed under Section 482 of the

Code of Criminal Procedure invoking the inherent powers of

this court seeking to have Annexure A FIR and Annexure E

complaint quashed.

           2. The facts absolutely necessary for the disposal

of this petition are as follows:

           The daughter of the petitioners got married to the

son of the third respondent. Suffice to say that within a short

span of marriage, discordant notes arose between the couple

and litigations began.        It is seen from the records that

ultimately it ended up in the daughter of the petitioners filing

a complaint before the          Nagpur City Police Station who

registered crime against the son of the third respondent, the

third respondent and the daughter of the third respondent for

offence punishable under Section 498A, 377 read with Section

Crl.M.C.1352/2013.
                               2

34 of Indian Penal Code, Sections 3 and 4 of Dowry Prohibition

Act and Sections 66E, 67 and 67A of Information Technology

Act. The registration of such a crime resulted in the son of the

third respondent being arrested and remanded to custody.

The third respondent and her daughter too had to go over to

Nagpur.      The claim of the petitioners is that there was

mediation talks between the parties at Nagpur and as a result

of the settlement reached in that mediation talk, the

petitioners were assured that their daughter would have        a

comfortable life in future and no untoward incident would

happen.       Contrary to the assurance given, the torture

continued. It is pointed out that as a result of the settlement

arrived at between the parties, the son of the third respondent

was released on bail and the third respondent and her

daughter were able to get     anticipatory bail.   After having

obtained the benefit under the settlement, it is pointed out by

the petitioners that no sooner than they returned to their

Crl.M.C.1352/2013.
                                3

native place, they laid Annexure E complaint which resulted in

registration of Crime No. 1729 of 2012 of Thalassery Police

Station for the offence under Sections 384 read with Section

34 of I.P.C.

             3.   Learned counsel appearing for the petitioners

contends that even assuming all what is stated in the

complaint are true, no offence is made out. Even assuming

that there is an agreement as such, that does not confer any

right and the ingredients necessary to attract the offence

under Section 384 of I.P.C are not made out. According to the

learned counsel, it is only a counter blast to the complaint laid

by the daughter of the petitioners which necessitated the third

respondent and her daughter to go over to Nagpur and also

that her son had been remanded to custody. Since no offence

is made out even if the entire allegations in the complaint are

taken as true, the proceedings now initiated on the basis of

such a complaint is sheer abuse of the process of court and it

Crl.M.C.1352/2013.
                                  4

is only in the interests of justice that the FIR be quashed.

             4.   Learned counsel appearing for the third

respondent on the other hand contended that it is too early to

come to the conclusion whether any offence is made out or

not. Even assuming that the agreement alleged to have been

executed by the third respondent is only an agreement for

sale, it might fall under Section 30 of I.P.C. qualifying as a

security and if that be so, it could not be said that prima facie

the offence under Section 384 I.P.C. is not made out. Again,

it was pointed out that the complaint Annexure E specifically

alleges that the first petitioner had trespassed into the house

of the third respondent intimidated her and forced her to

execute the deed.      The mere fact that the police has only

shown Section 384 read with Section 34 of I.P.C. in the F.I.R.,

does not mean that other offences are not alleged. It is not a

case where, according to the learned counsel for the third

respondent, no cognizable offence is made out in order to

Crl.M.C.1352/2013.
                                5

enable the police to start the investigation.     The learned

counsel in support of his contention relied on the decision

reported in State of Madhya Pradesh v. Surendra Kori ((2012)

10 SCC 155) and Mrs. Rupan Deol Bajan v. Klanwar Pal Singh

Gill (1995 (4) Crimes 171).

             5.   Relying on the decision reported in Manzar

Sayeed Khan v. State of Maharashtra ((2009) 1 SCC 157),

learned counsel appearing for the petitioners contended that it

is a case where no offence is made out on the basis of the

allegations in the complaint and in the light of the principle

laid down in the above decision, the FIR, namely Annexure A is

only to be quashed.

             6. The point of discord seems to be an agreement

which is not seen produced along with the petition, but a

copy of the same was handed over to this court for perusal at

the time of argument. It is styled as a letter of undertaking

and the relevant clause reads as follows:

Crl.M.C.1352/2013.
                                 6

                  "She shall be compensated with entire of
      Nishant's share. Apart from that we assure 1/3rd
      portion belonging to Remalakshmi Devarajan a
      further stage with Sonal for her to claim as market
      value as on that date of such transaction to her or
      as donation to a trust of her choice."

According to the learned counsel for the petitioners, the above

recital, assuming it to be true, and forms a part of the alleged

agreement which even if admitted has been executed in the

circumstances made mention of in the complaint, still will not

constitute an offence under Section 384 of I.P.C. It is either a

guarantee or an agreement for sale at best        and neither of

them confer any right. Section 384 of I.P.C. contemplates a

situation where there is extortion as defined in Section 383 of

I.P.C. By no stretch of imagination, it is stated that, the recital

mentioned above can involve transfer of any property or

constitute as valuable security.

Crl.M.C.1352/2013.
                                 7

             7. Annexure E is the complaint which is alleged to

have been laid by the third respondent which resulted in the

registration of the crime in which the petitioners are shown as

the accused.      It narrates in detail the circumstances under

which the agreement made mention of above came to be

executed. Though in one portion of the complaint it is stated

that on 29.4.2012 the petitioners had come over to the house

of the complainant and forced her to execute the deed and in

another portion it is stated that she did not heed to the

demand on that day. However, it is subsequently stated that

as the threat and coercion from the side of the petitioners

continued, ultimately the agreement made mention of came to

be executed.      The specific allegation     is that  the first

petitioner      came to the house of the third respondent,

threatened her with dire consequences and had even gone to

the extent of stating that he would ensure that the son of the

third respondent is rendered jobless and thereafter Annexure

Crl.M.C.1352/2013.
                                8

E was executed.

             8. Section 383 reads as follows:

             "383.  Extortion.- Whoever intentionally puts
      any person in fear of any injury to that person, or to
      any other, and thereby dishonestly induces the
      person so put in fear to deliver to any person any
      property or valuable security, or anything signed or
      sealed which may be converted into a valuable
      security, commits "extortion"".

Section 384 reads as follows:

             "384.   Punishment for extortion.-    Whoever
      commits     extortion  shall   be    punished    with
      imprisonment of either description for a term which
      may extend to three years, or with fine, or with
      both."

Section 30 defines what is a security. It reads as follows:

             "30. "Valuable Security".- The words "valuable
      security" denote a document which is, or purports to
      be, a document whereby any legal right is created,
      extended, transferred, restricted, extinguished or
      released, or where by any person acknowledges that

Crl.M.C.1352/2013.
                                    9

      he lies under legal liability, or has not a certain legal
      right."

             9. It is difficult to believe that the agreement would

have been simply executed by the third respondent.             The

circumstances under which the said agreement came to be

executed are to be determined.               The allegation in the

complaint is that such an agreement came to be executed by

the threat and coercion of the first petitioner. Going by the

definition of Section 30, it is difficult as of now to come to the

conclusion that an agreement, copy of which was handed over

for perusal by this court may not constitute security. It may

not be proper for this court to enter into such a finding as it is

too premature.

             10. Moreover, it is also necessary to determine the

legal effect of the recitals in the agreement which have been

extracted above which too          may not be appropriate at this

stage of the proceedings.

Crl.M.C.1352/2013.
                                 10

             11. In the decision cited by the learned counsel for

the petitioners, the facts show that that was a case where the

FIR did not disclose the offence as alleged and in that

circumstance the FIR came to be quashed.

             12. In the decision relied on by the learned counsel

for the third respondent, namely, State of Madhya Pradesh v.

Surendra Kori ((2012) 10 SCC 155), it has been held as

follows:

             "14. The High Court in exercise of its powers
      under Section 482 Cr.P.C. does not function as a
      court of appeal or revision.      This Court has, in
      several     judgments,   held    that  the    inherent
      jurisdiction under Section 482 Cr.P.C., though wide,
      has to be used sparingly, carefully and with caution.
      The High Court, under Section 482 Cr.P.C., should
      normally refrain from giving a prima facie decision
      in a case where the entire facts are incomplete and
      hazy, more so when the evidence has not been
      collected and produced before the Court and the
      issues involved, whether factual or legal, are of wide

Crl.M.C.1352/2013.
                                 11

      magnitude and cannot be seen in their true
      perspective without sufficient material."

So also in the decision relied on by the learned counsel

reported in Mrs. Rupan Deol Bajaj v. Kanwar Pal Singh (1995

(4) Crimes 171), it was held as follows:

             "Of course, as has been pointed out in Bhajan
      Lal's case an F.I.R. Or a complaint may be quashed if
      the allegations made therein are so absurd and
      inherently improbable that no prudent person can
      ever reach a just conclusion that there is sufficient
      ground for proceeding against the accused but the
      High Court has not recorded such a finding,
      obviously because on the allegations in the FIR it
      was not possible to do so."



             13. The principles regarding the quashing of FIR

are well settled. Unless and until the court is fully satisfied

that no offence whatsoever is made out by the allegations in

the complaint, it may not be possible for the court to quash

Crl.M.C.1352/2013.
                                12

the proceedings. Once semblance of any cognizable offence is

made out on the allegations in the complaint, then, the

registration of the crime becomes mandatory and thereafter it

is the prerogative of the police to investigate into the crime.

This unfettered power conferred on the police cannot

ordinarily be interfered with by courts. Investigation is in the

realm of police function. It is neither possible for the court to

put an end to an investigation without justification or to

modulate the mode of investigation. Probably the court could

order further investigation. But that is a different question.

             14. In the case on hand, when viewed in the light of

the various decisions and also in the light of the decisions

referred to above, it is too early to say that no cognizable

offences are made out as per the allegations in the complaint.

True, the FIR as it now stands contains only offence under

Section 384 read with Section 34 of I.P.C. The question as to

whether that offence is attracted or not is a matter open to

Crl.M.C.1352/2013.
                                 13

debate.     It could not be said that the offence cannot be

attracted at all.

             Under such circumstances, it will not be appropriate

for this court to exercise its inherent powers and quash the FIR

and the complaint. This petition is accordingly dismissed.




                                             P. BHAVADASAN,
                                                   JUDGE

sb.



