
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                      PRESENT:

                          THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE P.BHAVADASAN

        WEDNESDAY, THE 27TH DAY OF NOVEMBER 2013/6TH AGRAHAYANA, 1935

                                           CRL.A.No. 910 of 2006 (A)
                                           -------------------------------------
          [S.C.NO.142/2004 OF THE ADDITIONAL DISTRICT JUDGE,
           FAST TRACK COURT NO.1 (ADHOC), MANJERI, DATED 26-04-2006,
           C.P.NO.46/2002 OF THE JUDICIAL FIRST CLASS MAGISTRATE COURT,
           NILAMBUR]
                                                    ...............

APPELLANTS/ACCUSED:
------------------------------------


        1. O.M.CHERIAN @ THANKACHAN,
            S/O.MATHAYI, OVANALVADAKKETHIL, PALANGARA,
            NILAMBUR.

        2. MATHAYI.O.C, S/O.CHACKO,
            OVANALVADAKKETHIL, PALANGRA, NILAMBUR.

        3. SARAMMA, W/O.MATHAYI,
            OVANALVADAKKETHIL, PALANGARA, NILAMBUR.

        4. THOMAS @ RAJAN, S/O.MATHAYI,
            OVANALVADAKETHIL, PALANGARA, NILAMBUR.


            BY SRI.GRASHIOUS KURIAKOSE, SENIOR ADVOCATE,
                 ADVS.SRI.C.K.ABDUL JABBAR,
                          SRI.V.V.NANDAGOPAL NAMBIAR.


RESPONDENT/COMPLAINANT:
--------------------------------------------


            STATE OF KERALA, REPRESENTED BY STATE PROSECUTOR,
            HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM,
            CRIME NO. 67/96 OF NILAMBUR POLICE STATION.


            BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SRI. DHANESH MATHEW MANJOORAN.


            THIS CRIMINAL APPEAL HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD
            ON 08-11-2013, THE COURT ON 27-11-2013 DELIVERED
            THE FOLLOWING:

Prv.


                       P. BHAVADASAN, J.
                  - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                     Crl.A. No. 910 of 2006
                  - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
           Dated this the 27th day of November, 2013.

                               JUDGMENT


           Accused four in number were prosecuted for the

offence punishable under Sections 498A and 306 read with

Section 34 of Indian Penal Code. All the accused were found

guilty of the offence punishable under Section 498A and they

were therefore convicted and sentenced to undergo rigorous

imprisonment for two years and to pay fine of Rs.5,000/- with

a default clause of one year. In addition to the said finding,

the first accused was also found guilty of the offence

punishable under Section 306 of I.P.C. and he was sentenced

to undergo rigorous imprisonment for seven years and to pay

fine of Rs.50,000/- with a default clause of three years. The

substantive sentences were directed to run consecutively and

set off as per law was allowed.

Crl.A.910/2006.
                                2

             2. The marriage between the first accused and

deceased Lillikutty was solemnized on 11.2.1988.       Lillikutty

committed suicide on 23.2.1996. She died by hanging. As

per the available material, it would appear that everything

went on well during the initial stage of marriage and almost

after five years things began to go astray. The allegation is

that the inmates in the matrimonial home of the victim,

including her husband, began to ill-treat and torture her

leading to an explosionel point where the victim was

compelled to commit suicide.       During the marital life, she

delivered a child which did not live long. Further allegation is

that abortion was caused clandestinely by the accused

persons. On 23.2.1996 a mediation talk was scheduled and

the relatives of deceased Lillikutty were also to attend the

mediation talks.     When the meeting was so scheduled,

Lillikutty committed suicide.     P.W.1, a neighbour of the

accused, laid Ext.P1 first information statement on 23.2.1996.

Crl.A.910/2006.
                               3

It appears that subsequent complaint was laid regarding the

death of Lillikutty and the initial FIR registered for unnatural

death under Section 174 of the Code of Criminal Procedure

was altered to one for the offences punishable under Sections

498A and 306 of I.P.C. Ext.P15 is the said first information

statement and P.W.12 on receipt of the statement registered

crime as per Ext.P15(a) FIR. Inquest over the body of Lillikutty

was conducted and her body was sent for autopsy.          P.W.4

conducted autopsy and furnished Ext.P9 report. P.W.14 took

over investigation. According to him, the initial investigation

was conducted by a Sub Inspector who was not alive at the

time for giving evidence and therefore P.W.14 who was familiar

with the signature and handwriting of the said investigating

officer spoke about the various steps taken by the earlier

Investigating Officer.   Ext.P7 note book was seized as per

Ext.P17 mahazar.     Ext.P14 scene mahazar was prepared by

P.W.14 and he filed Exts.P18 report showing the details of the

Crl.A.910/2006.
                                4

accused and also showing the relevant provisions of the Indian

Penal Code.     He also sent communication to the Executive

Magistrate to transfer    the records to JFCM, Nilambur.     He

recorded statements of witnesses and he also obtained

specimen signature of the victim and had the disputed writing

sent for expert examination.     He obtained Ext.P12 report.

During his investigation, he had seized several articles which

were sent to court and some of them were sent for chemical

examination.     He completed investigation and laid charge

before court.

             3. The court before which the final report was laid

took cognizance of the offences. On finding that the offences

are exclusively triable by a court of Sessions, the said court

committed the case to Sessions Court, Nilambur under Section

209 of Cr.P.C. That court made over the case to Additional

Sessions Court Fast Track-I (Adhoc), Manjeri for trial and

disposal.

Crl.A.910/2006.
                                5

             4. The latter court on appearance of the accused

and on receipt of records framed charges for the offences

punishable under Sections 498A and 306 of I.P.C., to which

the accused pleaded not guilty and claimed to be tried. The

prosecution, therefore, examined P.Ws.1 to 15 and had

Exts.P1 to P25 marked. M.Os.1 to 18 were got identified and

marked.      After the close of the prosecution evidence, the

accused were questioned under Section 313 Cr.P.C., they

denied all the incriminating circumstances brought out in

evidence against them and maintained that they were

innocent. The first accused stated that it was after four years

of treatment that the child was born to the couple. Since the

child did not live long, the victim was under tremendous

pressure. She felt that she may not conceive again. On the

date of the incident, at 5 p.m. she poured kerosene over her

body and drunk kerosene also. He called P.W.1 for aid and

also had decided to have mediation talks. The people who

Crl.A.910/2006.
                                6

sent for mediation talks were Chacko, Peter and Georgekutty.

They decided to talk to the family of Lillikutty.     The first

accused was waiting in the house of James when the second

accused called him home and he along with James rushed to

the place. The door of the room was found bolted from inside.

They broke open the door. Lillikutty was found hanging. They

untied the knot and laid her on the cot.      By that time, Dr.

Kurivila arrived and he pronounced Lillikutty dead.

             5. The second accused stated that after the loss of

the first child and miscarriage of the second child, the victim

was under tremendous pressure.         He denied any sort of

problem in the matrimonial home.

             6. The third accused stated that she had neither

ill-treated nor done any act which had caused any annoyance

to the victim. The victim was disappointed due to the death of

the first child and the miscarriage of the second child. On the

date of the incident, she had consumed kerosene and when

Crl.A.910/2006.
                                 7

the first accused told her about the same, she made the victim

drunk coconut oil and they were coffee.      Till the mediators

arrived, she was with the victim. She denied having committed

any act which would amount to cruelty.

             7.   The fourth accused stated that from 1986

onwards, he was not in the native place.          The marriage

between the first accused and the victim was held in 1988. His

marriage was on the 6th of December.            He denied the

allegations of he having beaten the victim with a broom and

contended that there was no difference of opinion between

them. He denied having any role to play in the suicide of the

victim.

             8. Finding that the accused could not be acquitted

under Section 232 Cr.P.C., they were asked to enter on their

defence.       They examined D.Ws.1 and 2 and had Ext.D1

marked.       The court below considerably impressed by the

evidence of P.Ws.3, 4 and 5, who are the younger sister and

Crl.A.910/2006.
                                 8

brothers of the deceased and also the contents of Ext.P7 and

P3 to P6 and P8 came to the conclusion that offences have

been made out. The court below also drew support from the

evidence of P.Ws.2 and 6 also. Finding the accused guilty of

the    offences, conviction and sentence followed.     The said

conviction and sentence are assailed in this appeal.

             9.   Learned Senior Counsel appearing for the

appellants namely, Shri. Gracious Kuriakose assailed the

finding on several grounds. It was pointed out by him that the

evidence is totally insufficient to reach a conclusion regarding

the commission of offence either under Section 498A of I.P.C.

or under Section 306 of I.P.C.       There is no allegation that

Lillikutty,    the deceased,   was   subjected   to  cruelty  or

ill-treatment demanding dowry. Certain acts are attributed to

the accused persons which according to the prosecution

compelled her to commit suicide. Except for vague statements

of ill-treatment, the learned Senior Counsel pointed out that

Crl.A.910/2006.
                                  9

there is no specific instance mentioned by any of the witnesses

which would justify the conclusion that Lillikutty was

ill-treated, tortured or treated cruelly in the matrimonial

house.

             10. Learned Senior Counsel pointed out that even

going by the evidence of P.Ws.3 and 5 during the initial five

years of marriage there was nothing wrong in the matrimonial

life of first accused and Lillikutty and it was thereafter that the

problems began. Referring to Exts.P3 to P6 and P8 learned

Senior Counsel pointed out that those letters were written at a

time when the victim had lost her first child and she was under

disappointment and tremendous pressure.           Learned Senior

Counsel also referred to the above letters to point out that the

members of the family of the victim were also equally at fault

for the reason that the contents of the letters would disclose

that she was not wanted in her parental house.               After

marriage, no one in her house used to care for her and that

Crl.A.910/2006.
                               10

made her extremely unhappy and sad.             Learned Senior

Counsel went on to point out that it is significant to notice

that even though P.W.5, the brother says that Lillikutty used to

continuously write letters to him, letters after 1994 are not

seen produced. That, according to the learned Senior Counsel,

is deliberate because subsequent letters would have shown

that her family life was far better and that there were nothing

unpleasant in the matrimonial home as is now sought to be

put forward.

             11. Learned Senior Counsel went on to point out

that the contents of Exts.P3 to P6 cannot be taken aid of to

come to the conclusion that offence of cruelty has been made

out. As far as accused Nos.2 to 4 are concerned, they are not

found guilty of offence under Section 306 of I.P.C., and the

contents of Exts.P3 to P6 were found against them for finding

them guilty under Section 498A of I.P.C.

Crl.A.910/2006.
                                11

             12. Relying on the decisions reported in Amalendu

Pal v. State of W.B. ((2010) 1 SCC 707), Pinakin Mahipatray

Rawal v. State (2013(3)K.H.C. 810), Gangula Mohan Reddy v.

State of Andhra Pradesh ((2010) 1 SCC 750) and Kishori LaL v.

State of M.P. (AIR 2007 SC 2457) it was contended that even

assuming all what the prosecution says is true, still no offence

under Section 306 of I.P.C. is made out because there is

nothing to show that the first accused either intended that the

victim should commit suicide or had knowledge that she

would commit suicide. When there were neither intention nor

knowledge, the question of instigation does not arise. It was

thus contended that the conviction and sentence for offence

under Section 306 of I.P.C. cannot stand.

             13.  Learned Public Prosecutor on the other hand

pointed out that the evidence of P.Ws.3 and 4 taken along with

the evidence of P.Ws.2 and 6 would sufficiently show that the

life of Lillikutty in the matrimonial house though might have

Crl.A.910/2006.
                                12

been pleasant initially, but went on rocks later. Exts.P3 to P6

tell the tale of the agony undergone by the victim in the

matrimonial house.      Not a day passed without she being

tortured or humiliated. She was beaten with a broom and was

made to spend a whole night outside the house while it was

raining. The evidence would disclose that the first child died

for want of adequate attention and care of the members of the

matrimonial house and evidence also discloses that as far as

the second child is concerned, a clandestine abortion was

done by the members of the matrimonial house. It is true,

according to the learned Public Prosecutor, that she received

little help from her kith and kin. But that does not justify the

acts of the accused persons which ultimately led to the suicide

of the victim.    True, the suicide was after seven years of

marriage. But that does not mean that the matter is to be

viewed lightly. The conduct of the first accused, the husband,

is such that he never bothered to attend to the complaints of

Crl.A.910/2006.
                                13

his wife and infact had decided that he would divorce her and

he would no longer have the company of his wife. This can be

seen from the contents of Ext.P7. Regarding the cruel acts

said to have been committed by the accused persons, there is

no effective cross-examination of P.Ws. 3 and 4. Of course,

they do say about      the incidents spoken to      by the victim

evidenced by Ext.P7.    P.W.5 had narrated about the cruel acts

of the accused. But both of them say that she used to convey

what transpired in the matrimonial house.          Exts.P3 to P6

sufficiently disclose the deplorable state of affairs as far as the

victim is concerned in the matrimonial house. She was even

deprived of food and clothing. On the date of the incident, a

mediation talk was scheduled to be held and the relatives of

the victim were also asked to attend the same.        The learned

Public Prosecutor pointed out that in the light of the fact that

the first accused had already decided to part ways with the

victim, the victim might have been compelled to believe that

Crl.A.910/2006.
                               14

after mediation talks she would be packed off from the

matrimonial house to her parental home where also she had

no firm footing. The conduct of the first accused spread over

a period of time in not caring for her wife, not maintaining her

and also not    taking any objection to the  overt acts of other

inmates of the matrimonial house ill-treating the victim, then,

the decision taken by the first accused to sever the

matrimonial relationship with the victim and his adamant

attitude that under no circumstance he was willing to live with

the victim along with the loss of two children mainly due to

the conduct of the members of the matrimonial house

ultimately was left with no choice, but to commit suicide. Even

though the first accused might not have contributed to the

suicide of the victim by doing anything on the date of the

incident, his conduct has certainly been questionable and his

passive and infact the active role in aiding the other members

of the family in ill-treating the victim which ultimately drove

Crl.A.910/2006.
                                 15

the victim to commit suicide is sufficient in law to attract

offence under Section 306 of I.P.C. Learned Public Prosecutor

went on to contend that the court below has analysed the

evidence in considerable detail and has come to the definite

conclusion that offence under Section 498A of I.P.C. is made

out against all the accused persons and offence under Section

306 of I.P.C. is made out against the first accused.        The

findings are based on the evidence on record and do not call

for any interference.

             14. It is not in dispute that the marriage between

the first accused and the victim was solemnized on 11.2.1988.

At the relevant time, the first accused was working as a painter

in New Delhi. Initially the marital life was happy and pleasant.

It appears that the first accused secured an employment in the

Middle East and he left for employment. There is a claim that

in order to go abroad for employment, the gold ornaments

given to the victim at the time of marriage were sold. The first

Crl.A.910/2006.
                               16

accused had      during his tenure of employment abroad had

frequently visited his house, but the prosecution allegation is

that he was indifferent to the victim apart from the fact that he

had indicated his decision to put an end to the marital

relationship with the victim. On the date of the incident, i.e.

on 23.2.1996 the first accused had come on leave and was at

home.

             15. The prosecution allegation is that the life of the

victim in the matrimonial house was deplorable and miserable

and the attitude of accused Nos.1 to 4 became so intolerable

and unbearable and the harassment         and torture were so

severe that the victim was left with no choice but to commit

suicide.

             16. The main items of evidence for the allegation

of cruelty and the commission of offence under Section 306

of I.P.C. are given by P.Ws.3 and 5 who are the siblings of the

victim. The evidence of P.W.3 would show that she was very

Crl.A.910/2006.
                                 17

close to her sister, the victim, who confided in her. She would

say that at the time of marriage the first accused was

employed as painter in New Delhi and later he went to Middle

East, money for which was          raised by selling the gold

ornaments of his sister. After the first accused had left for

Middle East, she would say that the ill-treatment of the rest of

the accused became a routine affair and whenever the first

accused came on leave, he also attributed         his share of

ill-treatment on the victim.     She speaks about the incident

where the fourth accused beat Lillikutty with a broom. She

also mentions that due to some trifle reasons which annoyed

the accused persons she had to spend a whole night outside

the house while it was raining. As per the evidence of P.W.3,

the ill-treatment continued even during the time of pregnancy

of the victim and during and after delivery proper attention

and care was not bestowed to the victim. According to her,

the affairs in the hospital at the relevant time were looked

Crl.A.910/2006.
                              18

after by her brothers. While the victim was pregnant, even

though on several occasions the victim wanted to go to the

hospital, accused Nos.2 to 4 did not yield and they were of the

opinion that no medical check up is necessary and she can

deliver even without any medical consultation. She also says

that though she used to visit the matrimonial house of the

victim, the accused persons took care to see that they do not

talk to each other alone. She also speaks about having met

her sister soon after the abortion. As regards the abortion,

her evidence is that when the first accused learned that the

victim had conceived on the second occasion, misleading her,

the first accused administered certain tablets to the victim

which caused bleeding and consequential miscarriage.       She

would also say that the victim was denied food in the

matrimonial house. Taunting, humiliation and mockery were a

daily routine in the matrimonial house of the victim. She also

spoke about the illegal relationship of the first accused with

Crl.A.910/2006.
                                19

another lady and when the victim took objection to the

conduct, she was ill-treated. Her evidence is to the effect that

while the victim was ill-treated by the first accused, the other

accused persons not only remained passive, but also aided

him in doing so and vice versa. In fact, the evidence would

show that while the victim was pregnant, the first accused

kicked on her abdomen.

             17. The other evidence is that of P.W.5, the brother,

who almost speaks in terms with the evidence furnished by

P.W.3.     P.W.5 in fact proved Exts.P3 to P6 and also Ext.P8

letter. Among them, Exts.P3 to P6 are letters written by the

victim to him, while Ext.P8 is a letter which the first accused

wrote to his brother which fell into the hands of the victim

which she entrusted with P.W.5.

             18. P.W.2 a neighbour of the accused speaks about

the frequent visits of the first accused to the house of one

Thanki when there was a rumour in the locality that the first

Crl.A.910/2006.
                               20

accused was maintaining an illicit relationship with the

daughter of Thanki. P.W.2 would say that he had advised the

first accused not to visit the house of said Thanki. He would

also say that Lillikutty, the deceased, had to put up with

considerable     difficulties and    inconveniences    in  the

matrimonial house. It is true that he betrayed the prosecution

on material aspects, but there are glimpses in his evidence

which would show that Lillikutty used to suffer in her

matrimonial house.

             19. P.W.6 is another neighbour of the accused. He

says that Lillikutty had confided to him about the severe

ill-treatment, both physical and mental, inflicted by the

members in the matrimonial house. He also says that she had

told him that the fourth accused had beaten her with a broom

and the first accused used to ill-treat her.

             20. The common attack on the evidence of these

witnesses is that their evidence is hearsay and none of them

Crl.A.910/2006.
                                 21

had direct knowledge about the incidents spoken to by them.

             21.  Here one has to remember that the court is

dealing with a matrimonial issue and the allegation is that the

victim    was being     ill-treated by the members in the

matrimonial house         as well as her husband.     It will be

imprudent on the part of the court to insist for direct evidence

in the form of independent witnesses for the acts committed

inside the matrimonial house by either the husband or the

members of his family. The evidence as a whole will have to

be appreciated and also the circumstances under which the

victim was led to commit suicide.       If one is to discard the

evidence in such cases as hearsay, probably there will be no

conviction for the offence under Sections 498A and 306 of

I.P.C.   It is virtually inconceivable that the victim would be

ill-treated in the presence of others or in such a manner that

others could see the ill-treatment.

Crl.A.910/2006.
                               22

             22. Even assuming that the evidence of P.Ws. 2, 3,

5 and 6 is to be treated as hearsay evidence, there is the

contents of Exts.P3 to P6 and the contents of Ext.P7 note book

in which the victim had made scribblings.       Exts. P3 to P6

letters would reveal the considerable difficulties which the

victim faced in the matrimonial house and the attitude of the

members of the family.

             23. Before this Court, there was no serious dispute

regarding the handwriting in Exts.P3 to P6 so also in Ext.P7.

Among the letters, Ext.P4 is dated 21.2.1994, Ext.P5 is dated

1.1.1994 and Ext.P6 is dated 19.2.1994. A reading of these

letters would show that Lillikutty was not receiving much of an

assistance, help or co-operation from her house also. It is

also not disputed that Exts.P3 to P6 were addressed to P.W.3

and was written by the victim. As already stated, they are tell

tales of the attitude, conduct and treatment meted out by the

members of the matrimonial family which have been

Crl.A.910/2006.
                                 23

extensively referred to by the lower court. It is unnecessary to

repeat the wordings in those letters.

             24. Ext.P8 is a letter which the first accused wrote

to his brother. It is contended on behalf of the appellant that

that is not admissible in evidence since it has not been proved

either through the person who has written the same or by the

person who received the same. The further contention is that

the handwriting in Ext.P8 is not proved.

             25.  There may be some force in the above

contention. But the evidence of P.Ws.3 and 5 would clearly

show that the attitude of the first accused was one of total

indifference and the prosecution allegation that the first

accused had decided to put an end to the marital relationship

with the victim and this to a considerable extent is fortified

by the contents in Exts.P3 to P6. The contents of Ext.P7 note

book, which is in the form of an autobiography, tells the sad

tale of a lady who had to put up with continuous harassment

Crl.A.910/2006.
                               24

and ill-treatment, both mental and physical, at the hands of

her husband and members of his family.        The writings in

Ext.P7 show that she was never taken along with her husband

to any place even though she pleaded for the same. He always

used to taunt her and instances were not rare when she used

to burst out crying. The contents of Ext.P7 also show that the

first accused kicked on her abdomen while she was pregnant

and she received no help from the members of her

matrimonial family during her pregnancy. The prompting by

accused Nos. 2 to 4 was enough for the first accused to

ill-treat her. The contents of Ext.P7 also shows that when the

victim pleaded to everyone in the house to take her to a doctor

as she was feeling uncomfortable and she often felt pain, the

reply going by the contents of Ext.P7 were kicks and fisting.

Ext.P7 makes mention of the fact that she was made to

consume tablets under the pretext that it was her vomiting

which ultimately resulted in severe pain and miscarriage and it

Crl.A.910/2006.
                                25

was then the victim realized that the tablets were for abortion.

Ext.P7 reflects the desire on the part of the victim to live. But

she also felt that her husband would do away with her. The

contents of Ext.P7 shows that she was physically harassed

almost every day.      She also expressed that had she been

married to a casual labourer, atleast she would have had

peace. It is evident from Ext.P7 that the trouble started after

the first accused had gone abroad for employment.            The

various instances of physical assault made mention of in

Ext.P7 which according to the victim were done at the

instigation of the other members in the matrimonial family.

             26.  As already noticed, it would appear that

Lillikutty, the victim, received no help from the members of

her family. This aspect is highlighted by the learned Senior

Counsel for the appellant to contend for the position that even

assuming that there was some difficulty with the victim in the

matrimonial house, that was aggravated by the conduct of the

Crl.A.910/2006.
                               26

members of her own family, who paid little attention to her

and it could not be said that the the victim committed suicide

solely due to the acts committed by the members of her

matrimonial family.

             27. The above contention is only to be rejected.

Now the present concern is the matrimonial life of the victim

in the matrimonial house and not the attitude of her brothers

and sisters towards her. There may be some substance in the

contention taken by the learned counsel for the appellant that

some of the statements made by P.Ws.3 and 5 in court do not

find a place in their statement under Section 161 Cr.P.C. to

the investigating officer.    But these deficiencies and the

infirmities attached to the evidence of P.Ws. 2, 3, 5 and 6 loss

their significance and importance in the light of the contents

of Exts.P3 to P7.

             28. It was pointed out by the learned counsel for

the appellants that during the mediation talks, it was decided

Crl.A.910/2006.
                               27

that the first accused and the victim may stay separately and

that was accepted by all who were present.       This aspect is

highlighted by the learned Senior Counsel to say that had the

life with the first accused been so miserable, the victim would

not have agreed to such a course.        That shows that the

allegations made against the first accused are without basis.

             29. Even assuming the above to be true, it does not

efface the acts committed by the first accused and the

members of his family. From the evidence, it is quite clear

that she had no where to go and had to bear the ill-treatment

and humiliation.      In one of the letters she pleads that

whenever anyone from her house happens to come to her

matrimonial house, she may be given a sum of Rs.50/- or

10/- which could maintain her for a few days. That shows the

pitiable state of affairs in which the victim was placed and

speaks volumes of the life of the victim in the matrimonial

house.

Crl.A.910/2006.
                               28

             30. There cannot be much dispute that the hand

writing contained in Exts.P3 to P6 is that of the victim. In fact

there is no serious challenge to the veracity of the document.



             31.  Ext.P7 is a note book in which certain

scribblings were made by the victim and as already noticed,

Exts.P3 to P6 are received by P.W.5, who is none other than

the brother of the victim. Ext.P7 also reflects the miserable

life which the victim had to lead in the matrimonial house and

it discloses that all that she received from her husband was

harsh and severe treatment and she never received love from

him. It also mentions that on the slightest pretext she used to

be manhandled and the beatings were severe in nature. It also

shows that she had no choice but to continue and she finds

conciliation by shedding tears.    It also mentions about the

second pregnancy of the victim and the incidents that

transpired thereafter.

Crl.A.910/2006.
                                29

             32. Considering the nature, tenure and torn of the

statements in Exts.P3 to P6, the conclusion is irresistible that

the victim was subjected to consistent ill-treatment.

             33. A contention was raised by the learned counsel

for the appellant that Exts.P4, P5 and P6 were soon after the

death of the first child. Probably, according to the learned

Senior Counsel, the victim was seriously disturbed.       It also

indicates that the members of her family never wrote to her

directly.

             34. This fervent plea by the victim goes a long way

in showing the nature of the treatment and the conduct of the

accused towards the victim in the matrimonial house.

             35.  Learned Senior Counsel appearing for the

appellant contended that the members of the family of the

victim also contributed to the agony of the victim. Reference

was made to the fact that the younger sister of the victim,

namely, P.W.3, referred to the father-in-law of the victim by

Crl.A.910/2006.
                              30

his    name    which was   highly  objectionable   since  the

father-in-law was a very elderly person and it is unusual as

per the custom to call such a person by his name. It is also

pointed out by the learned Senior Counsel that the attitude of

the victim towards her mother-in-law too might not have been

very commendable.      She refers   to the mother-in-law as

"". It is very easy to pick out things in order to mitigate

the severity of the acts committed by the members in the

matrimonial house. The above two aspects are too fragile to

condone the severity of the ill-treatment meted out to the

victim. The letters and the notes in Ext.P7 note book leave

one in no doubt that she was virtually a prisoner in the

matrimonial house.

             36.  The evidence also discloses that the first

accused had long ago decided to sever the matrimonial

relationship with the victim. The pain, agony and the trauma

Crl.A.910/2006.
                               31

undergone by the victim in the matrimonial house is easily

discernible from the above documents.

             37. The contention that the victim was willing to

stay separately with the first accused and that shows that she

could not have any complaint against the first accused       is

without basis. It must be noticed that the victim was placed

between the devil and the deep sea. Probably the victim was

under the bonafide hope that if they live separately, at least

she could avoid the ill-treatment by the other members of the

family and the ill-treatment at their behest would be less. The

poor victim was unaware of the fact that the first accused had

already decided to part ways with her and he had no intention

to live with her either along with the members of his family or

independently.

             38. One cannot omit to note that there is no

suggestion to P.Ws.3 and 5 that the behaviour of the deceased

in the matrimonial house was of an irritating nature and that

Crl.A.910/2006.
                                32

caused difficulties and annoyance to the members in that

family. It does not have much of an effort to come to the

conclusion that the first accused neglected       the victim and

gave ample support to the acts committed by accused Nos.2

to 4 and vice versa. Whatever may be the reasons, it is very

evident that accused Nos.1 to 4 wanted to get rid of the victim

and that idea surfaced after the first accused had gone abroad

and began to earn. It would appear from the evidence that

accused Nos.1 to 4 have other ideas and they found the victim

as a stumbling block and they want to get rid of her.

             39. It is here that one has to really appreciate the

conduct and the courage put up by the victim. She finding

help from nowhere had put up with the miserable treatment

which she received from the members of the matrimonial

house and she survived as much as she could. Not a day in

her life was pleasant or uneventful.      Food was scarce and

taunting, torture and humiliation in plenty.

Crl.A.910/2006.
                                33

             40. If one is to take each incident in isolation, it

may not look very serious or so severe so as to amount to

cruelty.     One has to take the cumulative effect of the

ill-treatment of the members of the family and its impact on

the victim.    She suffered both physical and mental torture.

Apart from the beating and taunting, she received nothing else

from the members of the matrimonial family and she was

deprived of even food.

             41. One has now to consider what are the offences

committed by the accused persons.        One should say that

accused Nos. 2 to 4 are fortunate to have been found guilty of

the offence under Section 498 A of I.P.C. only.

             42.  Learned Senior Counsel appearing for the

appellant contended that by no stretch of imagination the

offence under Section 306 of I.P.C. can be attracted as far as

the first accused is concerned. Even assuming that all what

the prosecution says as against the first accused is true, those

Crl.A.910/2006.
                                  34

acts by themselves are insufficient to come to the conclusion

that the first accused had abetted the suicide of the victim.

             43. Now one may turn to the decisions relied on by

the learned Senior Counsel for the appellant. In the decision

reported in Shri Ram v. State of U.P. (AIR 1975 SC 175) it was

held as follows:

             "6.  The   question    which    then   arises   for
      consideration, a question to which the Sessions Court
      and the High Court have not paid enough attention is
      whether the only inference which arises from the fact
      that Violet gave the particular shout is that by so doing,
      she intended to facilitate the murder of Kunwar Singh,
      Section 107 of the Penal Code which defines abatement
      provides to the extent material that a person abets the
      doing of a thing whom "Intentionally aids, by any act or
      illegal omission, the doing of that thing". Explanation 2
      to the section says that
      "Whoever, either prior to or at the time of the
      commission of an act, does anything in order to facilitate
      the commission of that act, and thereby facilitates the
      commission thereof, is said to aid the doing of that act".
      Thus, in order to constitute abatement, the abettor must

Crl.A.910/2006.
                                    35

      be shown to have "intentionally, aided the commission of
      the crime. Mere proof that the crime charged could not
      have been committed without the interposition of the
      alleged abettor is not enough compliance with the
      requirements of Section 107.A person may, for example,
      invite another casually or for a friendly purpose and that
      may facilitate the murder of the invitee. But unless the
      invitation was extended with intent to facilitate the
      commission of the murder, the person inviting cannot be
      said to have abetted the murder. It is not enough that an
      act on the part of the alleged abettor happens to
      facilitate the commission of the crime. Intentional aiding
      and therefore active complicity is the gist of the offence
      of abatement under the third paragraph of Section 107."

             44. In the decision reported in Kishori Lal v. State

of M.P. (AIR 2007 SC 2457), it was held as follows:

             "6. Section 107 IPC defines abetment of a thing.
      The offence of abetment is a separate and distinct
      offence provided in the Act as an offence. A person,
      abets the doing of a thing when (1) he instigates any
      person to do that thing; or (2) engages with one or more
      other persons in any conspiracy for the doing of that
      thing; or (3) intentionally aids, by act or illegal omission,

Crl.A.910/2006.
                                  36

      the doing of that thing. These things are essential to
      complete abetment as a crime. The word instigate"
      literally means to provoke, incite, urge on or bring about
      by persuasion to do any thing. The abetment may be by
      instigation, conspiracy or intentional aid, as provided in
      the three clauses of Section 107. Section 109 provides
      that if the act abetted is committed in consequence of
      abetment and there is no provision for the punishment
      of such abetment, then the offender is to be punished
      with the punishment provided for the original offence.
      Abetted in Section 109 means the specific offence
      abetted. Therefore, the offence for the abetment of
      which a person is charged with the abetment is normally
      linked with the proved offence.
             7. In cases of alleged abetment of suicide there
      must be proof of direct or indirect acts of incitement to
      the commission of suicide. The mere fact that the
      husband treated the deceased-wife with cruelty is not
      enough. [See Mahinder Singh v. State of M.P. (1995 AIR
      SCW 4570)].Merely on the allegation of harassment
      conviction in terms of Section 306 IPC is not sustainable.
      There is ample evidence on record that the deceased
      was disturbed because she had not given birth to any
      child. PWs. 8, 10, and 11 have categorically stated that

Crl.A.910/2006.
                                   37

      the deceased was disappointed due to the said fact and
      her failure to beget a child and she was upset due to
      this.
             8. If the background facts are analysed it is crystal
      clear that the prosecution has failed to establish its case.
      That being so, the appeal deserves to be allowed, which
      we direct."

             45.    In the decision reported in Gangula Mohan

Reddy v. State of Andhra Pradesh ((2010) 1 SCC 750) it was

held as follows:

             "17.    Abetment involves a mental process of
      instigating a person or intentionally aiding a person in
      doing of a thing. Without a positive act on the part of
      the accused to instigate or aid in committing suicide,
      conviction cannot be sustained.      The intention of the
      legislature and the ratio of the cases decided by this
      Court is clear that in order to convict a person under
      Section 306 IPC there has to be a clear mens rea to
      commit the offence.     It also requires an active act or
      direct   act which led the deceased to commit suicide
      seeing no option and this act must have been intended
      to push the deceased into such a position that he
      committed suicide."

Crl.A.910/2006.
                                 38

             46. In the decision reported in 2013 (3) K.H.C. 810

it was held as follows:

             "26. Section 306 refers to abetment of suicide. It
      says that if any person commits suicide, whoever abets
      the commission of such suicide, shall be punished with
      imprisonment for a term which may extent to 10 years
      and shall also be liable to fine.       The action for
      committing suicide is also on account of mental
      disturbance caused by mental and physical cruelty. To
      constitute   an     offence  under   Section  306,   the
      prosecution has to establish that a person has
      committed suicide and the suicide was abetted by the
      accused.      Prosecution  has    to  establish  beyond
      reasonable doubt that the deceased committed suicide
      and the accused abetted the commission of suicide. But
      for the alleged extra marital relationship, which if
      proved, could be illegal an immoral, nothing has been
      brought out by the prosecution to show that the accused
      had provoked, incited or induced the wife to commit
      suicide."

             47. In the decision reported in Amalendu Pal v .

State of West Bengal        ((2010) 1 SCC 707), it was held as

Crl.A.910/2006.
                                   39

follows:

             "12. Thus, this Court has consistently taken the
      view that before holding an accused guilty of an offence
      under Section 306, IPC, the Court must scrupulously
      examine the facts and circumstances of the case and
      also assess the evidence adduced before it in order to
      find out whether the cruelty and harassment meted out
      to the victim had left the victim with no other alternative
      but to put an end to her life. It is also to be borne in
      mind that in cases of alleged abetment of suicide there
      must be proof of direct or indirect acts of incitement to
      the commission of suicide. Merely on the allegation of
      harassment without their being any positive action
      proximate to the time of occurrence on the part of the
      accused which led or compelled the person to commit
      suicide, conviction in terms of Section 306, IPC is not
      sustainable.
             13. In order to bring a case within the purview of
      Section 306 of IPC there must be a case of suicide and in
      the commission of the said offence, the person who is
      said to have abetted the commission of suicide must
      have played an active role by an act of instigation or by
      doing certain act to facilitate the commission of suicide.
      Therefore, the act of abetment by the person charged

Crl.A.910/2006.
                                   40

      with the said offence must be proved and established by
      the prosecution before he could be convicted under
      Section 306 IPC.
             14. The expression 'abetment' has been defined
      under Section 107, IPC which we have already extracted
      above. A person is said to abet the commission of
      suicide when a person instigates any person to do that
      thing as stated in clause firstly or to do anything as
      stated in clauses secondly or thirdly of Section 107, IPC.
      Section 109 IPC provides that if the act abetted is
      committed pursuant to and in consequence of abetment
      then the offender is to be punished with the punishment
      provided for the original offence. Learned counsel for
      the respondent-State, however, clearly stated before us
      that it would be a case where clause 'thirdly' of Section
      107, IPC only would be attracted. According to him, a
      case of abetment of suicide is made out as provided for
      under Section 107 IPC.
             15. In view of the aforesaid situation and position,
      we have examined the provision of clause thirdly which
      provides that a person would be held to have abetted
      the doing of a thing when he intentionally does or omits
      to do anything in order to aid the commission of that
      thing. The Act further gives an idea as to who would be

Crl.A.910/2006.
                                  41

      intentionally aiding by any act of doing of that thing
      when in Explanation 2 it is provided as follows :
             "Explanation 2.- Whoever, either prior to or at the
      time of the commission of an act, does anything in order
      to facilitate the commission of that act, and thereby
      facilitate the commission thereof, is said to aid the doing
      of that act.""

             48. Relying on the principles laid down in the above

decisions, it was contended that most crucial aspect that has

to be determined is the intention of the first accused. The

question is whether the first accused intended that as a result

of the acts committed by        him, the victim       should commit

suicide. Mere harassment, ill-treatment or taunting etc may

not by themselves be sufficient to warrant a conclusion that

the first accused is guilty of abetment of suicide.             If one

applies the principle laid down in the above decisions,

according to the learned Senior Counsel, it is evident that in

the case on hand the first accused could not have been found

guilty of the offence under Section 306 of I.P.C.

Crl.A.910/2006.
                                 42

             49. Well in the matter of appreciation of evidence, it

is well settled that there are no precedents.          Each case

depends on the facts of that case and the evidence available in

the case.      There is no universal principle regarding the

appreciation of evidence      nor is there any straight jacket

formula for the same. Going by the principle laid down in the

above decisions, it does not follow that in order to attract

Section 306 of I.P.C. there has to be positive acts from the side

of the abettor. Even passive acts would amount to a positive

conduct instigating the victim to commit suicide. In the case

on hand, the conduct on the part of the first accused making

himself clear that he does not wish to continue the

relationship with the victim clearly indicates that the victim

was both undesirable and unwanted in the matrimonial house

which led to      frustration on her part apart from feeling

helpless and isolated.

Crl.A.910/2006.
                                 43




             50. In a marital life, both parties have duties and

obligations. Passiveness though always may not amount to a

positive act, may sometimes amount to an indication of the

state of affairs propelling the other person to do a particular

act. Total neglect of the spouse, passive attitude when the

other members of the family ill-treats and taunts and

humiliate the victim, and the declaration of intention on the

part of the husband that he no longer wishes to continue the

marital relationship and the total indifference and callous

attitude towards the wife cannot be easily ignored.

             51. From the evidence on record, it would appear

that the victim in this case used to slog for the matrimonial

family and in return she got brickbats, i.e., ill-treatment and

humiliation. It was not a case of ill-treatment for a day or two,

but it was a continuous process soon after the marriage till the

Crl.A.910/2006.
                                44

date she committed suicide. The evidence is also to the effect

that her first child died due to want of proper care and her

second pregnancy was cleverly aborted.

             52. The first accused, who is none other than the

husband of the victim, ought to have come to her rescue and

should not have left her to the mercy of the other inmates of

the house. A husband has a marital duty to ensure the welfare

of his spouse to the extent possible. If he keeps mum when

the members of his family take out their ire on her and keeps

torturing and ill-treating her making her life in the

matrimonial home miserable, it could not be said that the

husband can be treated as innocent for the reason that there

was no positive act from his side. Refusal on the part of the

husband to recognize the marital obligation would be

injustice. The passive attitude of a husband to his wife whose

life is made miserable by the conduct of the members of his

Crl.A.910/2006.
                                45

family and by his own conduct has to be viewed seriously. In

the case on hand, the first accused who is the husband of the

victim did not lag behind in contributing the misery of his

wife. He obviously had a marital duty to provide sufficient

security and care to his wife.

             53. In the case on hand, not only he did not come

to the aid of his wife and protect her, on the other hand he

also joined the band in making the life miserable for the victim

and he also expressly declare that he did not wish to continue

the marital relationship.

             54. The neglect, dislike and the desire to get rid of

his wife on the part of the first accused were all contributing

factors which left the victim helpless and without much hope

in life.    Even though the evidence would suggest that the

victim was willing to put up with the ill-treatment and the

inconveniences and was willing to take up residence with the

first accused and stay independently, the first accused had

Crl.A.910/2006.
                                46

other ides and intentions. Thus, under those circumstances,

when the victim came to know that the first accused was no

longer interested in her and was planning to sever the

relationship with her, she must have become desperate.

             55. It is here one has to notice that the act of self

immolation was on the day fixed for mediation talk between

the two families. It is seen from the evidence that on that day,

according to the defence, she had consumed kerosene.

Probably when the victim came to know that her family

members were also being asked to attend the mediation talks,

it must have struck that in the light of the fact that the first

accused was keen to get rid of her and his disinclination to

continue the relationship, she might have believed that she

would be packed off to her house where also she was not a

desirable member.

             56. One cannot omit to note that the attitude of the

members of her family was equally deplorable.           But that

Crl.A.910/2006.
                               47

cannot justify the acts committed by the first accused.        If

under those circumstances, if the victim was left with no

choice but to commit suicide, it could not be said that the first

accused had no role to play.

             57. Woman needs protection at home also. One

cannot in a civilized society accede to the contention that

continuous ill-treatment and harassment creating frustration,

concern and anxiety in the mind of woman leaving her with

no choice but to end her life does not amount to instigation.

             58. Law has to develop, keep growing and to meet

the needs of a developing and changing society. The concept

of an Indian wife destined to fate at her matrimonial home

no longer holds good. While usual family quarrels and discord

notes and unpleasant incidents may not by themselves be

sufficient ground to mulct liability either on the husband or

the members of his family and resorting to objectionable

conduct like continuous ill-treatment, physical assault making

Crl.A.910/2006.
                                  48

the life of the victim miserable in the matrimonial house

cannot be viewed lightly.

             59. It is true that in order to attract Section 306 of

I.P.C., the question is one of intention. But there is no magic

wand with a court to determine the intention of the person at a

particular point of time. The intention of the person has to be

gathered from his conduct. When one views the conduct of

the first accused as disclosed from the evidence, especially

after he had gone abroad on employment, his intention

became very clear. The letters referred to and the scribblings

in the note book Ext.P7 indicate that the first accused used to

disclose the deplorable state of affairs the victim had faced in

the matrimonial house. The Ill-treatment, taunting etc which

she faced in the matrimonial house have already been referred

to.

             60. Further, apart from the active role played by the

first accused in ill-treating his wife, the passive attitude

Crl.A.910/2006.
                              49

displayed by him while others played with the life of the victim

and his unequivocal declaration that he does not wish to

continue the marital relationship, if gives the impression to

the victim that she was no longer wanted by the first accused

and left with no choice and if she took the extreme step, it

will be imprudent on the part of the court to conclude that

merely because there is no positive act on the part of the first

accused, he could not be said to have instigated the victim to

commit suicide.

             61. The dictionary meaning of instigate     means

goad or urging forward. The act on the part of the abettor

facilitates the commission of the act by the victim. One is

presumed to have no consequence of his natural act. In the

light of the factors already made mention of, it is difficult to

accept the contention of the learned counsel for the appellant

that there was no instigation on the part of the first accused

resulting in the commission of suicide by the victim.       The

Crl.A.910/2006.
                               50

contention that he had no intention that the victim should

commit suicide is also not acceptable.



             62. The conduct of the first accused has to be

viewed in the light of the fact that the victim received little

support from her family.      Under such circumstances, she

needed more protection from her husband. But instead, her

life in the matrimonial house was far from pleasant and infact

miserable. There is some evidence to show that she was not

even provided with adequate food and cloths. This is a case

where both by the acts and omissions on the part of the first

accused indicated his clear intention that he intended that the

victim should commit suicide and the victim was left with no

choice under the circumstances but to commit suicide.

             63. When we look at the various decisions relied on

by the learned counsel for the appellant, it is true that mere

ill-treatment by themselves are not sufficient to attract Section

Crl.A.910/2006.
                                 51

306 of I.P.C. But as already stated, each case turn on its facts.

It could not be said that there has to be positive evidence of

manifest intention on the part of the accused person

concerned to bring him under Section 306 of I.P.C.          The

intention may be inferred from his conduct.

             64. Viewed from this angle, the court below was

perfectly justified in coming to the conclusion that the first

accused is guilty of the offence under Section 306 I.P.C. also.

From the above discussion, it follows that the finding that the

other accused are guilty of the offence punishable under

Section 498A of I.P.C. is fully justified.

             65.  Coming to the sentence, considering the

conduct of the accused persons, the ill-treatment undergone

by the victim etc., the sentence awarded is found to be

reasonable and no interference is called for with the sentence

also.

Crl.A.910/2006.
                                  52




             The result is that this appeal is without merits and it

is liable to be dismissed. I do so.




                                               P. BHAVADASAN,
                                                     JUDGE

sb.



