
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                      PRESENT:

                          THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE P.BHAVADASAN

              MONDAY, THE 28TH DAY OF OCTOBER 2013/6TH KARTHIKA, 1935

                                          CRL.A.No. 1950 of 2004 (C)
                                     -------------------------------------------------

  AGAINST THE ORDER/JUDGMENT IN SC 357/2000 of ADDITIONAL DISTRICT COURT
                              (ADHOC - I), ERNAKULAM DATED 15-05-2003

APPELLANT(S)/COMPLAINANT:
---------------------------------------------

            STATE OF KERALA,
            REP. BY THE PUBLIC PROSECUTOR, HIGH COURT OF KERALA.

            BY GOVERNMENT PLEADER, SMT.P.MAYA

RESPONDENT(S)/ACCUSED:
-------------------------------------------

        1. NABEESA, W/O. ABU, THRIKKAPARAMBIL,
            CHALIKKAVATTOM KARA, EDAPPALLY SOUTH.

        2. ABDUL RASHEED @ RASHEED,
            THRIKKAPARAMBIL, CHALIKKAVATTOM KARA, EDAPPALLY SOUTH.

        3. ABDUL NASSAR, THRIKKAPARAMBIL,
            CHALIKKAVATTOMKARA, EDAPPALLY SOUTH.

        4. SHAHIDA, W/O. RIAS, PAYYAPPILLIVEETTIL,
            THAMMANAM KARA, EDAPPALLY SOUTH.

            R1 BY ADVS. SRI.BABU KARUKAPADATH
                                SRI.JAGAN GEORGE

            THIS CRIMINAL APPEAL HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD ON 28-10-2013, THE
            COURT ON THE SAME DAY DELIVERED THE FOLLOWING:




DG


                      P. BHAVADASAN, J.

                   ....................................

                Crl.Appeal No. 1950 of 2004

              ...............................................

        Dated this the 28th day of October, 2013

                             JUDGMENT

  The accused four in numbers were prosecuted for the

  offences punishable under Sections 306 and 498A read

  with Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code.




2.The marriage between the 2nd accused and the

  deceased, who is the daughter of P.W.1, was solemnized

  on 04.09.1994.      The couple took up residence in the

  matrimonial house. They had a child in the wedlock. On

  31.11.1996, the body of Shamila, the daughter of P.W.1

  and the wife of 2nd accused was found on the railway

  track along with her child's body. The allegation is that

  she was driven to commit suicide due to the ill-

  treatment and torture meted out by the accused

  persons.   P.W.9 laid First Information Statement as

  Ext.P4 and that was recorded by P.W.20, who registered

  the crime for unnatural death and had Ext.P12 First

  Information Report. Inquests of the body of Shamila

Crl.Appeal No. 1950 of 2004

                                  2

   and her child was carried out and their autopsy were

   also conducted.         Exts.P7 and P8 are the respective

   postmortem certificates. Investigation was taken over

   by P.W.22.        He prepared a scene mahazar, recorded

   statement of witnesses and had the accused arrested.

   He filed necessary reports incorporating Sections 306

   and 498A read with Section 34 of IPC. He completed the

   investigation and laid charge before court.




3.The court, before which, final report was laid took

   cognizance of the offences. Finding that the offences

   are exclusively triable by a Court of Sessions, the said

   court committed the case to Sessions Court, Ernakulam.




4.The Sessions Court made over the case to Additional

   Sessions Court, Adhoc-I for trial and disposal. The latter

   court, on receipt of records and appearance of the

   accused, framed charge for the offences punishable

   under Sections 306 and 498A read with Section 34 of

   IPC. To the charge, the accused pleaded not guilty and

Crl.Appeal No. 1950 of 2004

                               3

   claimed to be tried.         The prosecution, therefore,

   examined P.Ws.1 to 22 and had Exts.P1 to P15 marked.

   MOs 1 to 8 were got identified and marked. After the

   close of prosecution evidence, they had questioned

   under Section 313 Code of Criminal Procedure. They

   denied all the incriminating circumstances brought out

   in evidence against them and maintained that they are

   innocent.      Finding that they could not be acquitted

   under Section 232 Cr.P.C., they were asked to enter on

   their defence and examined D.Ws.1 to 3         and had

   Exts.D1 to D13 were marked.




5.The court below on appreciation of the evidence in the

   case found that there is no convincing materials to

   come to the conclusion that Shamila had committed

   suicide as a result of the torture and cruelty meted out

   by the accused persons or there is anything to show

   that they had treated the deceased with cruelty.

   Accordingly the accused were acquitted of all charges.

Crl.Appeal No. 1950 of 2004

                                  4

6.The State challenges the acquittal. The learned Public

   Prosecutor appearing for the State contended that the

   evidence of P.Ws.1, 2, 3, 6 and 11 are sufficient to

   establish the guilt of the accused. All of them are

   consistent in their deposition that the accused were

   making fun of the victim, Shamila, for having squint-eye

   and also that she lacked beauty and the 2nd accused

   intended to marry again. P.Ws.1 and 3 also say that the

   3rd accused had beaten the wife of the 2nd accused.

   P.W.3 also, according to the learned Public Prosecutor,

   says that the accused had not given enough food to the

   victim and also that she was made to do the entire

   household work.         It is pointed out that P.W.6 is the

   neighbour,       who    had   no   reason  to  favour  the

   prosecution. She speaks about the taunting by the

   accused persons towards Shamila. She was also the

   mediator for the marriage. These convincing items of

   evidence, according to the learned Public Prosecutor,

   could not have been ignored by the court below on

   slight inconsistencies and contradictions.

Crl.Appeal No. 1950 of 2004

                               5

7.It is, therefore, contended that the conviction and

   sentence of acquittal cannot be sustained.




8.The learned counsel appearing for the accused persons

   on the other hand pointed out that a reading of the

   evidence of the witnesses made mention by the learned

   Public Prosecutor would clearly show that they had no

   idea about the household matters of the accused

   persons. None of them was ever gone to the house of

   Shamila, except P.W.1, who had gone on one or two

   occasions and he would say that he stood in the

   courtyard and was not allowed entry to the house. He

   had absolutely no idea about the inmates of the house

   or what is happening in the house. All these witnesses

   say that the accused used to taunt Shamila saying that

   she was squint-eye and she lacked beauty. While P.W.1

   murmur about the demand for dowry, none of other

   witnesses support the same. The testimony of P.W.3 to

   the effect that Shamila was not being given food etc.,

   are not spoken to by P.W.1 at all. It is very clear that

Crl.Appeal No. 1950 of 2004

                               6

   none of the witnesses namely P.Ws.1, 3 and 11 had ever

   gone to the matrimonial house of Shamila. While P.W.3

   says that Shamila had complained about the beating by

   the 3rd accused, P.W.11 his son, who claims to be

   extremely close to Shamila, does not say any such act

   by the 3rd accused. According to the learned counsel,

   there is no consistency on any of the matter between

   these witnesses. The court below was perfectly justified

   in discarding the evidence and acquitted the accused.




9.That Shamila was married to the 2nd accused is not a

   matter in dispute. They had also a child in the wedlock.

   The prosecution allegation is that due to the ill-

   treatment meted out to Shamila, she was driven to

   commit suicide along with her child.




10.It is true that P.Ws.1, 3, 6 and 11 do speak about

   certain aspects. Their testimony is in unison in that the

   accused used to taunt the victim, Shamila, saying that

   she was squint-eye and she lacked beauty. That is

Crl.Appeal No. 1950 of 2004

                                7

   common in their evidence. The evidence of P.W.1 makes

   an interesting reading. He has absolutely no idea about

   the matrimonial house of his daughter and how many

   inmates are in their house. He had not met anybody

   there and he also says that when he had gone to the

   house of his daughter, he stood in the courtyard and did

   not enter the house. All that he says is that she had

   complained about the taunting by the accused about

   her squint-eye and lacked beauty. He of course also

   says about the complaint by the accused about the

   inadequacy of dowry. It is significant to notice that he

   does not know whether any ceremony was conducted

   regarding the child of the 2nd accused. He has absolutely

   no idea about what had happened in the matrimonial

   house of his daughter. It has come out from his

   evidence that the first time he had gone to the house of

   his daughter was about 1 = years after marriage. It

   was suggested to him that the 1st accused is bedridden

   and is suffering to filaria, he says that he does not know

   anything about it. A reading of his evidence shows that

Crl.Appeal No. 1950 of 2004

                               8

   he has no idea about the affairs in the matrimonial

   house of his daughter. He says that whenever he goes

   to the matrimonial house of his daughter he does not

   meet anybody except his daughter.




11.P.W.3, however, does not say anything about the

   demand for dowry, on the other hand he would say that

   the victim, Shamila was not given food properly. He too

   would of course says about the squint-eye complaint

   and lack of beauty. It is significant to notice that he

   does not speak about the beating by 3rd accused.

   According to his version, all these complaints were

   made by deceased Shamila about one month prior to

   her death when she had come home and meet him. But

   it is significant to notice that even after his niece had

   complained about the torture and the ill-treatment in

   her matrimonial house, he did not feel it necessary to

   inform P.W.1 about it. P.W.11 is none other than the

   son of P.W.3. He says that he was very close to the

   victim, Shamila. According to him, she revealed all the

Crl.Appeal No. 1950 of 2004

                                9

   facts to inmates only 15 days prior to her death. He

   would also say that the victim, Shamila only is the

   subject of torture of all the inmates of the house. He

   however had no complaint about the 3rd accused

   beating Shamila.




12.It is significant to notice that most of the crucial

   statements made by P.Ws.1, 3 and 11 at the time of

   evidence do not find a place in their previous statement.

   That would clearly show that those are subsequent

   developments          and after thoughts     in  order  to

   substantiate the case.




13.As already noticed, the evidence of P.W.1 makes a very

   strange reading. He has no idea about what transpired

   after the marriage except for saying that his daughter

   complained to him about the ill-treatment. As regards

   the ill-treatment, there is no specific instance mentioned

   by any one of the witnesses and they are all general in

   their statements that she was taunted for having squint-

Crl.Appeal No. 1950 of 2004

                               10

   eye and also for lack of beauty.




14.There is absolutely no evidence to show that on the

   date of incident there was any act committed by any

   one of the accused persons to instigate the victim to

   commit suicide, except for saying that she was made

   fun of for having squint-eye and having not enough

   beauty.       There is nothing more spoken to by the

   witnesses. Even though, all the witnesses say that the

   accused had ill-treated the victim, Shamila, no specific

   overt act is attributed to anyone of the accused persons

   except a slap by 3rd accused on one occasion is spoken

   to by the witnesses. Such general statements cannot be

   made use of by prosecution to hold the accused guilty of

   the offences alleged against him.      The court below

   analysed the evidence of all the witnesses in detail and

   had come to the conclusion especially in the light of

   their conduct of non visit to the matrimonial house of

   the victim, Shamila that offence has not been

   established.

Crl.Appeal No. 1950 of 2004

                               11

15.It is true that the marriage was short lived but that way

   itself is not a ground to presume that she was ill-treated

   or driven to commit suicide due to the cruel act

   committed by the accused persons. These are all

   matters to be established by the prosecution and cannot

   be taken for granted. Once it is established that she

   was driven to commit suicide probably the presumptions

   may apply. However, in the absence of any evidence to

   show that the accused had ill-treated her except for

   probably making fun of her for her squint-eye nothing

   more is established.




16.It is interesting to note that the lower court has

   observed that during that time the 3rd accused had

   alleged to have ill-treated the victim, he was actually in

   hospital after undergoing massive lung surgery. D.W.1,

   the doctor       proved the same and Ext.D9 is the case

   sheet of the 3rd accused.




17.Lower court has also taken note of the fact that when

Crl.Appeal No. 1950 of 2004

                               12

   the policy taken by the 2nd accused, the nominee was

   none other than his wife, Shamila. The court below was

   of the opinion that if as a matter of fact the 2nd accused

   had any intention to divorce Shamila, he would not have

   done so.




18.The court below which had the occasion to watch the

   demeanour of witness has come to the conclusion that

   the evidence of P.Ws.1, 3, 6 and 11 are insufficient to

   come to the conclusion that Shamila was driven to

   commit suicide as a result of the acts committed by the

   accused persons at their instigation nor is there any

   evidence to show that she was treated cruelly while at

   recording Form 88A.




19.May be that a different view is possible, but unless it is

   shown that the findings of the court below are perverse

   and are contrary to the evidence on record, interference

   is not called for.

Crl.Appeal No. 1950 of 2004

                               13

   This Court reminds itself that this appeal is against an

   order of acquittal and the interference is limited as

   usual. By no such imagination it can be said that the

   findings of the court below are perverse or are not in

   accordance with the evidence on record. It is certainly

   a possible view. If that be so, no interference is called

   for with the order of acquittal passed by the court

   below.       This appeal is without any merits.     It is

   accordingly dismissed.




                                                sd/-
                                  (P. BHAVADASAN, JUDGE)
AMV/



                                    /TRUE COPY/




                                    P.A.TO JUDGE



