
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                          PRESENT:

           THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE V.K.MOHANAN

    TUESDAY, THE 25TH DAY OF JUNE 2013/4TH ASHADHA, 1935

                 Crl.MC.No.2570 of 2013 ()
                ---------------------------

CRIME NO.179/2013 OF VELLARIKUNDU POLICE STATION, KASARAGOD
                          DISTRICT
                     -----------------

PETITIONER/ACCUSED 1 TO 3:
-------------------------

   1. AHAMMED SHAKKIR K.P, AGED 36 YEARS,
      S/O. N.MOIDEEN KUNHI, RESIDING AT KAMMADATH,
      PARAPPA VILLAGE, KASARGOD DISTRICT.

   2. SUBAIDA,
      W/O.N.MOIDEEN KUNHI, RESIDING AT KAMMADATH,
      PARAPPA VILLAGE, KASARGOD DISTRICT.

   3. SHANIJA,
      D/O.N.MOIDEEN KUNHI, RESIDING AT KAMMADATH,
      PARAPPA VILLAGE, KASARGOD DISTRICT.

      BY ADV. SRI.SURESH KUMAR KODOTH

RESPONDENTS/STATE AND COMPLAINANT:
----------------------------------

    1. STATE OF KERALA,
      REPRESENTED BY THE PUBLIC PROSECUTOR
      HIGH COURT OF KERALA.

    2. RAMSEENA.M.P,, AGED 24 YEARS,
      W/O.AHAMMED SHAKKIR.K.P,
      RAMSEENA MANZIL, ITTAMMAL,
      KOLAVAYAL, AJANUR VILLAGE,
      KASARGOD DISTRICT-671531.

      R2 BY ADV. SRI.BINU GEORGE
      BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR, SMT.HYMA

THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE HAVING COME UP FOR ADMISSION ON
25-06-2013, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE FOLLOWING:

Crl.MC.No.2570 of 2013 ()
---------------------------


                          APPENDIX



PETITIONERS' ANNEXURES:
-----------------------

ANNEXURE-1    : CERTIFIED COPY OF THE FIR IN CRIME
                 179/2013 OF VELLARIKUNDU POLICE STATION.

ANNEXURE-2    : JOINT STATEMENT OF FIRST PETITIONER AND
                 SECOND RESPONDENT.


RESPONDENTS ANNEXURES: NIL.
---------------------




                                      /TRUE COPY/


                                           P.A.TO JUDGE.

ln


                       V.K.MOHANAN, J.
              ------------------------------------------
                  Crl.M.C.No.2570 of 2013
              -------------------------------------------
            Dated this the 25th day of June, 2013

                              ORDER

        The above petition is filed under Section 482 of the

Criminal Procedure Code (for short 'Cr.P.C.') at the instance of

the petitioners, who are accused Nos.1 to 3 in Crime No.179

of 2013 of Vellarikundu Police Station which is a crime

registered on the basis of a complaint given by the second

respondent for the offence punishable under Section 498(A) of

IPC with a prayer to quash the proceeding in Crime No.179 of

2013 of Vellarikundu Police Station as the matter is settled out

of court.

     2.   The allegation against the petitioners is that, the

first  accused married the 2nd respondent/complainant on

24/03/2008 and they were residing together in the matrimonial

home.     According to the de facto complainant, though

sufficient properties were given connected with the marriage,

during her stay along with the first petitioner in the

Crl.M.C.No.2570 of 2013
                             :-2-:


matrimonial home, the other accused started to blaming the

complainant not bringing sufficient dowry and thus occurred

difference of opinion among the spouses, in spite of the fact

that the 2nd respondent/complainant gave birth to a female

child in the meanwhile.      According to the 2nd respondent/

complainant, she was subjected to both mental and physical

harassment as a result of which he was forced to lodge an

information   and     consequently    Annexure-I   F.I.R.  was

registered. Now the case of the petitioner is that the matter is

settled between them and the second respondent who is the de

facto complainant and now both of them are residing together

after amicably settling the dispute including both the

matrimonial and criminal.     Annexure-2 is the joint statement

signed by the first petitioner and the second respondent which

are counter signed by the respective counsel.

        3. Heard the learned counsel for the petitioners as

well as the 2nd respondent.      I have also heard the learned

Public Prosecutor.

Crl.M.C.No.2570 of 2013
                              :-3-:




        4.   The learned counsel for the petitioners submitted

that, during the pendency of the above crime, the dispute is

settled amicably between the parties which is the subject

matter of the above crime. Therefore, the continuation of the

proceedings in the above crime is abuse of process of law and

proceedings.

        5. The learned counsel for the 2nd respondent who on

the basis of specific instruction received from the respondent

submitted that the above respondent, who is the de facto

complainant does not intend to proceed any further against the

petitioners and she has no grievance against them.

        6. I have carefully considered the above submissions of

the respective counsel.    I have verified the documents and

materials produced along with the above petition including

Annexure-2 joint statement.         In the given facts and

circumstances of the case and especially in the light of the

settlement arrived between the parties to the dispute, the

Crl.M.C.No.2570 of 2013
                                   :-4-:


learned Public Prosecutor has also no objection in allowing the

above petition.

        7.    Having regard to the facts and circumstances

involved in the case, it can be seen that the offences involved

in the above case are only under Section 498(A) of IPC which

are more or less personal in nature and no public interest is

involved. It is pertinent to note that though such offences are

involved, the real parties to the dispute approached this Court

after having amicably settled the matter. From the submission

made by the counsel for the 2nd respondent, it appears to me

that the the de facto complainant has no further grievance

against the petitioners/accused in the light of the settlement

arrived by them. In this juncture, it is relevant to note that the

Honourable Apex Court, in the decision reported in Jitendra

Raghuvanshi and Others v. Babita Raghuvanshi and

another [2013 (1) KLD 817(SC)], has held as follows:-

              "7. It is not in dispute that matrimonial disputes

        have been on considerable increase in recent times

        resulting in filing of complaints under Sections 498A and

Crl.M.C.No.2570 of 2013
                                   :-5-:


        406 of I.P.C. not only against the husband but also against

        the relatives of the husband. The question is when such

        matters are resolved either by the wife agreeing to rejoin

        the matrimonial home or by mutual settlement of other

        pending disputes for which both the sides approached the

        High Court and jointly prayed for quashing of the criminal

        proceedings or the FIR or complaint by the wife under

        Sections 498A and 406 of I.P.C., whether the prayer can

        be declined on the sole ground that since the offences are

        non-compoundable under Section 320 of the Code, it

        would be impermissible for the court to quash the

        criminal proceedings or FIR or complaint.

              8. It is not in dispute that in the case on hand

        subsequent to the filing of the criminal complaint under

        Sections 498A and 406 of IPC and Sections 3 and 4 of the

        Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961,         with the help and

        intervention of family members, friends and well-wishers,

        the parties concerned have amicably settled their

        differences   and   executed    a  compromise/settlement.

        Pursuant    thereto,   the   appellants    filed   the  said

        compromise before the Trial Court with a request to place

        the same on record and to drop the criminal proceedings

        against the appellants herein. It is also not in dispute that

        in additional to the mutual settlement arrived at by the

        parties, respondent/-wife has also filed an affidavit stating

        that she did not wish to pursue the criminal proceedings

        against the appellants and fully supported the contents of

        the settlement deed. It is the grievance of the appellants

        that no only the Trial Court rejected such prayer of the

        parties but also the High Court failed toe exercise its

Crl.M.C.No.2570 of 2013
                                   :-6-:


        jurisdiction under Section 482 of the Code only on the

        ground that the criminal proceedings relate to the

        offences punishable under Sections 498A and 406 of IPC

        which are non-compoundable in nature."

               "12. In our view, it is the duty of the Courts to

        encourage genuine settlements of matrimonial disputes,

        particularly, when the same are on considerable increase.

        Even if the offences are non-compoundable, if they relate

        to matrimonial disputes and the Court is satisfied that the

        parties have settled the same amicably and without any

        pressure, we hold that for the purpose of securing ends of

        justice, Section 320 of the Code would not be a bar to the

        exercise of power of quashing of FIR, complaint or the

        subsequent criminal proceedings.

                  13. There has been an outburst of matrimonial

        disputes in recent times.     The institution of marriage

        occupies an important place and it has an important role

        to play in the society. Therefore, every effort should be

        made in the interest of the individuals in order to enable

        them to settle down in life and live peacefully.    If the

        parties ponder over their defaults and terminate their

        disputes amicably by mutual agreement instead of

        fighting it out in a Court of law, in order to do complete

        justice in the matrimonial matters, the Courts should be

        less hesitant in exercising its extraordinary jurisdiction.

        It is trite to state that the power under Section 482

        should be exercised sparingly and with circumspection

        only when the Court is convinced, on the basis of material

        on record, that allowing the proceedings to continue

        would be an abuse of the process of the Court or that the

Crl.M.C.No.2570 of 2013
                                  :-7-:


        ends of justice require that the proceedings ought to be

        quashed."


In the present case, the only offence involved is under Section

498A of I.P.C. The criminal proceedings for the said offence

originated from the matrimonial issues, which are now settled.

Consequently, the parties want a quietus to the criminal case

as well.

        According to me, in the light of the facts and

circumstances involved in the present case and particularly in

view of the settlement arrived in the present case, the dictum

laid in the above decision will be squarely applicable in the

present case. According to me, as the parties to the dispute

settled the issues amicably, it is the duty of this Court to

promote such settlement, instead of compelling the parties to

go on with the dispute. It is pertinent to note that since the

matter is settled out of court, in the event of proceeding with

the trial, there would not have any fruitful prosecution

resulting the conviction of the accused, rather the net result

Crl.M.C.No.2570 of 2013
                             :-8-:


would be sheer waste of judicial time and abuse of process of

the court and proceedings. Thus, according to me, following

the decisions cited supra, this Crl.M.C. can be allowed

granting the relief as sought for.

        In the result, this Crl.M.C. is allowed, quashing all

further proceedings pending against the petitioners in Crime

No.179 of 2013 of Vellarikundu Police Station.




                                                 sd/-
                                    V.K.MOHANAN, JUDGE
skj




                                            /True copy/




                                               P.A. to Judge.



