
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                      PRESENT:

                          THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE P.BHAVADASAN

             MONDAY,THE 11TH DAY OF NOVEMBER 2013/20TH KARTHIKA, 1935

                                           CRL.A.No. 1436 of 2005 ( )
                                       ---------------------------------------------

 AGAINST THE ORDER/JUDGMENT IN SC 483/2004 of ADDITIONAL SESSIONS COURT
                 (ADHOC), FAST TRACK COURT-I, THRISSUR DATED 25-07-2005

APPELLANT(S)/1ST ACCUSED:
----------------------------------------------

            SURESH BABU @ SURA, S/O. RAMAKRISHNAN,
            THIRUTHILMELVEEDU, MANALITHATTA.

            BY ADV. SRI.C.RAJENDRAN

RESPONDENT(S)/COMPLAINANT:
--------------------------------------------------

            STATE,
            REPRESENTED BY ASSISTANT SUPERINTENDENT OF POLICE,
            KUNNAMKULAM.


             BY GOVERNMENT PLEADER, SMT.P.MAYA

            THIS CRIMINAL APPEAL HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD ON 11-11-2013, THE
            COURT ON THE SAME DAY DELIVERED THE FOLLOWING:




DG


                       P. BHAVADASAN, J.

                    ....................................

                 Crl.Appeal No.1436 of 2005

               ...............................................

        Dated this the 11th day of November, 2013


                              JUDGMENT

  Five persons were prosecuted for the offence punishable

  under Section 304B read with Section 34 of Indian Penal

  Code. Among them, except the 1st accused, all others

  were acquitted. As far as the 1st accused is concerned,

  who is the husband of the victim, he was found guilty of

  offence under Section 498A of the Indian Penal Code.

  He was convicted and sentenced to suffer rigorous

  imprisonment for 2 years and to pay a fine of

  Rs.10,000/-        with       a     default        clause    of simple

  imprisonment for 4 months. If the fine amount was

  realised, it was ordered to be paid to P.W.1. Set off as

  per law was allowed.




2.The marriage between the victim, Reshma, and the 1st

  accused was solemnized on 06.02.2000. It is claimed

  that at the time of marriage 38 sovereigns of gold and

Crl.Appeal No.1436 of 2005

                                2

   Rs.1,75,000/- were given.        The allegation is that

   dissatisfied with the quantum of dowry, the accused

   persons used to harass and ill-treat the victim and she

   was driven out of the house. At the relevant time, she

   was staying in her paternal house. Subsequently, the

   victim secured a job and it appears that the rift between

   the 1st accused and the deceased only increased.

   Mediation talks attempted, but failed. Finally, on

   28.11.2003, the victim committed suicide by hanging.

   They had a child at the relevant time.




3.P.W.3, who is the brother of the victim, laid Ext.P19 First

   Information Statement. P.W.15 recorded the same and

   registered a crime as per Ext.P19(a) F.I.R. Investigation

   was taken over by P.W.16. Inquest over the body was

   conducted. Autopsy was conducted by P.W.2. P.W.16

   prepared the         scene mahazar and had the Marriage

   Register seized. After the arrest of the accused, he filed

   Ext.P24 report showing the details of the accused as

   well as incorporating Section 304B read with Section 34

Crl.Appeal No.1436 of 2005

                              3

   of IPC.      He recorded the statements of witnesses,

   completed investigation and laid charge before court.




4.The court, before which final report was laid, took

   cognizance of the offences and finding that the offences

   are exclusively triable by a Court of Sessions, the case

   was committed to Sessions Court, Thrissur. The said

   court made over the case to IIIrd Additional Sessions

   Court,(Adhoc) Fast Track Court No.1, Thrissur for trial

   and disposal. The latter court, on receipt of records and

   on appearance of the accused, framed charge for the

   offences punishable under Section 304B read with

   Section 34 of IPC. The prosecution therefore had P.Ws.1

   to 19 examined and Exts.P1 to P33 marked. Ext.D1 was

   marked through the prosecution witness P.W.4.




5.After the close of prosecution evidence, the accused

   was questioned under Section 313 Cr.P.C. He denied all

   the incriminating circumstances brought out in evidence

   against him and maintained that he is innocent. The 1st

Crl.Appeal No.1436 of 2005

                              4

   accused in his statement pointed out that there was no

   demand for more dowry by any one of the accused

   persons and the victim had picked up quarrel with him

   about 1 = years ago and stayed in her paternal house.

   The accused pointed out that they had in no way

   contributed to the suicide of the victim.




6.Finding that the accused could not be acquitted under

   Section 232 Cr.P.C., they were asked to enter on their

   defence. They chose to adduce no evidence.




7.Presumably impressed by the evidence of P.Ws.1, 3 and

   4, who are the mother and brothers of the victim, the

   court below came to the conclusion that though the

   offence under Section 304B is not made out, the

   prosecution has succeeded in establishing the offence

   under Section 498A as against the 1st accused.    The

   conviction and sentence as already mentioned followed.




8.The learned counsel appearing for the appellant

Crl.Appeal No.1436 of 2005

                               5

   contended that the court below was not justified either

   on facts or in law in coming to the conclusion that the

   offence under Section 498A has been made out. True,

   P.Ws.1, 3 and 4 in their evidence simply stated that the

   victim was treated cruelly demanding more dowry. It is

   significant to notice, according to the learned counsel,

   that the court below has not accepted the claim put

   forward by the prosecution that there was harassment

   of the victim demanding more dowry.         There is no

   finding at all that suicide committed by the victim was

   as a result of the demand for more dowry or that she

   was ill-treated soon before committing suicide.     The

   evidence of the three prosecution witnesses, relied on

   by the court below only show that the victim was being

   harassed by the accused. Those witnesses did not say

   about the details of harassment except for saying that

   she was used to be ill-treated by the accused.




9.The learned counsel for the appellant relying on Ext.P3

   letter, pointed out that    in fact it goes against the

Crl.Appeal No.1436 of 2005

                               6

   prosecution case. It would be clear from a reading of

   Ext.P3 that the victim was unwilling to stay with the 1st

   accused for reasons of her own. But even in spite of

   best efforts made by the family of the 1st accused to

   patch up the differences between the two, the victim

   was not amenable to such a course. There is nothing in

   Ext.P4 diary which has been marked by prosecution to

   show that the accused had in anyway harassed the

   victim. Of course, the learned counsel had to admit that

   there is some suggestion that probably the family of the

   accused had financial difficulties and they might have

   utilized the money of the victim. But that by itself is not

   a ground to come to the conclusion that she was ill-

   treated or harassed or cruelty was meted out to her

   either demanding more dowry or driving her to commit

   suicide.




10.The learned Public Prosecutor, on the other hand, tried

   to support the findings of the court below on the ground

   that the court below has chosen to believe the evidence

Crl.Appeal No.1436 of 2005

                                   7

   of P.Ws.1, 3 and 4.         There is no reason to take a

   different view. It is unusual and unnatural for a wife to

   stay away from her husband in a normal course and if

   the victim was forced to do so, it must have been due to

   the fault of the 1st accused.        There is no reason to

   disbelieve P.Ws.1, 3 and 4. There were mediation talks

   which failed and the evidence would disclose that the

   accused persons were not satisfied with the dowry

   received at the time of marriage.         At any rate, the

   learned Public Prosecutor pointed out that the view

   taken by the court below is a plausible view and if that

   be so, no interference by the appellate court is called

   for.




11.Of course, P.Ws.1, 3 and 4 gave a parrot like version

   about the ill-treatment. They simply say that the victim

   was     harassed       and ill-treated   by   the accused

   demanding more dowry. As rightly pointed out by the

   learned counsel for the appellant, the claims of demand

   for more dowry and ill-treatment have not been

Crl.Appeal No.1436 of 2005

                              8

   accepted even by the lower court . But the lower court

   seems to have been impressed by the versions given by

   P.W.s1, 3 and 4 that the 1st accused used to physically

   assault the victim demanding more dowry.




12.As already stated, P.Ws.1, 3 and 4 do say that in fact

   all the members in the family of the husband of the

   victim used to continuously ill-treat her and the 1st

   accused used to manhandle her. It is even stated that

   on one night P.W.1 had gone to the house of the

   accused to rescue the victim.




13.The evidence of P.Ws.1 and 4 show that on the night

   on which P.W.1 is alleged to have gone to the house of

   the accused to save the victim, one Saraswaty teacher

   had intervened in the matter. But the said person is not

   seen examined.




14.The question is whether the evidence of P.Ws.1, 3 and

   4 are sufficient to come to the conclusion that there was

Crl.Appeal No.1436 of 2005

                                9

   any ill-treatment or harassment of the victim by the 1st

   accused. As rightly pointed out by the learned counsel

   for the appellant,       Ext.P3 plays a significant role.

   Nowhere in Ext.P3, the letter which is admittedly written

   by the victim, there is no mention of any ill-treatment or

   any cruel act by the 1st accused on the victim. But a

   reading of the letter would show that the victim was not

   keen to carry on the relationship with the 1st accused

   and she was not         amenable for any patch up or to

   continue the marital life. Here, one cannot omit to note

   that in Ext.P3, she accepts that during mediation talk,

   there was a proposal that the 1st accused and his family

   would return the gold ornaments and the money which

   they got at the time of marriage. Later, there was some

   other mediation as could be seen from Ext.P3 in which

   they agreed to give her a small item of property. She in

   fact told her elder brother namely P.W.4 that she did not

   wish to continue the relationship and if they all persisted

   and insisted that she should go, then she would be left

   with no other alternative but to commit suicide.

Crl.Appeal No.1436 of 2005

                              10

   Obviously, the tenor of Ext.P3 is the root of the

   prosecution case. There is nothing in Ext.P3 to show

   that there was any demand for more dowry or

   harassment on that account.        Of course, there is a

   vague mention of the same in Ext.P19. But as already

   noticed, the court below too was not inclined to accept

   the claim of demand for more dowry.            Since the

   harassment and ill-treatment are closely linked to the

   demand for more dowry, once it is found that the claim

   of demand for more dowry failed, then the claim

   regarding the ill-treatment and cruelty also become very

   fragile and brittle.




15.The main item of evidence, namely, Ext.P3 letter

   disclosed that there were attempts of mediation. Going

   by the tenor of Ext.P3, it can be seen that it must have

   failed due to the adamant stand on the part of the

   victim herself.




16.It is difficult to accept the findings of the court below

Crl.Appeal No.1436 of 2005

                                 11

   that the 1st accused is guilty of meting out           cruel

   treatment to the victim.        The evidence is far from

   satisfactory in that regard. It is also significant to notice

   that the entire family was dragged to the court on the

   allegation of ill-treatment of the victim by demanding

   more dowry.          Thus viewed from any angle, the claim

   made by P.Ws.1, 3 and 4 that the victim was being ill-

   treated cannot be accepted.




17.But it is also significant to notice that the victim for the

   last 1 = years prior to the date of incident had been

   staying away from the 1st accused and she seems to be

   very comfortable going by the tenor of Ext.P3. Viewed

   from that angle, it is difficult to accept the finding of the

   court below that offence under Section 498A is made

   out as against the 1st accused.




18.In the result, this appeal is allowed. The conviction and

   sentence against the 1st accused are set aside and it is

   held that he is not guilty of the offence alleged against

Crl.Appeal No.1436 of 2005

                              12

   him and he is acquitted of the offence under Section

   498A of IPC. His bail bond shall stand cancelled and he

   is set at liberty. If he has paid the fine amount, the

   same shall be refunded to him.




                                               sd/-
                                 (P. BHAVADASAN, JUDGE)
AMV/




                                   /TRUE COPY/




                                   P.A.TO JUDGE



