
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                    PRESENT:

                          THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE P.BHAVADASAN

        WEDNESDAY, THE 4TH DAY OF DECEMBER 2013/13TH AGRAHAYANA, 1935

                                           CRL.A.No. 2203 of 2006 ( )
                                              ---------------------------
         SC.NO. 826/2001 OF ADDL. SESSIONS, FAST TRACK (ADHOC) COURT - IV,
                                           THIRUVANANTHAPURAM
                                                    ---------------

APPELLANT/ACCUSED :
------------------------------------

            SIVAKUMAR @ SIVANKUTTY @ GOPAKUMAR,
            S/O.MADHAVAN PILLAI, LATHA BHAVAN, THIRUCHITTOOR
            VETTAMPALLI, ANAD MURI, ANAD VILLAGE.

            BY ADV. SRI.M.RAJAGOPALAN NAIR

RESPONDENT/COMPLAINANT :
----------------------------------------------

            STATE OF KERALA,
            REP. BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR,
            HIGH COURT OF KERALA
            ERNAKULAM.

            BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SRI. DHANESH MATHEW MANJOORAN

            THIS CRIMINAL APPEAL HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD ON 04-12-2013,
            THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY DELIVERED THE FOLLOWING:




Mn


                       P.BHAVADASAN, J.
               - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                     Crl.A. No. 2203 of 2006
               - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
          Dated this the 04th day of December, 2013


                         J U D G M E N T

     The accused faced prosecution for the offences

punishable under Sections 498(A) and 306 of IPC. After trial,

he was found guilty of the offence punishable under Section

498(A) of IPC. He was therefore convicted and sentenced to

suffer rigorous imprisonment for two years and to pay a fine

of  3,000/- with a default clause of three months rigorous

imprisonment.

     2.   The marriage between the accused and the victim

was solemnized on 22.08.1993. It appears that at the time

of marriage, the accused was employed abroad. He lost his

employment there and had to return home. Thereafter, the

victim, the accused, the parents of the victim, the children of

the victim and the father of the accused were all residing

together.    The allegation is that the accused, for no

particular reason, used to pick up quarrel with the victim and

Crl.A. No. 2203/2006
                              -2-



used to manhandle her. Unable to bear the ill-treatment any

more, on 27.05.2000, she is said to have committed suicide

by hanging.

      3.    PW1, the father of the victim laid Ext.P1, First

Information Statement.     It was recorded by the Station

House Officer of the Police Station concerned and the crime

was registered as per Ext.P18, FIR. Investigation was taken

over by PW14. Inquest was conducted over the body of the

deceased and Ext.P7 report was prepared.        Autopsy was

done by PW12, who furnished Ext.P9 report.               The

Investigating Officer had the scene mahazar prepared and

articles collected from the place of occurrence. He recorded

statement of witnesses and after the arrest of the accused,

filed the necessary report before court. He had the articles

collected during investigation sent for chemical analysis

report and obtained Ext.P17 report.         After completing

investigation, charge was laid before court.

Crl.A. No. 2203/2006
                              -3-



      4.    The court, before which the final report was laid,

took cognizance of the offences. Finding that the offences

are exclusively triable by a Court of Sessions, the case was

committed to the Sessions Court, Thiruvananthapuram

under Section 209 of Cr.P.C. The said court made over the

case to Additional Sessions Court, Fast Track (Adhoc)-IV,

Thiruvananthapuram, for trial and disposal.

      5.    The later court, on receipt of records, framed

charges for the offences punishable under Sections 498A

and 306 of IPC. To the charge, the accused pleaded not

guilty and claimed to be tried. The prosecution therefore

had PWs 1 to 17 examined and had Exts.P1 to P18 marked.

CW1 has examined as the court witness and Ext.C1 was

marked as court exhibit. Mos 1 to 18 were got identified and

marked.

      6.    After the close of prosecution evidence, the

accused was questioned under Section 313 Cr.P.C.          He

denied all the incriminating circumstances brought out in

Crl.A. No. 2203/2006
                              -4-



evidence against him and maintained that he is innocent.

He further stated that his wife was a B.Com graduate and

had earned proficiency in typing while he had only school

education. His marriage with the victim was only due to his

employment abroad and he soon after the marriage, went

abroad for employment. He used to sent money to his wife

and unfortunately he lost his job abroad and had to return to

his native place. He used to go for casual work to maintain

his family. In order to save money, he says he used to carry

lunch with him. But his job was not liked by his wife who

used to pick up quarrel with him frequently on that ground.

According to him, she was over suspicious about him and if

he talked to anybody, even to the neighbour, she used to

pick up quarrel with him. He would say that when ten cents

of property which was put up for sale by the sister of the

victim, he utilizing his funds, purchased the property in the

name of his wife. He carried out the maintenance work of

the house in which they were residing. On a particular day

Crl.A. No. 2203/2006
                              -5-



Maheswari, a neighbour came to their house for milk. Even

after calling the victim for four or five times, the victim did

not respond.      After Maheswari left, the accused on that

count questioned the victim which resulted in a quarrel. He

would then say that when he was about to leave for work, he

did not get the tea and he did not have his lunch pack by the

victim. When he questioned the victim about the same, the

victim behaved in an unnatural manner and showered

abuses on him. Unable to bear the abuse, he says that he

picked up a stick and beat her about 5 to 6 times. He, for

his employment, had to pass the shop where the tea shop

was being run by PWs 1 and 2. When they did not find him

carrying his food, he asked him about the same and replied

that probably his wife had decided that he should starve for

the day and he left place. In the evening, when he returned,

he heard that his wife is no more. Having found that the

accused could not be acquitted under Section 232 Cr.P.C.,

he was asked to enter on his defence. The accused chose to

Crl.A. No. 2203/2006
                               -6-



adduce no evidence.

      7.    Presumably accepting the evidence of PWs 1, 2, 5

and 8, who are the parents, sister and the son of the victim,

the court below came to the conclusion that even though it

could not be said that there was any instigation on the part

of the accused in driving the victim to commit suicide and

thereby, Section 306 of IPC is not attracted, the court

formed the opinion that the conduct of the accused was

such that it fell within the ambit of Section 498(A) of IPC and

the offence is attracted.        Accordingly, conviction and

sentence followed.

      8.    Assailing conviction and sentence, the learned

counsel appearing for the appellant pointed out that the

court below has mechanically acted on the evidence of PWs

1, 2, 5 and 8 without taking care to see whether they stand

scrutiny. All witnesses it would be clear according to the

learned     counsel,   are   prone  to   embellishments     and

developments and if those factors are eschewed from their

Crl.A. No. 2203/2006
                              -7-



evidence, it could be found that there are no materials on

the basis of which the court below could have come to the

conclusion that the accused used to ill-treat the victim.

Apart from the above aspect, the learned counsel also

pointed out that the allegations of ill-treatment except one

or two incidents, are all vague in nature without any specific

date or time or act as such. Of course, the learned counsel

conceded that PW1 says about a particular incident, PW2

about another incident and PW5 says about yet another

incident.    But the learned counsel drew attention of this

Court that the incident spoken to by PW1 is not spoken to by

PWs 2 and 5 and vice versa.       The learned counsel drew

attention of this Court to the fact that there is no allegation

that there was any demand for dowry from the side of the

accused or that he used to come home drunk and beat his

wife. In fact, the evidence would show that he had spent

money for purchasing a property in the name of his wife and

also for repairing works to the house which in fact belonged

Crl.A. No. 2203/2006
                              -8-



to the parents of the victim. He had bought a cow and he

was looking after the family. It is such a type of man who is

now accused of having ill-treated the victim. The learned

counsel went on to point out that true, the evidence of PW8,

the son of the victim does mention about certain ill-

treatment meted out by the accused. But, then the learned

counsel pointed out that the court cannot loose sight of the

fact that after the incident, he has been staying with PW5

and it is possible that the child witness could have been

tutored. Had he stayed with the accused, the position might

have been different. The learned counsel went on to point

out that even assuming all what the prosecution says is true,

at worst it could give a picture of a short tempered person

who used to get annoyed at the slightest pretext and might

have picked up quarrel with his wife. But characterizing as a

woman batterer, it would be unfortunate. It is also pointed

out by the learned counsel that one cannot easily ignore the

fact that there was incompatibility between the two as the

Crl.A. No. 2203/2006
                              -9-



wife was much more educated and she in fact, wanted to go

for an employment which was not permitted by the accused.

After loosing the employment, when the accused returned

home and went for casual labour work, it might have

reflected on the victim and frustrated by such a life, she

might have committed suicide. These aspects cannot be

ignored. According to the learned counsel, the evidence is

found wanting to show that the ill-treatment or cruelty as

contemplated under Section 498(A) of IPC is proved in the

case on hand. Accordingly, it is contended that conviction

and sentence cannot stand.

      9.    The learned Public Prosecutor on the other hand

pointed out that the evidence of PW3 would show the

temperament of the man. PW3, a neighbour who though

turned hostile to the prosecution has stated that no one in

the neighbourhood could go to the house of the accused for

the reason that he would make them run away showering

abuses. The learned Public Prosecutor went on to point out

Crl.A. No. 2203/2006
                              -10-



that the evidence of PWs 1, 2, 5 and 8 clearly show that the

victim had a miserable life. Not a day passed without she

being beaten.      It is true that there are inconsistencies,

contradictions, embellishments and developments in the

evidence of PWs 1, 2, 5 and 8. But even discarding all those

portions, their evidence is sufficient to show that the

accused was ill-treating his wife. In this regard, according to

the learned Public Prosecutor, the evidence of PW8, the son

of the victim assumes considerable importance. He speaks

about the thrashing which his mother received on the date

of incident also. He also says that almost every day, his

father used to beat his mother. The reason suggested by

the appellant for doubting his evidence according to the

learned Public Prosecutor, is not legally tenable. There is

nothing to show that the child was tutored or that the child

had any reason to falsely implicate the accused. It is not as

if that the accused had acted on the spur of the moment or

spontaneous behaviour or conduct on the part of the wife.

Crl.A. No. 2203/2006
                             -11-



But the evidence would clearly show that the assault on his

wife was almost a routine affair.         The learned Public

Prosecutor went on to point out that at any rate, the court

below which had the opportunity to watch the demeanour of

the witnesses has chosen to accept the evidence of PWs 1,

2, 5 and 8 and unless it is shown that the findings are

perverse, no interference is called for.

      10. The marriage between the accused and the victim

was solemnized on 22.08.1993 and the unfortunate incident

occurred on 22.07.2000. The victim was found hanging in

her house. It is not much in dispute that soon after the

marriage, the accused had gone abroad for employment. It

is also not in dispute that he lost his employment and came

down to his native place.      The evidence shows that the

accused, the victim, their children, the father of the accused

and the parents of the victim were residing together. As per

the evidence, PWs 1 and 2 were running a tea shop and they

used to leave the house by 4 O'Clock in the morning and

Crl.A. No. 2203/2006
                             -12-



return in the afternoon. After taking rest for a while, they

again used to go back and return late in the night. The

evidence is to the effect that the accused after having lost

his job abroad, came down and in order to maintain his

family, he used to go for casual work. As rightly pointed out

by the learned counsel for the appellant, there is no

allegation or complaint that the accused used to harass his

wife demanding more dowry or that he used to come drunk

everyday and used to assault his wife. In fact, the evidence

shows that when 10 cents of property which belonged to

PW5 was offered for sale, the accused using his funds

purchased the property in the name of his wife.          The

evidence is also suggestive of the fact that he was

maintaining the family. He claims to have carried out the

repair works of the house which they were residing and also

claimed that he had bought a cow. At any rate, there is no

complaint for PWs 1 and 2 that the accused was not looking

after the family.

Crl.A. No. 2203/2006
                             -13-



      11. However, the evidence of PWs 1 and 2 would show

that the accused was harsh on the victim. PW1 is the author

of Ext.P1, First Information Statement which was laid within

hours of the incident. That does make mention of the fact

that the accused used to continuously ill-treat the victim and

unable to bear it any more and frustrated by such a life, his

daughter had committed suicide. It is true that Ext.P1, does

not make mention of any specific incident of assault or ill-

treatment. But it makes mention of the fact that there was

continuous harassment. Here, one has to remember that

the First Information Statement is only intended to set the

law in motion and need not be an encyclopedia of facts.

There are indications to show that the reason for the victim

to have committed suicide is the ill-treatment meted out by

the accused. The evidence of PWs 1 and 2 show that the

victim was the younger of the two daughters they had. They

speak about the work they do and also regarding as to when

they leave the house in the morning and return in the

Crl.A. No. 2203/2006
                             -14-



evening. Both of them say that the accused used to pick up

quarrel with their daughter and used to assault her

physically. PW1 would say that when the victim used to

take objections to the improper conduct on the part of the

accused, he used to get furious and beat her also. He would

say that on a particular day, when the victim was carrying

the second baby, when he reached home, he found the

accused assaulting his daughter. When PW2 intervened, she

was threatened with dire consequences. He would say that

not a day passed without events and ultimately, his

daughter was compelled to take the extreme step.

      12. PW2 would say that the accused used to assault

his wife on the slightest pretext and used to pick up quarrel

almost for everything.    PW2 would say that the accused

used to unnecessarily pick up objections to whatever the

victim did for him and used to beat her. She would also say

that often the victim had to take shelter in the house of

Valsala, fearing the attack of the accused. PW2 would say

Crl.A. No. 2203/2006
                               -15-



that there were occasions when her daughter was physically

assaulted in her presence. She would also say that when

she tried to intervene, she was also attacked.

      13. It is true that the incident spoken to by PWs 1 and

2 do not find a place in their respective statement to the

Police.    To that extent, it would be said that there is

embellishment. But both of them do say about the daily

chorus that happened in the house and both of them say

that the accused was an ill-tempered man and used to

assault his wife. Even assuming that the specific incident

spoken to by PWs 1 and 2 are not reflected in their earlier

statements, that does not by itself mean that their whole

testimony will have to be discarded. Even eschewing those

portions for consideration, there is consistency in the

evidence of PWs 1and 2 regarding the conduct of the

accused towards the victim.

      14. PW5 is the sister of the victim. She would depose

about a particular incident which took place in her presence.

Crl.A. No. 2203/2006
                             -16-



She also would say that her sister used to complain to her

about the conduct of the accused and that her sister was

driven to commit suicide because of the said fact. She also

speaks about the incident which took place in her presence

but that incident does find reflection in her statement to the

Police.

      15. Even accepting the contentions raised by the

learned counsel for the appellant that the evidence of PWs

1, 2 and 5 cannot be accepted, there is the evidence of PW8

who is none other than the son of the victim and the

accused. True, it is come out in his testimony that he had

been staying with PW5. However, a reading of his testimony

as a whole would show that there is nothing to suspect the

versions given by him. He speaks about his father beating

his mother almost everyday and he makes special reference

to the incident which took place on the date of incident. On

that day morning, according to PW8, he saw his father

beating his mother with an iron rod and the mother bleeding

Crl.A. No. 2203/2006
                             -17-



through the nose.      She was repeatedly beaten by the

accused and he would say that his mother took him and his

brother along with her and dropped them in the shop run by

PWs 1 and 2 and went back home. That the victim had

brought PW8 and his brother to the shop of PWs 1 and 2 on

the date of incident is confirmed by the evidence of PWs 1

and 2. PW8 speaks about the acts of the accused in detail.

He too would swear that almost everyday, his mother used

to be beaten by his father.

      16. Merely because, after the incident, PW8 was

staying with PW5 by itself may not be a ground to suspect

his version. It is true that the claim made by PW8 that on

the date of incident, his father had beaten his mother with

an iron rod on her head causing an injury is not supported by

the post-mortem findings. But one shall not omit to note

that PW8 has also stated that she was beaten on various

parts of the body which find reflection in the findings in the

post-mortem report. Therefore, it could not be said that the

Crl.A. No. 2203/2006
                             -18-



entire evidence of PW8 regarding what had transpired in the

morning of the incident is untrue. He also makes mention of

the fact that on the date of incident, after beating his

mother, when the accused was about to leave for work, his

mother brought him a glass of milk. PW8 would say that he

emptied the glass on the body of the victim. He also speaks

about the incident involving Maheswari. Even though this

witness was cross-examined at length, there is nothing to

show that he is speaking falsehood or that he had any ill-

motive or oblique intention to falsely implicate his father.

There is nothing to indicate that the child was tutored to

depose as he did. Even otherwise, it is difficult to believe

that a child would have unnecessarily attributed to cruel

acts to his father just because of incitement by the in-laws.

      17. The post-mortem certificate issued by PW12 which

is marked as Ext.P9 shows the number of ante-mortem

injuries which cannot be a result of hanging. That to some

extent confirms the testimony of the witnesses that the

Crl.A. No. 2203/2006
                              -19-



victim used to be assaulted by the accused.

      18. It is true that the evidence shows that the accused

had spent money for the family and had purchased ten cents

of property in the name of his wife. But the evidence also

shows that he was ill-treating his wife.

      19. In Ext.P8 which is said to be a suicide note, the

victim does not blame anybody. But the evidence of PWs 1,

2, 5 and 8 clearly show the reason which had driven the

victim to commit suicide. As rightly noticed by the court

below, even though it could not be said that the suicide was

committed at the instigation of the accused, there is ample

evidence to show that she had suffered both physical and

mental injury as a result of the act committed by the

accused. The court below was therefore perfectly justified in

coming to the conclusion that the offence punishable under

Section 498(A) of IPC is made out. Conviction has only to

stand.

Crl.A. No. 2203/2006
                             -20-



      20. Faced with the above situation, the learned

counsel appearing for the appellant also pointed out that

considering his contribution to the family and considering

the fact that in all probabilities, the acts might have been

conferred because of his short temperament, some leniency

may be shown with regard to the sentence.

      21. The court below has awarded him the sentence of

rigorous imprisonment for two years and to pay a fine of 

3,000/-.     There seems to be some substance in the

contentions raised by the learned counsel for the appellant

that there is no complaint that the acts were committed by

the accused demanding more dowry or that he used to come

home drunk and beat his wife. There is also no allegation

that he had squandered the money or ornaments which was

given to his wife at the time of marriage and there is also

evidence to show that he had purchased ten cents of land in

the name of his wife and had bought a cow and also had

done repair works of the house in which all were residing.

Crl.A. No. 2203/2006
                                -21-



There are elements of goodness in him.          Considering all

these facts, it is felt that some leniency can be shown with

regard to the sentence.

      In the result, while confirming the conviction of the

accused for the offence punishable under Section 498(A) of

IPC, the sentence awarded by the court below is set aside

and     instead,   he    sentenced       to  undergo   rigorous

imprisonment for a period of one year and to pay a fine of

 10,000/- in default of payment of which he is to undergo

simple imprisonment for a period of three months. If the

fine amount is realized, it shall be paid to the children of the

victim as compensation. Set off as per law is allowed.


                                                     Sd/-
                                           P.BHAVADASAN
                                                  JUDGE
ds
                            //True Copy//


                            P.A. To Judge



