
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                PRESENT:

              THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE PIUS C.KURIAKOSE
                                   &
                 THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE P.D.RAJAN

        WEDNESDAY, THE 20TH DAY OF MARCH 2013/29TH PHALGUNA 1934

                      Mat.Appeal.No. 250 of 2011
                    -------------------------------
                 OP.89/2010 of FAMILY COURT, KASARAGOD


APPELLANT(S)/APPELLANT/RESPONDENT:
------------------------------------------

       H R PRADEEP KUMAR, AGED 42 YEARS,
       S/O. RAGHAVENDRA HEGDE, RESIDING AT VARSHA DEEP
       NEAR MUTHAPANTHARA, BALLA VILLAGE AND POST
       HOSDURG TALUK, KASARAGOD DISTRICT.

       BY ADVS.SRI.SURESH KUMAR KODOTH
                        SMT.HEMALATHA

RESPONDENT(S)/PETITIONER:
------------------------------------------

       P. REKHA, AGED 36 YEARS,
       D/O.N.PUSHKAR RAO, RESIDING AT KARATTUVAYAL
       NEAR DHS ROAD KANHANGAD, PO KANHANGAD, HOSDURG TALUK
       KASARGOD DISTRICT-671315.

           BY ADV. SRI.K.G.ANIL
           BY ADV. SRI.L.GOPALAKRISHNAN POTTI
           BY ADV. SRI.A.DINESH RAO

       THIS MATRIMONIAL APPEAL  HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD  ON  25-2-
2013, THE COURT ON 20-3-2013 DELIVERED THE FOLLOWING:


           PIUS C. KURIAKOSE & P.D. RAJAN, JJ.
     =~=~=~=~=~=~=~=~=~=~=~=~=~=~=~=~=~=~=~=~=~=~=
             Mat. Appeal No. 250 of 2011
     =~=~=~=~=~=~=~=~=~=~=~=~=~=~=~=~=~=~=~=~=~=~=
          Dated this the 20th day of March, 2013

                       JUDGMENT

P.D.Rajan, J.

     This appeal is directed against the judgment in

O.P.No.89/2010 of the Family Court, Kasargod, which was

filed u/s 13(1) (ia) and (ib) of the Hindu Marriage Act.

Appellant is the husband and respondent is the wife. The

appellant married the respondent on 19.10.1997 as per

Hindu customary rites and a female child was born to them.

He is a graduate employed in a Service Co-operative Bank.

Before the marriage, the respondent informed that she is a

graduate in Commerce, but after the marriage, when a

suggestion was made to join HDC course, she stated that

she did not complete her B.Com course. After this, she

began to pick up quarrels with the appellant and his aged

parents and their marital relationship became disrupted.

Mat.A.250/2011               2

Now he is residing in his house with his father following his

mother's death and the respondent wanted to avoid the

company of the appellant. She even made complaint to the

police and the police warned her not to repeat the habit of

complaining for silly matters in the family life.       Since

20.5.2008 the respondent started residing separately in a

rental house.    On 13.4.2009, in a mediation talk, they

decided to dissolve the marital tie by filing a joint petition.

Accordingly, a joint application was filed, but the

respondent repeatedly absent and consequently that was

dismissed on 31.12.2009.      The cruel treatment by the

respondent is very grave, which is something more serious

than the ordinary wear and tear of married life.

      2.    The respondent wife, denied the allegation of

cruelty and desertion from her side and contended that

after the birth of the child, the appellant started finding

fault with the respondent for not having bachelor degree,

besides this, he demanded that the respondent should be

employed immediately.     The appellant harassed her both

Mat.A.250/2011                 3

physically and mentally for not bringing dowry and on

different occasions, her father and relatives gave Rs.3 lakhs

to   him.     During   2003-2004,   the   appellant   started

construction of a residential house for which also he

demanded money from her and took her ornaments. When

she was pregnant the second child, due to the mental and

physical torture of the appellant, the pregnancy got

aborted.      On 27.2.2009, the respondent was asked to get

out of the house and she decided to leave the matrimonial

house.     The appellant obstructed to take the child and

informed the school authorities not to issue transfer

certificate. In that situation, the respondent was forced to

sign an agreement for filing joint application.          The

appellant and his henchmen insisted that the cash and gold

ornaments received from the respondent's parents will have

to be given up in order to leave her native place with the

child. Since the appellant threatened that she will not be

allowed to leave Kanhangad, unless divorce is granted, the

respondent had to take a rental house for staying with the

Mat.A.250/2011                4

child from March 2009. The appellant has not bothered to

look after the respondent and her child from March 2009.

The respondent is even now ready and willing to join the

appellant as a dutiful wife. Even before obtaining divorce,

the appellant has put his profile in a matrimonial website

for a second marriage.

      3.    The learned Judge of the Family Court examined

petitioner and his witness as PWs 1 and 2 and marked his

documents as Exts.A1 to A6. The respondent was examined

as RW1 and her documents were marked as Exts.B1 to B5.

The court below dismissed the petition filed by the

appellant. Hence, this appeal.

      4.    The learned counsel appearing for the appellant

contended that the marital relationship between the parties

has been broken irretrievably and refusal to grant relief

would only augment miseries of both parties.      The trial

judge noticed Ext.A1 agreement and terms of agreement

entered by both of them. The factum of filing joint petition

was in furtherance of Ext.A1 and departure from the

Mat.A.250/2011                5

conditions mentioned in Ext.A1 would cause irreparable

injuries to the parties. The allegation proved in the lower

court is sufficient to grant a decree for divorce and all the

ingredients sufficient to grant a divorce on the ground of

cruelty were proved with cogent and convincing evidence.

The observation made by the court below regarding the

correctness of Exts.A1 and A2 is manifestly illegal.     The

husband and wife living separately from 2008 onwards and

the factum of separate residence also proved in the court

below. When marital tie is come to an end from the factual

matrix of the case, it reveals that they cannot repair the

raptured marital tie in future, which is liable to be

terminated. The learned counsel relies on the decision of

the Apex Court in Samar Ghosh V. Jaya Ghosh, (2007) 4

SCC 511, in support of his contention.

      5.    The learned counsel appearing for the respondent

strongly resisted the above argument and contended that

the appellant demanded that the respondent should be

employed immediately and started to harass and torture her

Mat.A.250/2011                 6

both physically and mentally. He has also collected huge

amount      nearly   Rs.3  lakhs  from    her   parents  and

misappropriated 30 sovereigns of gold ornaments for his

own purpose. When his harassment and torture continued,

which was intolerable to the respondent, she was forced to

work as an Accountant in various firms. On 27.2.2009 the

appellant ousted the respondent from his house and she

informed this to her father and she left her matrimonial

house and resided along with her father. There was no

insult or ill-treat from her side against the appellant. Even

now, she is ready and willing to reside with the appellant as

a dutiful wife.

      6.    Before referring to the facts of the case, let us

consider the law under Section 13 of the Hindu Marriage

Act, 1955. Section 13 reads as follows:

              "13.   Divorce.-   (1)   Any     marriage
        solemnised,    whether  before   or   after  the
        commencement of this Act, may, on a petition
        presented by either the husband or the wife, be
        dissolved by a decree of divorce on the ground
        that the other party-

            xx        xx       xx       xx

Mat.A.250/2011                  7

       (ia) has, after the solemnisation of the marriage,

            treated the petitioner with cruelty; or

        (ib) has    deserted   the    petitioner   for a
        continuous period of not less than two years
        immediately preceding the presentation of the
        petition."

       7. Cruelty is not defined in the Act. The parties have

to prove that a particular conduct or         behaviour  in a

matrimonial relation becomes cruel. It is clear from the

evidence of PW1 that after the marriage, both of them

resided together in the matrimonial house. The husband in

his evidence contended that, while he was working as a

clerk in a Co-operative Bank, he married the respondent.

Before the marriage, she informed that she is a Commerce

graduate and intends to go for H.D.C. Course. After one

month of the marriage when the appellant demanded the

degree certificate, she informed that she was not a

graduate. After this, she behaved in a strange manner and

started quarrel. Three months after the birth of a child, she

joined with PW1 at Hosdurg and again in the year 2002 she

went to Ernakulam with the child. When the appellant

Mat.A.250/2011               8

visited her house during Onam festival, she closed the door

and not permitted him to see the child. Her father's brother

assaulted him. On the next day he took the respondent and

daughter to his house. While living so, the appellant

constructed a new house in the same compound in the year

2006 and stayed there . The respondent insulted him by

filing a complaint in the Hosdurg Police Station in the year

2008.

       8.    Evidence of DW1 shows that after the marriage

the appellant ill-treated her both physically and mentally

demanding more gold and money but with the help of her

father, she arranged money. She admitted that she failed

her B.Com Examination, but she was not allowed to

continue her studies after the birth of the first child. In the

year 2006 PW1 assaulted her and Ext.B4 is the prescription

issued by the doctor. When there was a continuous quarrel,

she informed the matter to the parents. After this incident

his behaviour became very cruel. When they returned to

Kochi after daughter's study, the appellant filed O.S.

Mat.A.250/2011                  9

No.143/2010 before the Munsiff's Court, Kanhangad against

the     Principal,   Christ    C.M.I.  School,     Kanhangad.

Subsequently, she shifted her residence in a rented

building.

       9. From the aforesaid facts, it is clear that there was

petty quarrel between them while they were living together

in the matrimonial home. But the only fact to be considered

is whether that petty quarrel made by them was an

intention to desert each other. During the subsistence of

marriage both parties are living together as husband and

wife, they must equally share happiness and sorrow through

out their life. The behavioural pattern of the couple must

be adjusted in each incident during the subsistence of the

marital tie. When one of the parties approached the court

alleging cruelty, it is his primary responsibility to plead and

establish each and every incident       at   particular place

happened or such incidents happened at different places

during the subsistence of the marital life. Therefore, we are

of the opinion that 'cruelty' as a ground for divorce is not

Mat.A.250/2011                 10

found in his evidence. In a normal marital life, there were

some incidents happened in their day-today life, while

residing together. As a part of good marital tie, such acts

cannot be called acts of cruelty within the meaning of

Section 13(1) (ia) of the Act.

       10.    The concept of 'mental cruelty' has been

discussed by the Apex Court in Samar Ghosh V. Jaya Ghosh,

(2007) 4 SCC 511, which was relied on by the appellant. In

paragraph 101 the Apex Court enumerated some instances

of human behaviour, which read as follows:-

             "101. No uniform standard can ever be laid

       down for guidance, yet we deem it appropriate to

       enumerate some instances of human behaviour

       which may be relevant in dealing with the cases

       of "mental cruelty". The instances indicated in

       the succeeding paragraphs are only illustrative

       and not exhaustive:

       (i) On consideration of complete matrimonial life

            of the parties, acute mental pain, agony and

            suffering as would not make possible for the

            parties to live with each other could come

            within the broad parameters of mental

Mat.A.250/2011                  11

            cruelty.

       (ii) On comprehensive appraisal of the entire

            matrimonial life of the parties, it becomes

            abundantly clear that situation is such that

            the wronged party cannot reasonably be

            asked to put up with such conduct and

            continue to live with other party.

       (iii) Mere coldness or lack of affection cannot

            amount to cruelty, frequent rudeness of

            language, petulance of manner, indifference

            and neglect may reach such a degree that it

            makes the married life for the other spouse

            absolutely intolerable.

       (iv) Mental cruelty is a state of mind. The feeling

            of deep anguish, disappointment, frustration

            in one spouse caused by the conduct of other

            for a long time may lead to mental cruelty.

       (v) A sustained course of abusive and humiliating

            treatment calculated to torture, discommode

            or render miserable life of the spouse.

       (vi)   Sustained    unjustifiable    conduct   and

            behaviour of one spouse actually affecting

            physical and mental health of the other

            spouse. The treatment complained of and the

            resultant danger or apprehension must be

Mat.A.250/2011                 12

            very grave, substantial and weighty.

       (vii) Sustained reprehensible conduct, studied

            neglect, indifference or total departure from

            the normal standard of conjugal kindness

            causing injury to mental health or deriving

            sadistic pleasure can also amount to mental

            cruelty.

       (viii) The conduct must be much more than

            jealousy, selfishness, possessiveness, which

            causes unhappiness and dissatisfaction and

            emotional upset may not be a ground for

            grant of divorce on the ground of mental

            cruelty.

       (ix) Mere trivial irritations, quarrels, normal

            wear and tear of the married life which

            happens in day-to-day life would not be

            adequate for grant of divorce on the ground

            of mental cruelty.

       (x) The married life should be reviewed as a

            whole and a few isolated instances over a

            period of years will not amount to cruelty.

            The ill   conduct must be persistent for a

            fairly lengthy period, where the relationship

            has deteriorated to an extent that because of

            the acts and behaviour of a spouse, the

Mat.A.250/2011                  13

            wronged party finds it extremely difficult to

            live with the other party any longer, may

            amount to mental cruelty.

       (xi) If a husband submits himself for an operation

            of sterilisation without medical reasons and

            without the consent or knowledge of his wife

            and    similarly,  if the  wife   undergoes

            vasectomy or abortion without medical

            reason or without the consent or knowledge

            of her husband, such an act of the spouse

            may lead to mental cruelty.

       (xii) Unilateral decision of refusal to have

            intercourse for considerable period without

            there being any physical incapacity or valid

            reason may amount to mental cruelty.

       (xiii) Unilateral decision of either husband or

            wife after marriage not to have child from

            the marriage may amount to cruelty.

       (xiv) Where there has been a long period of

            continuous separation, it may fairly be

            concluded that the matrimonial bond is

            beyond repair. The marriage becomes a

            fiction though supported by a legal tie. By

            refusing to sever that tie, the law in such

            cases, does not serve the sanctity of

Mat.A.250/2011                  14

            marriage; on the contrary, it shows scant

            regard for the feelings and emotions of the

            parties. In such like situations, it may lead to

            mental cruelty."

       11. In another decision in Gurbux Singh V. Harminder

Kaur, (2010) 14 SCC 301, the Apex Court held that:

       "Cruelty has not been defined under the Act. It

       is quite possible that a particular conduct may

       amount to cruelty in one case but the same

       conduct necessarily may not amount to cruelty

       due to change of various factors, in different set

       of circumstances. Therefore, it is essetial for the

       appellant, who claim relief, to prove that a

       particular/part of conduct or behaviour resulted

       in cruelty to him. No prior assumptions can be

       made in such matters. Meaning thereby that it

       cannot be assumed that a particular conduct ill,

       under all circumstances, amount to cruelty, vis-

       a-vis the other party. The aggrieved party has to

       make a specific case that the conduct of which

       exception is taken amounts to cruelty."

       12. Several incidents which were highlighted by the

appellant and the respondent while they were examined in

Mat.A.250/2011                15

the trial court would show that the act or conduct of one

party caused to the other party inconveniences in their day

today life. Due to these incidents there might have been silly

expression of hatred towards each other, which would not

be amounted as a cruelty. On analyzing the evidence, it is

clear that appellant failed to prove the alleged physical or

mental cruelty.

       13. The next ground highlighted by the appellant in

the Family Court was "desertion". Desertion means the

abandonment of one spouse by the other without any

consent of the other. Therefore, in actual desertion

abandonment of matrimonial home is necessary. Besides,

actual separation an "intention to desert" is essential. On

25-2-2008 the respondent left the matrimonial house and

through a mediation talk, the appellant and the respondent

executed Ext.A1 agreement. Both of them agreed to file a

joint petition under section 13(b) of the Hindu Marriage Act.

Ext.A2 is copy of the joint petition. The appellant contended

that the respondent gave Rs.1,00,000/- to the appellant,

Mat.A.250/2011                16

which was returned on 5-3-2004 by availing a housing loan

from the Catholic Syrian Bank, Hosdurg Branch. Ext.A3 is

the statement. The appellant denied that he demanded for

dowry and misappropriated the gold ornaments. During

cross-examination of PW1, Exts.B1 and B1(a) to B1(f) were

marked. Ext.B2 was the salary certificate of the appellant.

PW2 supported the evidence of PW1, but he has no detailed

knowledge about it.

       14. The specific case of wife is that when there was

ill-treatment from the side of the appellant, she left her

matrimonial home from Hosdurg and resided in a rented

building.     Even  in  cross-examination    of RW1,    she

categorically denied that she has no intention for a

permanent separation. Still she loves her husband. This

evidence shows that she never intended to abandon the

appellant permanently.

      15. In this context, we may refer to a decision of the

Apex court discussing the principle of 'desertion'. In

Bipinchandra Jaisinghbai Shah V. Prabhavati, AIR 1957 SC

Mat.A.250/2011                 17

176, in which the Supreme Court observed as follows:

       "..For the offence of desertion, so far as the

       deserting spouse is concerned, two essential

       conditions must be there namely, (1) the factum

       of separation, and (2) the intention to bring

       cohabitation permanently to an end (animus

       deserendi). Similiarly two elements are essential

       so far as the deserted spouse is concerned: (1)

       the absence of consent, and (2) absence of

       conduct giving reasonable cause to the spouse

       leaving the matrimonial home to form the

       necessary intention aforesaid. The petitioner for

       divorce bears the burden of proving those

       elements in the two spouses respectively. Here a

       difference between the English law and the law

       as enacted by the Bombay Legislature may be

       pointed out. Whereas under the English law

       those   essential  conditions   must    continue

       throughout the course of the three years

       immediately preceding the institution of the suit

       for divorce, under the Act, the period is four

       years   without   specifying   that  it   should

       immediately precede the commencement of

       proceedings for divorce. Whether the omission

       of the last clause has any practical result need

Mat.A.250/2011                18

       not detain us, as it does not call for decision in

       the present case. Desertion is a matter of

       inference to be drawn from the facts and

       circumstances to each case. The inference may

       be drawn from certain facts which may not in

       another case be capable of leading to the same

       inference; that is to say, the facts have to be

       viewed as to the purpose which is revealed by

       those acts or by conduct and expression of

       intention, both anterior and subsequent to the

       actual acts of separation. If in fact, there has

       been a separation,      the    essential question

       always is whether that act could be attributable

       to an animus deserendi.The offence of desertion

       commences when the fact of separation and the

       animus deserendico-     exist. But it is not

       necessary that they should commence at the

       same time. The de facto separation may have

       commenced without the necessary animus or it

       may be that the separation and the (animus

       deserendi) coincide in point of time; for

       example, when the separating spouse abandons

       the marital home with the intention, express or

       implied of bringing cohabitation permanently to

       a close. The law in England has prescribed a

Mat.A.250/2011                19

       three years period and the Bombay Act

       prescribed a period of four years as a

       continuous   period   during   which   the   two

       elements must subsist. Hence, if a deserting

       spouse    takes   advantage     of   the   locus

       poenitentiae thus provided by law and decides

       to come back to the deserted spouse by a bona

       fide offer of resuming the matrimonial home

       with all the implications of marital life, before

       the statutory period is out or even after the

       lapse of that period, unless proceedings for

       divorce have been commenced, desertion comes

       to an    end,  and   if  the  deserted    spouse

       unreasonably refuses to offer, the latter may be

       in desertion and not the former. Hence it is

       necessary that during all the period that there

       has been a desertion, the deserted spouse must

       affirm the marriage and be ready and willing to

       resume married life on such conditions as may

       be reasonable. It is also well settled that in

       proceedings for divorce the plaintiff must prove

       the offence   of desertion, like and       other

       matrimonial offence, beyond all reasonable

       doubt. Hence, though corroboration is not

       required as an absolute rule of law the courts

Mat.A.250/2011                 20

       insist upon corroborative evidence, unless its

       absence is accounted for to the satisfaction of

       the court."

       16. It is worth to note the following decisions of this

Court in Narayanan V. Sreedevi, 1989(1) KLT 509, and

Baby V. Gopinath, 1989(1) KLT 650. In Narayanan's case

(Supra) this Court considered the meaning of 'desertion'

and held as follows:-

       "6.    The true content and import of desertion in

       clause l(b) of S.13 of the Hindu Marriage Act

       imparts a definite idea of complete and endless

       abandonment of one spouse by the other. This

       must be without the other's consent and without

       justifiable  cause.  Two    essential   conditions

       attached to the notion of desertion are: (1) the

       factus of separation and (2) the intention to bring

       marital life permanently to an end animus

       deserendi. Desertion is always a matter of

       inference to be drawn from the facts and

       circumstances of each case. There may be often

       cases where a spouse is forced under certain

       peculiar circumstances by the conduct of the

       other spouse, to live separately or to stay away.

Mat.A.250/2011                 21

       In such a case there is no legal desertion to

       constitute a ground for divorce. The simple

       reason is that the said situation has been

       brought about by the act of the spouse who had

       misconducted himself or herself.

       7 . Desertion as a ground for divorce was added

       to S.13 by the Marriage Laws (Amendment) Act,

       1976. Before the amendment, it was only a

       ground for judicial separation. Now the ground

       of desertion for claiming divorce is qualified as

       desertion for a continuous period of two years

       immediately preceding the presentation of the

       petition. The Explanation makes it clear that the

       expression `desertion' means the desertion of the

       petitioner by the other party to the marriage

       without reasonable cause, and without the

       consent and against the wish ofsuch party and it

       includes the wilful neglect of the petitioner by

       the other party to the marriage. The section read

       along with the explanation makes it abundantly

       clear, that in its essence it signifies the

       intentional     permanent       forsaking      and

       abandonment of one spouse by the other without

       the other's consent and without reasonable

       cause. It is a total repudiation of the obligations

Mat.A.250/2011                  22

       of marriage vide (Lachman v. Meena A.I.R. 1964

       S. C. 40). The explanation gives emphasis to the

       quality of permanence as one of the essential

       elements differentiating desertion from voluntary

       separation for good reasons. It is very important

       to note that in deciding what constitutes

       desertion,    one    of  the   first matters   for

       consideration is the intent of the offending party

       in addition to separation or withdrawal from

       cohabitation."

In Baby's case (Supra) this Court also held thus:-

       "To constitute an act of desertion two elements

       must be there on the side of the deserting

       spouse.     Firstly,  the   factum   of   physical

       separation is the sine qua non of desertion.

       There must also be the animus deserandi to

       bring      co-habitation   or   the   matrimonial

       consortium to an end. Likewise, so far as

       deserted spouse is concerned, to constitute

       desertion, it must be affirmatively established

       that he was not a consenting party to the

       desertion by the opposite party. In other words,

       if it is found that desertion happened on account

       of the action of the deserted spouse he cannot

       legitimately adopt the posture of innocence. On

Mat.A.250/2011                23

       the side of the deserted spouse there should not

       occur any conduct giving reasonable cause to

       the spouse leaving matrimonial house. In a case

       where desertion is alleged to obtain decree of

       divorce it must be established that the deserting

       spouse purposefully kept away from the other

       party to the marriage with the avowed intention

       of not having any matrimonial relationship. In

       Rohini Kumari v. Narendra Singh (AIR. 1972

       S.C. 459) the Supreme Court held that desertion

       within the meaning of S.10(1) (e) of the Act read

       with Explanation does not imply only a separate

       residence and separate living but also a

       determination to put an end to matrimonial

       relationship and co-habitation. One of the

       essential elements which differentiates desertion

       from   wilful  separation   is  the   quality  of

       permanence. If in a case a spouse abandons the

       other spouse in a state of temporary passion or

       anger without intending to cease co-habitation

       permanently, it will not amount to desertion. In

       a case where a spouse had left the opposite

       party's company never to return and with the

       intention to bring cohabitation permanently to

       an end, the necessary animus deserandi can be

Mat.A.250/2011                  24

       inferred. In a case where physical separation

       with animus deserandi has been established,

       certainly, the allegation of desertion stands

       proved."

       17. In the light of the above legal principles, we are of

the opinion that there was no deliberate desertion from the

side of the respondent. She took a rented house at

Kanhangad only on the ground of ill-treatment from the side

of the appellant. If the wife is living with animus deserendi

and her absence was without sufficient reason to leave the

company of the husband, the relief can be granted. The case

in hand shows that the respondent is residing in a rented

house with sufficient reasons.

       18. In the circumstances, we are of the view that the

finding of the Family Court that the appellant miserably

failed to make out a case of cruelty and desertion as alleged

by him is based on the correct analysis of facts. No grounds

are highlighted before us to interfere with the above

finding.

Mat.A.250/2011                  25

           In the result, the judgment and decree passed by

the Family Court are confirmed. Accordingly, the appeal is

dismissed. No order as to costs.




                                PIUS C. KURIAKOSE, JUDGE.



                                P. D. RAJAN, JUDGE.

nkm.



