
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                        PRESENT:

                            THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE P.BHAVADASAN

                WEDNESDAY, THE 27TH DAY OF MARCH 2013/6TH CHAITHRA 1935

                                          Crl.Rev.Pet.No. 828 of 2002 (B)
                                          -------------------------------------------
          [CRL.A.NO.90/1996 DTD. 10/06/2002 OF THE SESSIONS COURT, MANJERI,
           S.C.NO.28/1994 OF THE ASSISTANT SESSIONS COURT, MANJERI
           DATED 27/07/1996]
                                                               ........

REVISION PETITIONER/APPELLANT/ACCUSED:
--------------------------------------------------------------------

            PARAMBAN MUHAMMED, S/O. ALIKUTTY,
            OORANGATTIRI AMSOM DESOM, ERNAD TALUK,
            MALAPPURAM DISTRICT.


            BY SRI.P.VIJAYA BHANU, SENIOR ADVOCATE,
                  ADV. SRI.P.M.RAFIQ.


RESPONDENT/RESPONDENT/COMPLAINANT:
------------------------------------------------------------------


            STATE OF KERALA, REPRESENTED BY
            PUBLIC PROSECUTOR,
            HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM.


            BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SRI. ROY THOMAS.


            THIS CRIMINAL REVISION PETITION HAVING BEEN FINALLY
            HEARD ON 27-03-2013, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED
            THE FOLLOWING:



Prv.


                       P. BHAVADASAN, J.
                  - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                     Crl.R.P. No. 828 of 2002
                  - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
             Dated this the 27th day of March, 2013.

                                   Order



           Faced with the concurrent findings of guilt against

him, the accused has approached this court by way of

revision.   The accused           was prosecuted for the offence

punishable under Sections 498A and 304B of Indian Penal

Code.    He was found guilty on both counts and                  was

convicted and sentenced to suffer rigorous imprisonment for

three years for the offence under Section 498A of I.P.C. and

to suffer rigorous imprisonment for seven years for the

offence under Section 304B of I.P.C.. The sentences were

directed to run concurrently. In appeal, the said conviction

and sentence were confirmed by the appellate court.

           2. The facts absolutely necessary for the disposal

of this revision petition are as follows:

           The deceased Mariyakutty was married to the son

of the accused in this case in some day in April, 1992. It is

not disputed that Mariyakutty was found hanging from a

Crl.R.P.828/2002.                2

cashew tree on 1.10.1992.          The prosecution allegation

seems to be that Mariyakutty was driven to take the

extreme step due to the harassment meted out by the

accused        who persistently demanded the balance dowry

from the parents of the deceased and he used to pester and

harass Mariyakutty with the demand.

             3. Ext.P5 is the First Information Statement laid

relating to the suicide of Mariyakutty and Ext.P5(a) is the

FIR.    Initially the crime was registered only for unnatural

death.         During  investigation,  it was  revealed  that

Mariyakutty was driven to commit suicide due to the dowry

demand made by the accused.           Thereafter Section 498A

and Section 304B were incorporated.            P.W.12 is the

Investigating Officer who had laid charge before court.

             4.  The court before which final report was laid

took cognizance of the offence and finding that the case is

one exclusively triable by a court of Sessions, committed

the case to Sessions Court, Manjeri, which court made over

Crl.R.P.828/2002.                3

the case to Assistant Sessions Court, Manjeri for trial and

disposal.      The latter court, on receipt of records and on

appearance of the accused before the said court, framed

charge for the offence under Sections 498A and 304B of

I.P.C. To the charge, the accused pleaded not guilty and

claimed to be tried. The prosecution therefore had P.Ws.1 to

13 examined and had Exts.P1 to P6 marked. M.Os. 1 to 8

were identified and marked. After the close of the

prosecution evidence, the accused was questioned under

Section 313 Cr.P.C.         He denied all the incriminating

circumstances       brought out in evidence against him and

maintained that he is innocent. He has stated that it was

revealed that at the time of death of Mariyakutty, she was

carrying a foetus which was 5 to 8 months old and that

would mean that she had conceived before the marriage in

April, 1992 and when Mariyakutty came to know that her

husband had doubts about her, she committed suicide.      On

finding that the accused could not be         acquitted under

Crl.R.P.828/2002.               4

Section 232 Cr.P.C., he was asked to enter on his defence.

The accused chose to adduce no evidence.

             5. The court below found the evidence of P.Ws. 1,

2, 3, 4 and 7 to be sufficient and came to the conclusion that

there was consistent and persistent demand for balance

dowry by the accused and he used to harass the deceased

demanding the balance dowry, and that made her life

miserable. Accordingly, both the courts below found that it

was the said demand made by the accused which led

Mariyakutty to commit suicide and accordingly he was found

guilty of the offences.

             6.   Learned counsel for the revision petitioner

pointed out that the court below has omitted to note the

contradictions,      inconsistencies,  embellishments     and

developments in the evidence of P.Ws.1 to 4 and 7 and

which, if properly appreciated, it would have been found that

it was not safe to accept the evidence in favour of the

prosecution. Learned counsel pointed out that when such

Crl.R.P.828/2002.            5

glaring inconsistencies and contradictions are pointed out,

the evidence of such witnesses are unworthy of acceptance.

In support of his contention, learned counsel relied on the

decisions reported in Nepal Singh v. State of Haryana

((2009) 12 SCC 351) and Sunil Kumar Sambhudayal

Gupta v. State of Maharashtra ((2010) 13 SCC 657). This

aspect has been omitted to be noticed by the court below

and the courts below have blindly accepted the evidence of

P.Ws.1 to 4 and 7 and the conviction based on such

suspicious evidence cannot be accepted. Further, it was

contended that mere demand for dowry is not sufficient. It

must be followed by cruelty which is conspicuously absent in

the case on hand and since no overt act is attributed to the

petitioner, it would show that he had not treated the

deceased cruelly.    In support of the above contention,

learned counsel relied on the decision reported in Amar

Singh v. State of Rajasthan ((2010) 9 SCC 64). In short,

Crl.R.P.828/2002.               6

the contention is that the conviction and sentence cannot

stand.

             7. Learned Public Prosecutor reminded this court

and pointed out that this court is sitting in revision where

the scope of interference is considerably limited. A

reappraisal of the evidence is not warranted while exercising

revisional jurisdiction and the issue that arises is only

whether there is any illegality, irregularity or impropriety in

the findings of the courts below or whether the findings are

so perverse which would attract interference. If the findings

of the courts below are possible ones, and based on an

appreciation of the evidence, even if another view may be

possible, this court will not be justified in interfering with the

findings of the courts below. Learned Public Prosecutor also

referred to the evidence of P.Ws.1 to 4 and 7 and pointed

out that their evidence is sufficient to show that there has

been consistent and persistent demand for balance dowry

by the accused and that the deceased used to be harassed

Crl.R.P.828/2002.             7

and humiliated by such demands. The concurrent findings

based on appreciation of the evidence do not call for any

interference. Therefore, it is contended that the conviction

and sentence has to stand.

             8. The evidence regarding the so-called cruelty

and demand for dowry is spoken to by P.Ws.1 to 4 and 7.

Among       them,  P.W.4's evidence  shows    that  he has

knowledge about what his wife had told him. Of course,

there are certain contradictions and inconsistencies in his

evidence which would make his evidence suspicious. But

there are certain parts of his evidence which would show

that he had knowledge about the demand made by the

accused for the balance amount.

             9. P.Ws.1 and 2 have spoken about the specific

demand made by the accused regarding the balance dowry.

It is true that there are some inconsistencies in their

evidence also.     But however, those inconsistencies are

regarding insignificant matters and not about the crux of the

Crl.R.P.828/2002.             8

matters which is that the accused used to demand balance

amount of Rs.7000/- and he used to harass the deceased. It

is significant to notice that even though P.Ws.1 to 4 and 7

have stated in their chief examination that there was a

demand by the        accused   for the balance amount of

Rs.7000/-, there is no suggestion that the said statement

spoken to them is not true and there was no such demand

by the accused. In other words, the statement made by the

witnesses that the accused used to harass the deceased by

demanding balance amount of Rs.7000/- as promised by the

parents of the deceased is not seriously challenged or

impeached in their cross examination. That portion of their

evidence stands unchallenged. There is no reason for not to

accept the said version. In the light of the said fact, the

principle laid down in the decision reported in      Nepal

Singh's case (supra)and also Sunil Kumar Sambhudayal

Gupta's case (supra) cannot have any application to the

facts of this case.

Crl.R.P.828/2002.              9

             10. Even otherwise, the principle falsus in uno,

falsus in omnibus is not applicable in India. Even assuming

that there are some embellishments and developments and

there are inconsistencies and contradictions while giving

evidence, it cannot be a ground to reject their evidence in

toto. It is also significant to note that the inconsistencies

and contradictions are with regard to the answers brought

in cross examination and not with what is spoken to in chief

examination.

             11. As regards the contention that mere demand

for balance dowry is not sufficient unless there is evidence

of cruelty, the evidence of P.Ws.2 and 7 are sufficient to

show that Mariyakutty, the deceased, used to complain

about the conduct of the accused because of non-payment

of balance amount. P.W.7 is none other than the brother of

the deceased. He would say that Mariyakutty was taken

back to the house by him and the accused came to call the

deceased. It is significant to notice that he would depose

Crl.R.P.828/2002.                10

that while taking back the deceased to the house, the

accused demanded that when P.W.1 and others come to

take Mariyakutty for delivery, they should pay the balance

amount.       It is also pointed out by P.W.7 that deceased

Mariyakutty was not taken to the house of her husband, but

to the house where the accused was living even though the

house belonging to the husband was lying vacant.

             12. On an over all consideration of the materials

before it, the courts below came to the conclusion that

Mariyakutty was driven to commit suicide due to the

harassment meted out by the accused demanding balance

amount promised as dowry to him.

             13. It will be only appropriate here to refer to the

definition of dowry in the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961 which

is made applicable to Section 304B of I.P.C..        It reads as

follows:

      "2. Definition of 'dowry'.- In this Act, "dowry"

      means any property or valuable security given or

      agreed to be given either directly or indirectly-

Crl.R.P.828/2002.               11

      (a) by one party to a marriage to the other party

      to the marriage; or

      (b) by the parent of either party to a marriage or

      by any other person, to either         party to the

      marriage or to any other person,

      at or before or any time after the marriage in

      connection with the marriage of the said parties,

      but does not include dower or mahr in the case of

      persons to whom the Muslim Personal Law

      (Shariat) applies.

      Explanation II.- The expression "valuable security"

      has the same meaning as in section 30 of the

      Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860)."

Going by the definition, it is clear that the demand made for

balance amount attracts the provisions of Section 304B of

I.P.C.

             14. As rightly pointed out by the learned Public

Prosecutor, the finding of the courts below that Mariyakutty

was driven to commit suicide because of the demand for the

balance amount promised at the time of marriage as dowry

and that she was being harassed is a concurrent finding of

Crl.R.P.828/2002.                12

fact based on      appreciation of the evidence and there is

nothing to show that the findings are either perverse or

contrary to the evidence on record. At any rate, the views

taken by the courts below are possible views. If that be so,

no grounds are made out to interfere with the finding of the

courts below.

             15. Coming to the sentence, Section 304B I.P.C.

provides for a minimum punishment and since the minimum

punishment alone had been awarded, question of interfering

with the sentence also does not arise for consideration.

             The result is that this revision petition is dismissed

confirming the conviction and sentence passed by the trial

court as confirmed by the appellate court.




                                               P. BHAVADASAN,
                                                     JUDGE
sb.



