
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                      PRESENT:

                          THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE P.BHAVADASAN

          TUESDAY, THE 3RD DAY OF DECEMBER 2013/12TH AGRAHAYANA, 1935

                                           CRL.A.No. 2066 of 2005 ( )
                                           -------------------------------------

          (AGAINST THE JUDGMENT IN S.C.No. 1/2003 IN PRINCIPAL ASST. SESSIONS
                                 COURT, PALAKKAD DATED 30.11.2005.)
                                                          ------




APPELLANT/ACCUSED :
----------------------------------


            PREMAKUMARAN, S/O. RAMAN,
            PEZHUMKODE VEEDU, THOLANUR, PALAKKAD.

            BY SENIOR ADVOCATE SRI.P.VIJAYA BHANU
                  ADVOCATE SRI.P.M.RAFIQ


RESPONDENT/COMPLAINANT :
--------------------------------------------


            STATE OF KERALA,
            REPRESENTED BY THE PUBLIC PROSECUTOR,
            HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM.

            BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SRI. DHANESH MATHEW MANJOORAN


            THIS CRIMINAL APPEAL HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD ON 03-12-2013,
             THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY DELIVERED THE FOLLOWING:




sv


                        P.BHAVADASAN, J.
                ---------------------------------------
                   Crl. Appeal No.2066 OF 2005
                ---------------------------------------
           Dated this the 3rd day of December, 2013.


                          J U D G M E N T


      The accused was prosecuted for the offences punishable

under Sections 498A, 306, 304B of Indian Penal Code. He was

found guilty of the offences punishable under Sections 498A and

306 IPC and was therefore convicted and sentenced to suffer

rigorous imprisonment for a period of two years under

Section 498A IPC and rigorous imprisonment for another seven

years under Section 306 IPC. The substantive sentences were

directed to run concurrently and set off as per law was allowed.

It is significant to notice that even though for both the offences,

imposition of fine is mandatory, the court below has omitted to

do so.

      2. The marriage between the accused and the victim was

solemnised on 05.05.1996. The couple had a girl child in that

wedlock.     The allegation is that soon after the marriage, the

accused began to pester the victim demanding more dowry and

he used to ill-treat her for not bringing more money. It is alleged

Crl. Appeal No.2066/2005         2


that on the 15th day of marriage, the victim had come to her

house and stayed there for one month and according to her, she

was being ill-treated by the accused. The allegation is that the

brother of the accused mediated and on the assurance given by

accused, the victim returned to the matrimonial house.         It

appears that she had come home for delivery and stayed in her

house for six months. Further allegation is that the accused used

to send the victim home on several occasions demanding money

for various purposes and PW1, father of the victim, was unable to

give the money asked for and ultimately, the ill-treatment

became so unbearable that the victim committed suicide by

hanging on 11.07.1999.

       3.       PW1, the father of the victim, laid Ext.P1 First

Information Statement.        That was recorded by PW9 who

registered a crime as per Ext.P1(a) First Information Report.

PW13 conducted the initial investigation and he prepared the

relevant mahazars and seized various articles.         Later the

investigation was taken over by PW15 who prepared Ext.P15

scene mahazar seizing the diary and note book. Ultimately, after

Crl. Appeal No.2066/2005              3


completing investigation, PW17 laid charge before court.

       4.      The court before which final report was laid took

cognizance of the offences and on finding that the offences are

exclusively triable by a Court of Sessions, the case was

committed to Sessions Court, Palakkad.           The said court made

over the case to Assistant Sessions Court (Prl.), Palakkad for trial

and disposal.          The latter court, on receipt of records and on

appearance of the accused, framed charges for the offences

punishable under Sections 498A, 306 and 304B IPC.              To the

charge, accused pleaded not guilty and claimed to be tried. The

prosecution therefore had PWs 1 to 17 examined and Exts.P1 to

P21 marked.

       5. After the close of the prosecution evidence, the accused

was questioned under Section 313 Cr.P.C.            He denied all the

incriminating circumstances brought out in evidence against him

and maintained that he is innocent.

       6. On finding that the accused could not be acquitted under

Section 232 Cr.P.C, he was asked to enter on his defence. But he

chose to adduce no evidence.

Crl. Appeal No.2066/2005            4


       7. On an appreciation of the evidence presumably that of

PWs 1 and 2 and also the entries in Ext.P10 diary, Ext.P11 letter

pad, Ext.P12 a page of diary, Ext.P13 series namely, sheets of

letter pad and the report filed by the forensic experts namely,

Ext.P14, the court below came to the conclusion that the offences

under Sections 498A and 306 IPC have been made out and

accordingly, the conviction and sentence followed.

       8.     Assailing the conviction and sentence passed by the

court below, the learned counsel appearing for the appellant

contended that the evidence of PWs 1 and 2 are incompatible and

they are contradictory to each other. The version given by PW1

at the time of giving Ext.P1 First Information Statement is an

entirely different one as what is stated in witness box and there

is no consistency in his evidence. The incidents spoken to by

PWs 1 and 2 are entirely different and they have no consistent

version regarding the alleged ill-treatment said to have been

meted out to the victim. If the evidence of PWs 1 and 2 do not

stand scrutiny, then there is no evidence at all to come to the

conclusion that the offences have been made out.

Crl. Appeal No.2066/2005          5


       9.     As regards the entry in the diary dated 09.07.1999

which, according to PW1, is in the handwriting of the victim,

which indicates the extra marital relationship of the accused, it is

contended by the learned counsel for the appellant that that

cannot be taken as a ground to come to the conclusion that the

victim was treated cruelly or she was instigated to commit

suicide.

       10. Learned counsel for the appellant contended that the

court below was not justified in invoking the presumption under

Section 113A of the Indian Evidence Act for the reason that that

presumption comes only when it is proved that the victim was

subjected to cruelty. There is absolute want of evidence except

for some vague statements by PWs 1 and 2 that the accused

used to ill-treat the victim. Learned counsel finally contended

that even assuming that there was ill-treatment, there is

absolutely no evidence to show that there was any instigation on

the part of the accused which contributed to the suicide

committed by the victim. At any rate, according to the learned

counsel, offence under Section 306 IPC cannot be attracted.

Crl. Appeal No.2066/2005        6


       11. Learned Public Prosecutor, on the other hand,

contended that the death was within three years of marriage and

that assumes importance since no satisfactory explanation is

offered by the accused as to why the victim had committed

suicide. The evidence of PWs 1 and 2 clearly show that there was

persistent demand for money made by the accused and the

accused used to send the victim home asking to bring money

from her house. There is no reason to disbelieve PWs 1 and 2

and their evidence is sufficient to show that the victim was ill-

treated by the accused.       According to the learned Public

Prosecutor, the court below has chosen to accept the evidence of

PWs 1 and 2 and there is no reason as to why this Court should

take a different view.

       12. That the marriage between the accused and the victim

took place on 05.05.1996 and the victim committed suicide on

11.07.1999 are matters not in dispute. It is also not in dispute

that the couple had a girl child who resides along with the

accused even after the incident. The prosecution allegation is

that soon after the marriage, the victim began to be ill-treated by

Crl. Appeal No.2066/2005         7


the accused demanding more money to be brought from her

house. It is stated that at the time of marriage, dowry fixed was

20 sovereigns of gold ornaments and Rs.20,000/- in cash and

that was given to the accused. There is an allegation that he had

squandered the entire gold ornaments and has been ill-treating

the victim asking her to go home and bring more money. Further

allegation is that since the parents of the victim was not so

financially sound, they could not provide the money asked for by

the accused and that increased the ill-treatment and finally led to

the suicide of the victim.

       13. In order to prove the prosecution allegations against

the accused, the prosecution mainly relies on the entries in

Exts.P10, P11, P12 and P13.       Coming to the forensic expert's

evidence namely, Ext.P14, it will be useful to refer to his evidence

first. He is examined as PW14. His evidence is to the effect that

'the person who wrote the blue enclosed standard writing

stamped and marked S1 to S5 did not write the read enclosed

question writing similarly stamped and marked Q1 to Q38'. But

the handwriting in Ext.P8 is that of the victim. All that in the

Crl. Appeal No.2066/2005         8


diary and notebook she indicated is that the accused had extra

marital relationship. There is no whisper either in the evidence of

PW1 or PW2 or in Ext.P1 given by PW1 that they had any such

complaint against the accused.

       14. Coming to the evidence of PW1, he would say that four

days after the marriage, when the couple came home, in the

night, the accused ill-treated the daughter by pressing her neck

and she came out crying and it is stated that he pacified her.

This is spoken to by PW2 also. PW1 then would say that after

returning to the matrimonial house, she again came home and

stayed there. She complained that she was unable to return to

matrimonial house due to the ill-treatment meted out by the

accused. This is spoken to by PW2 also.

       15. PW1, while giving the First Information Statement,

would say that the victim had come home for delivery and stayed

in his house for six months. Surprisingly enough, PW2 denies

this version and says that when they went to bring their daughter

for delivery, permission was refused and she never came home

for delivery. PW2 would also say that when she had gone to

Crl. Appeal No.2066/2005            9


meet her daughter coming to know that she had conceived, the

accused is alleged to have applied chilly paste in the eyes of the

victim. This cruel act spoken to by PW2 does not find a place in

the evidence of PW1. The evidence of PW1 shows that he has no

such case at all. Except for saying that the victim used to come

home demanding money, there is no specific incident or specific

amounts demanded by the accused pointed out by either PW1 or

PW2. Even though they say that she used to be ill-treated, the

specific act committed by the accused is not spoken to by either

PW1 or PW2.

       16. It is significant to notice that PW1 had furnished Ext.P1

First Information Statement.        In Ext.P1, the incident which is

spoken to by PWs 1 and 2 which happened on the 4th day of

marriage is conspicuously absent. Most of the things stated in

Ext.P1 do not find a place in the evidence of PW1 and it would

appear that there is conscious departure from what is stated in

Ext.P1. Except for some vague and general statements by PWs 1

and 2 regarding the ill-treatment, there is no specific incident or

date or the amounts demanded by the accused made mention of

Crl. Appeal No.2066/2005          10


by either PW1 or PW2. The court below was satisfied with the

evidence of PWs 1 and 2 and readily accepted their evidence.

       17.      PW8 is the sister of the victim.  She has given a

general statement that she was informed by the victim that she

used to be ill-treated. It is significant to notice that there is no

independent evidence adduced by the prosecution to show that

the accused used to send the victim home quite often demanding

money.

       18. It would appear from the evidence of PW1 that most of

the time, the victim was staying in her house. Of course, there is

evidence of one of the neighbours who says that he was told by

somebody that the accused was in the habit of ill-treating the

victim.      But that cannot be given much weight.       As already

noticed, there is want of details regarding the manner in which

the victim was ill-treated. Except for saying that she used to be

ill-treated, PWs 1 and 2 do not say about the actual acts done by

the accused. It has already been noticed that the claim of PW2

regarding application of chilly paste in the eyes of the victim

cannot be accepted. PW1 has no such case. PW2 would say that

Crl. Appeal No.2066/2005         11


she did not divulge it to her husband. That is alleged to have

happened in the matrimonial house of the victim. It is not as if

the evidence of PWs 1 and 2 are so convincing and creditworthy

that it can be safely accepted in finding the accused guilty of the

offences made mention of. Even assuming that the ill-treatment

spoken to by PWs 1 and 2 are accepted, it is extremely difficult to

come to the conclusion that offence under Section 306 IPC is

attracted. There is nothing to show that the accused nurtured

any intention that the victim should commit suicide or that he

knew that he had created such a situation where the victim had

no choice but to commit suicide. The essential ingredients to

attract the offence under Section 306 IPC are conspicuously

absent.

       19. Coming to the evidence regarding offence under

Section 498A IPC, except for general and vague statements made

by PWs 1 and 2, there is no specific incident spoken to by them

regarding the ill-treatment meted out.        It is true that the

marriage lasted only for a little over three years and the victim

committed suicide. It is also true that unnatural death occurred

Crl. Appeal No.2066/2005         12


within seven years of marriage. But that by themselves are not

sufficient to come to the conclusion that offences under

Section 498A and 306 IPC are made out.           For attracting the

offence under Section 498A IPC, there has to be wilful conduct on

the part of the accused in ill-treating the victim. At the risk of

repetition, one may notice that except for the vague statement

made by PWs 1 and 2, there is no evidence at all to show that

there was ill-treatment at the hands of the accused. In short, it

is difficult to uphold the conviction and sentence as against the

accused for the offences under Sections 498A and 306 IPC.

       In the result, this appeal is allowed. The conviction and

sentence passed by the court below for the offences under

Sections 498A and 306 IPC are set aside. It is held that the

prosecution has failed to establish the case against the accused.

He stands acquitted of the charges levelled against him. His bail

bond shall stand cancelled and he is set at liberty.




                                       P.BHAVADASAN
                                            JUDGE
smp



