
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                         PRESENT:

                          THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE P.BHAVADASAN

              MONDAY, THE 28TH DAY OF OCTOBER 2013/6TH KARTHIKA, 1935

                                           CRL.A.No. 453 of 2004 (A)
                                                  --------------------------

              AGAINST THE ORDER/JUDGMENT IN SC 796/2001 of I ADDL.D.C. &
                                 ADDL.MACT,KOLLAM DATED 16-03-2004

   AGAINST THE ORDER/JUDGMENT IN CP 258/2000 of J.M.F.C.-II,KOTTARAKKARA
                                        .....................................................


APPELLANT(S)/ACCUSED                      :
-------------------------------------


                     ANIL, S/O.PADMAJAN,
                     ANIL MANDIRAM, VELLAMPARA,
                     POST NILAMEL, KOLLAM DISTRICT.

                     BY ADV. SRI.K.A.SALIL NARAYANAN




RESPONDENT(S)/COMPLAINANT                              :
-----------------------------------------------


                     STATE OF KERALA,
                     REPRESENTED BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR,
                     HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM.


                     BY SRI.DHANESH MATHEW MANJOORAN, PUBLIC PROSECUTOR


                     THIS CRIMINAL APPEAL HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD ON
                     28-10-2013, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY DELIVERED THE
                     FOLLOWING:




AMV


                      P. BHAVADASAN, J.

                   ....................................

                 Crl.Appeal No.453 of 2004

              ...............................................

        Dated this the 28th day of October, 2013

                             JUDGMENT

  The accused was prosecuted for the offences punishable

  under Section 304B, 498A and 306 of Indian Penal Code.

  He was found guilty of the offences punishable under

  Section 498(A) and 306 of IPC and was convicted and

  sentenced to suffer two years rigorous imprisonment

  and to pay a fine of `50,000/- in default to undergo

  simple imprisonment for six months for the offence

  punishable under Section 498A and also sentenced to

  suffer rigorous imprisonment for four years and to pay a

  fine of `50,000/- with a default clause of two years,

  simple imprisonment for the offence under Section 306

  IPC.




2.The marriage between the accused and Sheeja, who is

  the daughter of P.Ws.2 and 8 was solemnized on

  30.11.1997. Admittedly after marriage, the couple was

  staying in the matrimonial house. The couple have a

Crl.Appeal No.453 of 2004

                               2



   child in the wedlock. The prosecution allegation is that

   at the time of marriage Sheeja was given 32 sovereigns

   of gold ornaments and also promised 60 cents of landed

   property.      Soon after marriage, it is stated that, the

   accused sold the gold ornaments given to Sheeja and

   began to insist that 60 cents of property promised to her

   should be immediately given to Sheeja so that it could

   be sold. The parents of Sheeja were not willing and

   they wanted her to come and reside with them, which

   was not acceptable to Sheeja because her husband was

   not willing to do so. The prosecution allegation is that

   due to the torture and ill-treatment meted out by the

   accused demanding         60 cents of land immediately,

   Sheeja might have committed suicide.




3.That Sheeja jumped into the well and she died due to

   drowning is not a matter in dispute. She had jumped

   into the well on 06.11.1999. Her body was retrieved,

   inquest was conducted and postmortem was done by

Crl.Appeal No.453 of 2004

                              3



   P.W.5 who furnished Ext.P4 postmortem certificate.

   P.W.1 laid Ext.P1 First Information Statement that was

   recorded by P.W.10, who registered crime as per Ext.P1

   (a) F.I.R. Investigation was conducted by P.W.12, who

   recorded the statement of witnesses, seized the articles

   and laid final report was before court..




4.The court, before which the final report was laid, took

   cognizance of the offences. Finding that the offences

   are exclusively triable by a court of sessions, the said

   court committed the case to Sessions Court, Kollam.




5.The said court made over the case to First Additional

   Sessions Court for trial and disposal. The latter court,

   on receipt of, records framed charge for the offences

   punishable under Sections 304B, 498A and 306 of Indian

   Penal Code. To the charge, the accused pleaded not

   guilty and claimed to the tried.        The prosecution

   therefore, examined P.Ws.1 to 12 and had Exts.P1 to P9

Crl.Appeal No.453 of 2004

                               4



   (a) were marked. The defence had Exts.D1 marked

   while examining the prosecution witnesses, and also

   had Exts.D2 to D5 marked. After the close of the

   prosecution evidence, the accused was questioned

   under Section 313 Cr.P.C.          He denied all the

   incriminating circumstances brought out in evidence

   against him and maintained that he is innocent.     He

   further stated that after marriage, he and Sheeja were

   leading a happy matrimonial life. He did not either

   demand gold or property and he had not ill-treated her

   on that      account.   He admitted that at the time of

   marriage 28 sovereigns of gold was given and out of

   which, 19 sovereigns of gold, with the consent and

   willingness of his wife, he had sold for renovating the

   house they were living. He also stated that in order to

   retrieve the gold, which was sold, he opened an SB

   account in a Co-operative Bank and was depositing an

   amount periodically in the name of Sheeja. According to

   him, Sheeja used to quarrel with him for silly matters

Crl.Appeal No.453 of 2004

                              5



   and on 05.11.1999 she had gone to her house. On that

   day they returned from that house and at Elamballoor

   the vehicle was stopped and child was given a hair cut.

   For celebrating Deepavali, he would state that she

   asked him to buy crackers. He forgot to do so. When

   he reached home but in the evening she picked up a

   quarrel for not bringing crackers. He scolded her for

   her conduct, then Sheeja all of a sudden said that she

   would end her life ran out and jumped into the well. His

   cries brought neighbours to the place and her body was

   taken out from the well.




6. Finding that the accused could not be acquitted under

   Section 232 Cr.P.C., he was asked to enter on his

   defence. He marked Ext.D5. The court below mainly

   relying on the evidence of P.Ws.1, 2, 8 and 9 and also

   drawing inspiration from the evidence of P.Ws.3 and 4

   came to the conclusion that though offence under

   Section 304B is not made out, offences under Sections

Crl.Appeal No.453 of 2004

                             6



   306 and 498A are clearly established. The conviction

   and sentence as already mentioned followed.




7.The learned counsel appearing for the appellant

   assailed the conviction and sentence on several

   grounds. It was pointed out that there is nothing to

   show that the claim made by P.Ws.1, 2, 8 and 9, that

   the accused had squandered the gold given to Sheeja at

   the time of marriage is true.     In fact the accused

   admitted that out of the 28 sovereigns of gold given to

   him, he had sold 19 sovereigns with the consent of

   Sheeja for renovating his house.      Referring to the

   evidence of P.W.1, it was contended that his knowledge

   about the sale of gold ornaments and ill-treatment, was

   as told by P.W.8. He had no direct knowledge about the

   same. As regards P.W.2, it is significant to notice that

   he did not complain about the sale of gold ornaments at

   all and his statement regarding the ill-treatment

   demanding the property was conspicuously absent in

Crl.Appeal No.453 of 2004

                               7



   his previous statement to the Police.




8.According to the learned counsel, the testimony of

   P.W.8 to the effect that the accused used to come home

   drunk and ill-treat Sheeja, is seen in the testimony of

   P.W.2, so also, she had to concede that her testimony

   that Sheeja was dragged out of the house does not find

   a place in her statement to the police. Referring to the

   evidence of P.W.9, it was contended that it is the most

   unreliable testimony among the witnesses. Exts.D2 to

   D4 were marked through her, which are admittedly the

   letters written by her to the deceased Sheeja. If as a

   matter of fact according to the learned counsel, Sheeja

   was being so cruelly ill-treated, that would have found a

   reflection in the letters written to Sheeja by P.W.9. On

   the other hand Ext.D2 to D4 reflect a pleasant and

   happy atmosphere in the matrimonial house of Sheeja

   and it can be easily seen that the story of ill-treatment

   stated by P.W.9 is a clear after thought.

Crl.Appeal No.453 of 2004

                              8




9.The learned counsel for the appellant pointed out that

   the court below had simply narrated the evidence

   without critically examining the quality of the same and

   in the light of Exts.D2 to D4, it is very evident that the

   claim made by P.Ws.1, 2, 8 and 9 of ill-treatment cannot

   stand. It is also pointed out by the learned counsel that

   most of the statements made by these witnesses were

   appearing for the first time while giving evidence and

   that shows that they are prone to developments and

   embellishments and their evidence cannot be relied on.

   Except for saying that Sheeja was ill-treated, there is no

   specific instance pointed out by any of these witnesses

   to show that the accused was cruel to Sheeja.           Of

   course, P.W.8 says that on 05.11.1999 she was dragged

   out of the house by the accused. But P.W.8 conceded

   that she had not stated it to the police and the other

   witness namely, P.W.2, her husband has no such case.

   The cumulative effect, according to the learned counsel,

Crl.Appeal No.453 of 2004

                              9



   is that there is absolute want of convincing evidence to

   show that the accused had ill-treated the victim either

   demanding more dowry or insisting that she should sell

   the 60 cents of property promised to her.      It is also

   significant to notice, according to the learned counsel,

   that the 60 cents of property promised to Sheeja was

   standing in the name of P.W.2 and from her evidence it

   could be seen that she insisted that Sheeja should come

   and stay with them, to which Sheeja was not amenable

   and she would like to stay with her husband. There is

   want of convincing evidence to the effect that the

   accused had ill-treated or behaved cruelly to Sheeja,

   which drove her to commit suicide.       Accordingly the

   conviction and sentence cannot stand.




10.The learned Public Prosecutor on the other hand

   relying on the evidence of P.Ws.3 and 4, who are

   neighbours of the accused, pointed out that even

   according to them something had happened on the date

Crl.Appeal No.453 of 2004

                             10



   of incident, which had driven the victim to commit

   suicide. They had no axe to grind against the accused.

   When their evidence is taken along with the evidence of

   P.Ws.1, 2, 8 and 9, it can be clearly seen that the

   accused was cruel to the victim and that he had

   squandered her gold ornaments and was insisting her to

   sell the 60 cents of property promised to her. At any

   rate, according to the learned Public Prosecutor, the

   lower court has chosen to believe the evidence of

   P.Ws.1, 2, 8 and 9 and also taken aid of the evidence of

   P.Ws.3 and 4 and has come to the conclusion that the

   offences under Sections 306 and 498A have been made

   out. It could not be said that the findings are either

   perverse or contrary to the evidence on record. If that

   be so, no interference is called for at the appellate

   stage.




11.That the marriage between Sheeja and the accused

   took place on 30.11.1997 and the unfortunate incident

Crl.Appeal No.453 of 2004

                               11



   had happened on 06.11.1999 are not in dispute. It is

   also not in dispute that the death of Sheeja was due to

   head injury and drowning as a result of her jumping into

   the well. Of course there is an indication by P.Ws.1 and

   2 that she would not have normally committed suicide.

   But there is nothing to show that the accused had done

   anything which compelled her to jump into the well.




12.The case put forwarded by the prosecution is that

   Sheeja was given 32 sovereigns of gold at the time of

   marriage and was promised 60 cents of property.

   According       to   the prosecution,  the accused   had

   squandered the gold ornaments given to Sheeja and

   then began to insist that she should get 60 cents of

   property promised, sold and give him the money. When

   Sheeja could not get the property sold, the prosecution

   allegation is that she was ill-treated.




13.The evidence of P.W.1, as rightly pointed out by the

Crl.Appeal No.453 of 2004

                               12



   learned counsel for the appellant, is hearsay.        His

   knowledge about the ill-treatment is confined to what is

   told to him by P.W.8. P.Ws.2 and 8 are the parents of

   the victim. It may be remembered that P.W.1 has also a

   case that the accused insisted for the sale of 60 cents

   of property to meet the expenses of conducting a case

   in which his brother was an accused. It may at once be

   noticed that P.Ws.2 and 8 have no such case.         The

   evidence of P.W.2 does not show that he has any

   complaint        about the accused squandering the gold

   ornaments of the victim.      P.Ws.2 and 8 say that the

   accused used to ill-treat her. But no specific incident or

   no instance is pointed out by either of these witnesses

   regarding the ill-treatment said to have been committed

   by the accused against the victim. Of course, this Court

   is not forgetting the fact that the evidence of P.W.8 is

   to the effect that on 05.11.1999 Sheeja was dragged out

   of the house. But it must be noticed that P.W.2 has no

   such case and also the statement of P.W.8 that Sheeja

Crl.Appeal No.453 of 2004

                             13



   was dragged out of the house does not find a place in

   her Section 161 statement to the police.




14.The evidence of P.W.2 is to the effect that the accused

   used to pester and harass the victim demanding that

   she should get 60 cents of property promised to her

   sold. He would also say that she was ill-treated. This is

   spoken to by P.W.8 also. But in cross examination P.W.2

   had conceded that while he was questioned at the time

   of inquest and subsequently also he had not stated to

   the police that Sheeja was ill-treated by the accused

   demanding that she should sell 60 cents of property

   given to her and bring the money to him. As regards

   the evidence of P.W.8 is concerned, she had to concede

   in cross examination that she had not told the police

   that the accused had dragged Sheeja out of the house

   on 05.11.1999.




15.The omissions and the contradictions brought out in

Crl.Appeal No.453 of 2004

                                14



   the evidence of P.Ws.2 and 8 make it extremely

   dangerous to rely on their evidence. They are prone to

   developments and embellishments and they are not

   consistent in their versions regarding the ill-treatment.

   It may be remembered that no specific instance of the

   ill-treatment is spoken to either by P.Ws. 2 or 8.




16.The court below seems to have been greatly impressed

   by the evidence furnished by P.W.9, who is none other

   than the sister of the victim. She in her evidence would

   say that the victim had an occasion to confide in her

   over    telephone      about the  ill-treatment  and  the

   harassment of the accused. One could have accepted

   it, but for Exts.D2 to D4 letters which were admittedly

   written by P.W.9 to the victim. The tone and tenor of

   letters would show that the matrimonial life       of the

   victim and the accused was pleasant and happy and

   there is no mention or whisper in Exts.D2 to D4 about

   the ill-treatment by the accused. If as a matter of fact

Crl.Appeal No.453 of 2004

                             15



   what is claimed by P.Ws.2, 8 and 9 that the accused

   used to torture, humiliate and harass the victim is true,

   certainly and surely, the tenor of the letter would have

   been different, at least there would have been some

   mention about the conduct of the accused in that

   regard. There is no mention at all about the cruel acts

   alleged to have been committed by the accused in any

   of those letters. Of course P.W.9 would say that she had

   received letters from the victim in which the ill-

   treatment was mentioned, but she would say that she

   had not kept those letters. It is significant to notice that

   P.W.9 had not told her father about what was confided

   in her by the victim.

17.It also needs to be noticed that going by the evidence

   of P.Ws.2 and 8, they do not dispute that 60 cents of

   property was promised to Sheeja at the time of

   marriage. It is also not in dispute that the property

   stood in the name of P.W.2. One cannot omit to note

   that both P.Ws.2 and 8 say that when the accused

Crl.Appeal No.453 of 2004

                               16



   demanded the property, they insisted that she should

   come and stay with them. Sheeja was not willing to do

   so. She wanted to reside with her husband. If as a

   matter of fact what is stated by P.Ws.1, 2, 8 and 9 about

   the ill-treatment and the harassment is true., it will be

   difficult to believe that Sheeja would have taken such a

   step.




18.The above facts and circumstances, cast a serious

   doubt regarding the version given by P.Ws.1, 2, 8 and 9

   about the ill-treatment by the accused. One may note

   that no specific instance or incident is pointed out by

   these witnesses regarding the harassment meted out by

   the accused. One cannot presume that        because the

   victim committed suicide, it must have been as a result

   of instigation of the accused or      as a result of ill-

   treatment meted out by the accused to the         victim.

   Though not very relevant, defence has brought out from

   the prosecution witnesses that some of the close

Crl.Appeal No.453 of 2004

                                17



   relatives of the victim had committed suicide.




19.The embellishments, developments,         contradictions

   and inconsistencies in the evidence of P.Ws.2 and 8

   make it extremely vulnerable to rely on their evidence.

   The evidence of P.W.9 cannot be accepted in view of

   Exts.D2 to D4 letters and the      evidence of P.W.1 is

   hearsay.




20.The result is that there is no convincing evidence to

   come to the conclusion that late Sheeja has committed

   suicide on the instigation of the accused or that he had

   ill-treated her.      The accused when questioned under

   Section 313 Cr.P.C., clearly stated the circumstances

   under which the mishap occurred. True, he has not

   adduced any evidence in that regard. But the evidence

   regarding the ill-treatment and the harassment alleged

   against the accused is far from satisfactory. May be

   that some thing might have been done by the accused

Crl.Appeal No.453 of 2004

                               18



   on the day of incident but that is far from saying that

   the victim was driven to commit suicide at the

   instigation of the accused and that he ill-treated her.




21.For the above reasons, this Court is unable to uphold

   the findings of the court below that the offences under

   Sections 498A and 306 are made out on the facts. This

   appeal is allowed, conviction and sentence passed for

   the offences under Section 498A and 306 IPC are set

   aside and it is held that the accused is not guilty of the

   said offences. The appellant is acquitted of the charge

   levelled against him. His bail bond shall stand cancelled

   and he is set at liberty. If he had paid the fine amount,

   the same shall be refunded to him.


                                                sd/-
                                   (P. BHAVADASAN, JUDGE)
AMV/
                                          /TRUE COPY/



                                          P.A.TO JUDGE



