
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                      PRESENT:

                           THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE V.K.MOHANAN

                   FRIDAY, THE 12TH DAY OF JULY 2013/21ST ASHADHA, 1935

                                           Crl.MC.No. 2856 of 2013 ()
                                          --------------------------------------

       C.C.NO.86/2012 ON THE FILE OF THE JUDICIAL FIRST CLASS MAGISTRATE,
                                                   MALAPPURAM
                  CRIME NO. 618/2011 OF MALAPPURAM POLICE STATION

PETITIONER/DEFACTO COMPLAINANT:
--------------------------------------------------------

            SHAMEENA.C.H., AGED 24,
            D/O.MOHAMMED ALI, CHERUTHODI HOUSE, D.P.O.ROAD,
            MALAPPURAM AMSOM, KEEZHMURI DESOM, ERNAD TALUK.

            BY ADV. SRI.K.SHIBILI NAHA


RESPONDENTS/COMPLAINANT & ACCUSED:
----------------------------------------------------------------


        1. SUB INSPECTOR OF POLICE,
            MALAPPURAM POLICE STATION,
            REPRESENTED BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR,
            HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM-682 031.

        2. SHANAVAS, AGED 26 YEARS,
            S/O.AHAMED HAJI, KALAKKANDATHIL HOUSE, KOPPAM
            AMAYOOR-676123.

        3. AHAMMED HAJI OF DO... DO..


            BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SMT.S.HYMA




           THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE HAVING COME UP FOR ADMISSION ON
           12-07-2013, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE FOLLOWING:




MJL

Crl.MC.No. 2856 of 2013 ()
------------------------------------

                                              APPENDIX

PETITIONER'S ANNEXURES:
----------------------------------------

ANNEXURE-A:                       CERTIFIED COPY OF FIRST INFORMATION REPORT IN CRIME
                                  NO.618/2011 DATED 19-11-2011 MALAPPURAM POLICE
                                  STATION

ANNEUXRE-B:                       CERTIFIED COPY OF CHARGE SHEET IN CRIME NO.618/2011
                                  DATED 20-12-2011

ANNEXURE-C:                       TRUE COPY OF NOTARISED AGREEMENT EXECUTED BY
                                  PETITIONER ON 15-4-2013

ANNEXURE-D:                       TRUE COPY OF AFFIDAVIT SWORN TO BY THE PETITIONER
                                  DATED 31-5-2013.


RESPONDENTS' ANNEXURES: NIL




                                                           /TRUE COPY/


                                                           P ATO JUDGE




MJL


                      V.K.MOHANAN, J.
              ------------------------------------------
                  Crl.M.C.No.2856 of 2013
             -------------------------------------------
            Dated this the 12th day of July, 2013

                              ORDER

     The petitioner, who is the de facto complainant in Crime

No.618 of 2011 of Malappuram Police Station, preferred the

above petition under Section 482 of Cr.P.C. with a prayer to

quash Annexure-A FIR in Crime No.618 of 2011 of

Malappuram Police Station, Annexure-B charge sheet dated

20/12/2011 and all further proceedings pending in C.C.No.86

of 2012 on the file of the Judicial First Class Magistrate Court,

Malappuram against the accused, who are respondents 2 and

3 in the above M.C.

     2.   Heard the learned counsel for the petitioner and the

learned Public Prosecutor.

     3.   The prosecution allegation is that, the petitioner was

given 75 sovereigns of gold ornaments and Rupees One lakh at

the time of their marriage.           But respondents 2 and 3

demanding more dowry taunted and harassed the petitioner

and as the petitioner/de facto complainant was not amenable

for the demand of the respondents/accused, she was abused

Crl.M.C.No.2856 of 2013
                             :-2-:


and subjected to harassment and accordingly she was

hospitalised and thus, on the basis of the statement given by

the petitioner, Crime No.618 of 2011 was registered for the

offences punishable under Sections 498-A and 506(ii) of IPC.

On conducting investigation, the first respondent preferred

final report i.e., Annexure-B. On the basis of the same, the

learned Magistrate of the Judicial First Class Magistrate Court,

Malappuram took cognizance and instituted C.C.No.86 of

2012. Annexure-A is the F.I.R. and Annexure-B is the Final

Report. Now, the case of the petitioner is that, during the

pendency of the above matter the petitioner as well as the

second respondent decided to part with and marriage was

dissolved by pronouncing Talak and the second respondent

accordingly discharged his liabilities under Section 3(1) of the

Muslim Women (Protection of Rights and Divorce) Act and as

such the petitioner does not want to proceed against

respondents 2 and 3. Besides filing the above petition under

Section 482 of Cr.P.C., the petitioner has also filed Annexure-D

affidavit dated 31/05/2013.

Crl.M.C.No.2856 of 2013
                             :-3-:


        4. I have carefully considered the above submissions of

the respective counsel.    I have verified the documents and

materials produced along with the above petition including

Annexure-D affidavit. In the given facts and circumstances of

the case and especially in the light of the settlement arrived

between the parties to the dispute, the learned Public

Prosecutor has also no objection in allowing the above petition.

        5.   Having regard to the facts and circumstances

involved in the case, it can be seen that the offences involved

in the above case are only under Sections 498-A and 506(ii) of

IPC. which are more or less personal in nature and no public

interest is involved. It is pertinent to note that though such

offences are involved, the real parties to the dispute

approached this Court after having amicably settled the

matter.   From the submission made by the counsel for the

petitioner/de facto complainant, it appears to me that the de

facto complainant has no further grievance against the

respondents 2 & 3/accused in the light of the settlement

arrived by them. In this juncture, it is relevant to note the

decisions of the Honourable Apex Court reported in Gian

Crl.M.C.No.2856 of 2013
                                         :-4-:


Singh v. State of Punjab [2012(4) KLT 108(SC)]                             and

Jitendra Raghuvanshi and Others v. Babita Raghuvanshi

and another [2013 (1) KLD 817 (SC)]. In Gian Singh's case,

the Supreme Court has held as follows:-

                   "57.    The position that emerges from the above

           discussion can be summarised thus:         the power of the

           High Court in quashing a criminal proceeding or FIR or

           complaint in exercise of its inherent jurisdiction is distinct

           and different from the power given to a criminal court for

           compounding the offences under S.320 of the Code.

           Inherent power is of wide plenitude with no statutory

           limitation but it has to be exercised in accord with the

           guideline engrafted in such power viz;(i) to secure the

           ends of justice or (ii) to prevent abuse of the process of

           any Court. In what cases power to quash the criminal

           proceeding or complaint or F.I.R. may be exercised where

           the offender and victim have settled their dispute would

           depend on the facts and circumstances of each case and

           no category can be prescribed..

It is further held as follows:-

           "......... But the criminal cases having overwhelmingly and

           pre-dominatingly civil flavour stand on different footing

           for the purposes of quashing, particularly the offences

           arising from commercial, financial,mercandile, civil,

           partnership or such like transactions or the offences

           arising out of matrimony relating to dowry etc. or the

           family disputes where the wrong is basically private or

           personal in nature and the parties have resolved their

           entire dispute. In this category of cases, High Court may

           quash criminal proceedings if in its view, because of the

Crl.M.C.No.2856 of 2013
                                    :-5-:


         compromise between the offender and victim, the

         possibility of conviction is remote and bleak and

         continuation of criminal case would put accused to great

         oppression and prejudice and extreme injustice would be

         caused to him by not quashing the criminal case despite

         full and complete settlement and compromise with the

         victim........"

Further, in   Jitendra Raghuvanshi's case,       the Apex Court has held as

follows:-

                "7. It is not in dispute that matrimonial disputes

         have been on considerable increase in recent times

         resulting in filing of complaints under Sections 498A and

         406 of I.P.C. not only against the husband but also against

         the relatives of the husband. The question is when such

         matters are resolved either by the wife agreeing to rejoin

         the matrimonial home or by mutual settlement of other

         pending disputes for which both the sides approached the

         High Court and jointly prayed for quashing of the criminal

         proceedings or the FIR or complaint by the wife under

         Sections 498A and 406 of I.P.C., whether the prayer can

         be declined on the sole ground that since the offences are

         non-compoundable under Section 320 of the Code, it

         would be impermissible for the court to quash the

         criminal proceedings or FIR or complaint.

                8. It is not in dispute that in the case on hand

         subsequent to the filing of the criminal complaint under

         Sections 498A and 406 of IPC and Sections 3 and 4 of the

         Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961, with the help and

         intervention of family members, friends and well-wishers,

         the parties concerned have amicably settled their

         differences    and   executed   a  compromise/settlement.

         Pursuant      thereto,  the  appellants  filed   the  said

Crl.M.C.No.2856 of 2013
                                   :-6-:


        compromise before the Trial Court with a request to place

        the same on record and to drop the criminal proceedings

        against the appellants herein. It is also not in dispute that

        in additional to the mutual settlement arrived at by the

        parties, respondent/-wife has also filed an affidavit stating

        that she did not wish to pursue the criminal proceedings

        against the appellants and fully supported the contents of

        the settlement deed. It is the grievance of the appellants

        that no only the Trial Court rejected such prayer of the

        parties but also the High Court failed toe exercise its

        jurisdiction under Section 482 of the Code only on the

        ground that the criminal proceedings relate to the

        offences punishable under Sections 498A and 406 of IPC

        which are non-compoundable in nature."

               "12. In our view, it is the duty of the Courts to

        encourage genuine settlements of matrimonial disputes,

        particularly, when the same are on considerable increase.

        Even if the offences are non-compoundable, if they relate

        to matrimonial disputes and the Court is satisfied that the

        parties have settled the same amicably and without any

        pressure, we hold that for the purpose of securing ends of

        justice, Section 320 of the Code would not be a bar to the

        exercise of power of quashing of FIR, complaint or the

        subsequent criminal proceedings.

               13.  There has been an outburst of matrimonial

        disputes in recent times.     The institution of marriage

        occupies an important place and it has an important role

        to play in the society. Therefore, every effort should be

        made in the interest of the individuals in order to enable

        them to settle down in life and live peacefully. If the

        parties ponder over their defaults and terminate their

        disputes amicably by mutual agreement instead of

        fighting it out in a Court of law, in order to do complete

Crl.M.C.No.2856 of 2013
                                  :-7-:


        justice in the matrimonial matters, the Courts should be

        less hesitant in exercising its extraordinary jurisdiction.

        It is trite to state that the power under Section 482

        should be exercised sparingly and with circumspection

        only when the Court is convinced, on the basis of material

        on record, that allowing the proceedings to continue

        would be an abuse of the process of the Court or that the

        ends of justice require that the proceedings ought to be

        quashed."


Considering the particular facts and circumstances in this

case, it can be seen further that the criminal proceedings are

initiated consequent to the matrimonial dispute arose among

the parties and both the disputes are now amicably settled

between the parties. According to me, in the light of the facts

and circumstances          involved     in the present case and

particularly in view of the settlement arrived in the present

case, the dictum laid in the above decisions will be squarely

applicable in the present case. According to me, as the parties

to the dispute settled the issues amicably, it is the duty of this

Court to promote such settlement, instead of compelling the

parties to go on with the dispute. It is pertinent to note that

since the matter is settled out of court, in the event of

proceeding with the trial, there would not have any fruitful

Crl.M.C.No.2856 of 2013
                              :-8-:


prosecution, resulting the conviction of the accused, rather the

net result would be sheer waste of judicial time and abuse of

process of the court and proceedings. Thus, according to me,

following the decisions cited supra, this Crl.M.C. can be

allowed granting the relief as sought for.

        In the result, this Crl.M.C. is allowed, quashing

Annexure-A FIR in Crime No.618 of 2011 of Malappuram

Police Station, Annexure-B charge sheet dated 20/12/2011 and

all further proceedings pending in C.C.No.86 of 2012 on the

file of the Judicial First Class Magistrate Court, Malappuram

against the accused, who are respondents 2 and 3 in the above

Crl.M.C.




                                        V.K.MOHANAN, JUDGE

skj
                             True copy

                           P.A. to Judge



