
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                    PRESENT:

                        THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE V.K.MOHANAN

                MONDAY, THE 8TH DAY OF JULY 2013/17TH ASHADHA, 1935

                                        Crl.MC.No. 2779 of 2013 ()
                                              ---------------------------
 CC. NO.468/2013 OF JUDICIAL FIRST CLASS MAGISTRATE COURT, NILAMBUR.
     CRIME NO. 434/2013 OF NILAMBUR POLICE STATION, MALAPPURAM DIST.
                                                       ..........

PETITIONERS/ACCUSED AND DE-FACTO COMPLAINANT:
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

        1. JEAN VICTOR, S/O.M.U.VICTOR,
           AGED 32 YEARS, MOOLANKUZHI HOUSE,
           EZHUPUNNA, NEENDAKARA, ALAPPUZHA DISTRICT.

        2. SHIBI JEAN, AGED 29 YEARS,
           D/O.ALFONSE, KUNNAPPILLY HOUSE,
           UPPUVALLI, AMARAMBALAM. P.O.,
           POOKKOTTUMPADAM, NILAMBUR TALUK,
           MALAPPURAM DISTRICT.

           BY ADVS.SRI.P.SAMSUDIN,
                         SMT.NIMA JACOB.

RESPONDENT/STATE:
--------------------------------

           STATE OF KERALA,
           REPRESENTED BY THE PUBLIC PROSECUTOR,
           HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM-682 031.
           (IN CR.NO.434/2013 OF NILAMBUR POLICE STATION
           IN MALAPPURAM DISTRICT.)


           BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR MR.RAJESH VIJAYAN.


           THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE HAVING COME UP FOR ADMISSION
           ON 08-07-2013, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE
           FOLLOWING:

rs.

Crl.MC.No. 2779 of 2013


                                APPENDIX

PETITIONER'S ANNEXURES:-


ANNEXURE A1-        CERTIFIED COPY OF THE FINAL REPORT IN
                    CRIME NO.434/2013 OF NILAMBUR POLICE STATION.

ANNEXURE A2-        TRUE COPY OF THE AFFIDAVIT DATED 17.06.2013
                    SWORN IN BY THE 2ND PETITIONER.


RESPONDENT'S ANNEXURES:-                    NIL.




                                            //TRUE COPY//




                                            P.A. TO JUDGE.




rs.


                       V.K.MOHANAN, J.
              ----------------------------------------
                   Crl.M.C.No. 2779 of 2013
              ----------------------------------------
              Dated this the 8th day of July, 2013

                            O R D E R

       The above petition is filed under Section 482 of the

Criminal Procedure Code (for short 'Cr.P.C.'), at the instance

of the petitioners, who are accused in C.C.No.468/2013 of the

Judicial First Class Magistrate Court, Nilambur which is a case

instituted upon the police report [in Crime No.434 of 2013 of

Nilambur Police Station] for the offences punishable under

Sections 498-A, 406 and 323 of I.P.C with a prayer to quash

all further proceedings against the petitioners in C.C.No.468 of

2013 on the file of the Judicial First Class Magistrate Court,

Nilambur pursuant to Annexure-A1 FIR in Crime No.434 of

2013 of Nilambur Police Station as the matter is settled out of

court.

         2. The first petitioner is the accused who is the

husband of the second petitioner.          The above case was

registered on the allegation that first petitioner married the

second petitioner in accordance with the customs prevailed

among Christian religion and while they were residing

together, the accused misappropriated the gold ornaments

and the cash given as dowry and demanding more gold and

Crl.M.C.No. 2779 of 2013             2

money the second petitioner was harassed and thereby the

first petitioner committed the offences punishable under

Sections 498-A, 406 and 323 of I.P.C. Now the case of the

petitioners is that the difference of opinion among them is

scratched out and accordingly, they decided to reside together

and now they are living as husband and wife and moved this

Court by filing a petition together under Section 482 of Cr.P.C

and now, the case of the petitioners is that the matter is

settled out of court.

               3. Heard the learned counsel for the petitioners and

I have also heard the learned Public Prosecutor.

               4. The learned counsel for the petitioners submitted

that during the pendency of the above case, the matter is

settled amicably between the parties to the dispute which is

the subject matter of the above case.               Therefore, the

continuation of the proceedings in the above case is abuse of

process of law and proceedings.

               5. I have carefully considered the above submissions

of the respective counsel. I have verified the documents and

materials produced along with the above petition. Annexure-

A2 is the affidavit of the 2nd petitioner. In the given facts and

Crl.M.C.No. 2779 of 2013                3

circumstances of the case and especially in the light of the

settlement arrived between the parties to the dispute, the

learned Public Prosecutor has also no objection in allowing the

above petition.

               6.       Having regard to the facts and circumstances

involved in the case, it can be seen that the offences involved

in the above case are only Sections 498-A, 406 and 323 of

I.P.C which are more or less personal in nature and no public

interest is involved. It is pertinent to note that though such

offences are involved, the real parties to the dispute

approached this Court after having amicably settled the

matter. It appears to me that the de facto complainant and

the accused have no further grievance in the light of the

settlement arrived by them. In this juncture, it is relevant to

note the decisions of the Honourable Apex Court reported in

Gian Singh v. State of Punjab [2012(4) KLT 108(SC)] and

Jitendra Raghuvanshi and Others v. Babita Raghuvanshi

and another [2013 (1) KLD 817 (SC)]. In Gian Singh's case,

the Supreme Court has held as follows:-

                        "57. The position that emerges from
               the above discussion can be summarised
               thus:      the power of the High Court in
               quashing a criminal proceeding or FIR or

Crl.M.C.No. 2779 of 2013                4

               complaint    in   exercise   of   its  inherent
               jurisdiction is distinct and different from the
               power     given   to   a  criminal   court   for
               compounding the offences under S.320 of
               the Code.       Inherent power is of wide
               plenitude with no statutory limitation but it
               has to be exercised in accord with the
               guideline engrafted in such power viz;(i) to
               secure the ends of justice or (ii) to prevent
               abuse of the process of any Court. In what
               cases     power    to   quash    the    criminal
               proceeding or complaint or F.I.R. may be
               exercised where the offender and victim
               have settled their dispute would depend on
               the facts and circumstances of each case
               and no category can be prescribed..

It is further held as follows:-

               "......... But the criminal cases having
               overwhelmingly and pre-dominatingly civil
               flavour stand on different footing for the
               purposes     of  quashing,    particularly  the
               offences      arising     from     commercial,
               financial,mercandile, civil, partnership or
               such like transactions or the offences
               arising out of matrimony relating to dowry
               etc. or the family disputes where the wrong
               is basically private or personal in nature
               and the parties have resolved their entire
               dispute.    In this category of cases, High
               Court may quash criminal proceedings if in
               its view, because of the compromise
               between the offender and victim, the
               possibility of conviction is remote and bleak
               and continuation of criminal case would put
               accused to great oppression and prejudice
               and extreme injustice would be caused to
               him by not quashing the criminal case
               despite    full and complete settlement and
               compromise with the victim........"

Crl.M.C.No. 2779 of 2013                  5

Further, in Jitendra Raghuvanshi's case, the Apex Court

has held as follows:-

                        "7.     It  is  not   in  dispute    that
               matrimonial        disputes   have     been    on
               considerable       increase   in  recent    times
               resulting in filing of complaints under
               Sections 498A and 406 of I.P.C. not only
               against the husband but also against the
               relatives of the husband. The question is
               when such matters are resolved either by
               the wife agreeing to rejoin the matrimonial
               home or by mutual settlement of other
               pending disputes for which both the sides
               approached the High Court and jointly
               prayed      for    quashing   of   the   criminal
               proceedings or the FIR or complaint by the
               wife under Sections 498A and 406 of I.P.C.,
               whether the prayer can be declined on the
               sole ground that since the offences are non-
               compoundable under Section 320 of the
               Code, it would be impermissible for the
               court to quash the criminal proceedings or
               FIR or complaint.
                        8. It is not in dispute that in the case
               on hand subsequent to the filing of the
               criminal complaint under Sections 498A and
               406 of IPC and Sections 3 and 4 of the
               Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961, with the help
               and intervention of family members, friends
               and well-wishers, the parties concerned
               have amicably settled their differences and
               executed          a     compromise/settlement.
               Pursuant thereto, the appellants filed the
               said compromise before the Trial Court with
               a request to place the same on record and
               to drop the criminal proceedings against the
               appellants herein. It is also not in dispute
               that in additional to the mutual settlement
               arrived at by the parties, respondent/-wife
               has also filed an affidavit stating that she

Crl.M.C.No. 2779 of 2013               6

               did not wish to         pursue the      criminal
               proceedings against the appellants and fully
               supported the contents of the settlement
               deed. It is the grievance of the appellants
               that no only the Trial Court rejected such
               prayer of the parties but also the High
               Court failed toe exercise its jurisdiction
               under Section 482 of the Code only on the
               ground that the criminal proceedings relate
               to the offences punishable under Sections
               498A and 406 of IPC which are non-
               compoundable in nature."
                        "12. In our view, it is the duty of the
               Courts to     encourage genuine settlements
               of matrimonial disputes, particularly, when
               the same are on considerable increase.
               Even if the offences are non-compoundable,
               if they relate to matrimonial disputes and
               the Court is satisfied that the parties have
               settled the same amicably and without any
               pressure, we hold that for the purpose of
               securing ends of justice, Section 320 of the
               Code would not be a bar to the exercise of
               power of quashing of FIR, complaint or the
               subsequent criminal proceedings.
                        13. There has been an outburst of
               matrimonial disputes in recent times. The
               institution    of   marriage      occupies    an
               important place and it has an important
               role to play in the society. Therefore, every
               effort should be made in the interest of the
               individuals in order to enable them to settle
               down in life and live peacefully.        If the
               parties ponder over their defaults and
               terminate their disputes amicably by mutual
               agreement instead of fighting it out in a
               Court of law, in order to do complete justice
               in the matrimonial matters, the Courts
               should be less hesitant in exercising its
               extraordinary jurisdiction.       It is trite to
               state that the power under Section 482
               should be exercised sparingly and with

Crl.M.C.No. 2779 of 2013            7

               circumspection only when the Court is
               convinced, on the basis of material on
               record, that allowing the proceedings to
               continue would be an abuse of the process
               of the Court or that the ends of justice
               require that the proceedings ought to be
               quashed."

Considering the particular facts and circumstances in this case,

it can be seen further that the criminal proceedings are

initiated consequent to the matrimonial dispute arose among

the parties and both the disputes are now amicably settled

between the parties. According to me, in the light of the facts

and         circumstances   involved  in the  present   case  and

particularly in view of the settlement arrived in the present

case, the dictum laid in the above decisions will be squarely

applicable in the present case. According to me, as the parties

to the dispute settled the issues amicably, it is the duty of this

Court to promote such settlement, instead of compelling the

parties to go on with the dispute. It is pertinent to note that

since the matter is settled out of court, in the event of

proceeding with the trial, there would not have any fruitful

prosecution, resulting the conviction of the accused, rather the

net result would be sheer waste of judicial time and abuse of

process of the court and proceedings. Thus, according to me,

Crl.M.C.No. 2779 of 2013           8

following the decisions cited supra, this Crl.M.C.can be allowed

granting the relief as sought for.

               In the result, this Crl.M.C. is allowed, quashing

Annexure - A1 FIR in Crime No.434/2013 of Nilambur Police

Station and all further proceedings pending against the

petitioners in C.C.No.468 of 2013 of the Judicial First Class

Magistrate Court, Nilambur.




                                         V.K.MOHANAN
                                                  Judge

mns/



