
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                      PRESENT:

                      THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE PIUS C.KURIAKOSE
                                                             &
                                THE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE P.D.RAJAN

            MONDAY, THE 25TH DAY OF FEBRUARY 2013/6TH PHALGUNA 1934

                                        Mat.Appeal.No. 166 of 2010 ( )
                                               ------------------------------
                           OP.134/2006 OF FAMILY COURT, ERNAKULAM.
                                                        .............

APPELLANTS/RESPONDENTS NO.1 AND 2:
----------------------------------------------------------------

        1. SURESH GOPALAKRISHNAN, AGED 32,
            H.NO.38/1880, OPPOSITE CENTURY CLUB,
            PO.VENNALA, COCHIN-28.

        2. DAMAYANTHI, AGED ABOUT 63 YEARS,
           W/O.LATE GOPALAKRISHNAN, NO.12,
           LOTUS APARTMENTS, KRISHNAKANANDHI ROAD,
           KOPPAM, PALAKKAD.

           BY ADVS. SRI.K.R.VINOD,
                          SMT.M.S.LETHA.

RESPONDENTS/PETITIONER:
-------------------------------------------

        1. T. RADHIKA , AGED 28 YEARS,
           W/O.SURESH, GOPALAKRISHNAN, KRISHNAKRIPA,
           AYYAPURAM, KALAPATHY P.O., PALAKKAD.

        2. NIVEDA, D/O.RADHIKA,
           REPRESENTED BY MOTHER AND GUARDIAN,
           RADHIKA, W/O.SURESH GOPALAKRISHNAN,
           KRISHNAKRIPA, AYYAPURAM,
           KALPATHY P.O., PALAKKAD.


           BY SRI.P.SANTHALINGAM, SENIOR ADVOCATE.
                ADV. SRI.S.SHARAN.


           THIS MATRIMONIAL APPEAL HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD
           ON 05-02-2013, THE COURT ON 25-02-2013 DELIVERED THE
           FOLLOWING:


rs.

Mat.Appeal.No. 166 of 2010




                                 APPENDIX


PETITIONER'S ANNEXURES:-            NIL.




PETITIONER'S ANNEXURES:-


ANNEXURE R1A        COPY OF THE SCHEDULE ALONG WITH ENCUMBRANCE
                    CERTIFICATE PROPERTY DATED 23/11/2010.




                                          //TRUE COPY//


                                          P.S. TO JUDGE

rs.


                    PIUS.C. KURIAKOSE
                                &
                        P.D. RAJAN, JJ.
           -------------------------------------------
                 Mat. Appeal No.166 of 2010
          ----------------------------------------------
          Dated this the 25th day of February, 2013

                          JUDGMENT

P.D.Rajan, J.

     The respondents in O.P.No.134/2006 of the Family Court,

Ernakulam are the appellants and the petitioners are respondents

in this appeal.    Petitioners filed the Original Petition under

Sections 24 and 25 of Hindu Marriage Act, 1955, seeking

permanent alimony, return of gold ornaments and maintenance

etc. The 1st appellant is the husband and the 2nd appellant is the

mother.   The marriage between the 1st appellant and the 1st

respondent was registered on 12.11.2001 in the Sub Registrar

Office, Koduvayoor, after that the marriage was conducted in the

nearby temple as per Hindu customary rites. At the time of the

marriage, the mother of the 1st respondent gave 25 sovereigns of

gold and a sum of Rs.10,000/- to her. After the marriage, both

of them lead a happy married life, but, subsequently when the 2nd

appellant demanded more amount as dowry, the marital

Mat.Appeal No.166/10             2

relationship strained.      When she was unable to pay the

amount she withdrew the Fixed Deposit account and entrusted

it to the appellants.   In the wedlock, a female child was born

out to them on 18.2.2005 at Indira Gandhi Hospital,

Ernakulam.        In the   meantime, the 1st appellant filed

O.P. No.586/2005 for divorce which was dismissed by the

Family Court. The 1st appellant is a Marketing Executive in the

Standard Chartered Bank, Ernakulam and having landed

properties at Palakkad worth rupees thirty lakh and Fixed

Deposit in bank for more than ten lakh rupees.     Hence, they

filed the above petition for getting alimony and for return of

the gold ornaments and maintenance.

      2.    The appellants denied the allegation and contended

that the 1st respondent voluntarily left her house and joined

with the 1st appellant.   They admitted that the marriage was

solemnized at Sub Registrar office, Koduvayoor and no gold

ornaments were gifted by the mother of the 1st respondent and

the other contention is absolutely false. No money and house

hold articles were entrusted to the 1st appellant and he denied

the job as Marketing Executive in the Standard Chartered Bank

Mat.Appeal No.166/10            3

and contended that he has no bank balance and Fixed Deposit.

The gold ornaments, certificates, dress materials and personal

belongings of the 1st respondent are in her possession and she

is not eligible for any relief as claimed.      She also filed

additional counter statement.

     3.     The court below referred the parties for counselling

and as it was not successful, their evidence was recorded,

which consisted of oral testimony of PW1 and RW1. The court

below allowed the petition in part and directed the appellants

to return the gold ornaments weighing 40 sovereigns and the

1st appellant is directed to pay maintenance at the rate of

Rs.1250/- per month to the 1st respondent and Rs.1000/- per

month to the 2nd respondent from 2.2.2006.       The claim for

permanent alimony was disallowed.         Aggrieved by that,

husband preferred this appeal.

     4.     The learned counsel appearing for the appellants

contended that no evidence has been adduced by the 1st

respondent to prove that she gave 40 sovereigns of gold

ornaments to the appellants. There was no mental or physical

cruelty against the 1st respondent demanding more amount as

Mat.Appeal No.166/10               4

dowry.     The lower court rightly disallowed the permanent

alimony but, the maintenance awarded by the lower court is

without applying the settled principle of law. There was no

evidence in this case to show that the 1st appellant is employed

in the Standard Chartered Bank, Ernakulam.                In the

circumstance he contended that the impugned judgment is

absolutely a non-speaking one liable to be set aside.

      5.    But, the learned senior counsel appearing for the

respondents strongly resisted the above contention and

contended that the claim for permanent alimony was

disallowed by the court below.        The allegation that the 1st

respondent went with the 1st appellant empty handed is

baseless. While residing with the appellants, the mother of the

1st appellant ill-treated the 1st respondent and her life with the

appellants was with tension and miserable. Considering the

standards of living, the 1st respondent is entitled to get the

gold ornaments and maintenance pendente lite.

      6.    Now the first point that arises for consideration is

whether the 1st appellant is liable to pay pendente lite alimony

to the respondents and the respondents are entitled to cost of

Mat.Appeal No.166/10             5

the proceedings? The 1st appellant and the 1st respondent are

husband and wife, who admitted their marriage and there is no

dispute for that. The evidence of PW1 in the lower court for

recovery of gold ornaments and maintenance pendente lite

was assessed by the lower court. The court below directed the

appellants to return the gold ornaments weighing 40

sovereigns or its present market value to the 1st respondent,

after analyzing the oral evidence. It is admitted case of the 1st

respondent that the 1st appellant fell in love with her while she

was doing B.Com at the Universal College, Palakkad.          The

mother of the 1st appellant also visited the college and told her

that she liked the 1st respondent as a daughter-in-law. After

discussing her relatives about the relationship, their marriage

was registered on 12.11.2001. On the next day, the marriage

ceremony was conducted in the nearby temple as per hindu

religious rites. At the time of marriage, 25 sovereigns of gold

and ten thousand rupees were given to her.           As per the

demand, the appellants were also given 4 sovereigns of gold

as chain and ring and the 1st respondent's mother also gave

more than one lakh rupees worth gold ornaments to the

Mat.Appeal No.166/10              6

appellants.

      7.    The specific case of PW1 is that she has no income

for her livelihood and her daughter, therefore she need

maintenance pendente lite.        PW1 also deposed that the

appellants have landed property at Palakkad worth thirty lakh

rupees and several bank deposits. Moreover, the 1st appellant

is employed as a Marketing Executive in the Standard

Chartered Bank.         Even though PW1 deposed so, no

documentary evidence has been adduced by her to prove her

contention.        However,  there   was   no   effective  cross

examination from the side of RW1 to rebut the evidence

adduced by PW1.          As per Section 24 of the Hindu Marriage

Act, in a proceeding under this Act, it appears to the court that

either wife or the husband        has no independent income

sufficient for her or his support and the necessary expenses of

the proceeding, it may, on the application of the wife or the

husband, order the respondent to pay to the petitioner the

expenses of the proceeding, and monthly during the

proceeding such sum as, having regard to the petitioner's own

income and the income of the respondent, it may seem to the

Mat.Appeal No.166/10                   7

court to be reasonable during pendency of proceedings.                  A

reading of Section 24 of the Hindu Marriage Act                    clearly

support the non earning spouse, besides it indicates that

earning spouse must give support to the livelihood of the other

party.     In that situation court shall take in to consideration

the actual income of both parties before determining the

quantum of maintenance either monthly or a fixed sum. The

need of the aspirant and paying capacity are the relevant

factors during pendency of any proceeding under the Act for

granting pendente lite maintenance. Therefore it is clear that

the 1st respondent and her child have no sufficient income and

are entitled to get maintenance pendente lite.            In the decision

of the Madras High Court in Rajambal v. Murugappan [AIR

1985 MADRAS 284], it is stated thus (para 10):

           "An order for maintenance pendente lite and costs of
           the proceedings can, as the initial words of the section
           clearly state, be made in any proceeding under the
           Act, viz., for restitution of conjugal rights, judicial
           separation, divorce or nullity of a void or voidable
           marriage. When a fact of marriage is acknowledged or
           proved alimony follows subject of course to the
           discretion of the court in the matter having regard to
           the means of the parties.

In another decision of the Madras High Court in Manokaran

alias Ramamoorthy v. M. Devaki [AIR 2003 MADRAS 212] it is

Mat.Appeal No.166/10                  8

held thus: (para 5):

                 "............. I have already referred to the
           language used in Section 24 which makes it clear that
           for grant of maintenance pendente lite the party
           should not have sufficient independent income for her
           support.

Here PW1 deposed that the 1st appellant is working as a

Marketing Executive in Standard Chartered Bank having landed

properties and Fixed Deposits. The Court below believed the

evidence of PW1 and opined that 1st appellant is financially

sound to pay maintenance. Even though RW1 totally denied

the above facts with regard to his job and income from other

assets, but, that denial not substantiated by evidence is not

sufficient to disbelieve the evidence of PW1. It is the settled

law under Section 24 of the Hindu Marriage Act that a spouse

is entitled to prefers an application where the truth of marriage

is owned and she or he has no independent income for support

and on such application court shall order the respondent to pay

maintenance pendente lite and expenses of the litigation after

considering the income of the petitioner. RW1 admitted that

he is a free lance Marketing Executive and his sisters are well

placed. PW1 submitted that she has no job or income to look

Mat.Appeal No.166/10              9

after her daughter.      When husband is having sufficient

independent income, it is his responsibility to look after his

wife and daughter during his life time. Hence we are of the

opinion that respondents are entitled to get alimony

pendente lite.

      8.    The second point is that whether the appellants are

liable to return the gold ornaments of the 1st respondent as

claimed?    The evidence of PW1 shows that at the time of

marriage 25 sovereigns of gold and ten thousand rupees were

given to her by her mother. This was deposed by PW1 in the

court below. But, the 1st appellant, who was examined as RW1

in the court below, contended that PW1 fell in love with RW1,

while she was a student at Universal College, Palakkad.

Subsequently, she left her parental house and resided along

with RW1. At that time, there was no gold ornaments with

her.   It is true that a customary marriage was conducted

between PW1 and RW1 and their relatives at the temple. We

are of the opinion that, at that time, she might have owned 25

sovereigns of gold and PW1 might have given 4 sovereigns of

gold to RW1 as per demand is believable. The specific case of

Mat.Appeal No.166/10              10

RW1 was that when the 1st respondent returned to her parental

home, she carried all the gold ornaments.           Such a vague

denial itself is not sufficient in the light of his admission with

regard to ornaments. The statement that she carried all the

ornaments when she left the residence of RW1 clearly indicates

that she brought gold at the time of marriage. This admission

made by RW1 in a proceeding may be received as an evidence

against him. Admission is the best evidence against the party

making it. What is admitted by a party to be true must be

presumed to be true unless the contrary is proved.            An

admission made by a party in his pleading signed by him and

verified by him may be used as an evidence against him.

Hence, in the light of the above facts, the finding of the lower

court with regard to the gold ornaments needs interference,

we modify the quantity of gold ornaments as 29 sovereigns

only.

      9.    In the result, the judgment and decree passed by

the lower court are modified as follows:

      The appellants are directed to return the gold ornaments

weighing 29 sovereigns or its current market value to the 1st

Mat.Appeal No.166/10             11

respondent. If they fail to comply with the above direction,

the 1st respondent will be liberty to realise the amount with 6%

interest per annum from the date of the petition till realisation.

The appellants are also directed to pay Rs.5 lakh as alimony

pendente lite to the respondents. The respondents are at

liberty to approach the Family Court for getting future

maintenance. The appellants are directed to pay costs of the

respondents.

      The Mat. Appeal is disposed of as above.




                               PIUS.C.KURIAKOSE, JUDGE




                                       P.D. RAJAN, JUDGE.

acd

Mat.Appeal No.166/10    12

Mat.Appeal No.166/10    13



