
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                              PRESENT:

               THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE V.K.MOHANAN

      TUESDAY, THE 10TH DAY OF SEPTEMBER 2013/19TH BHADRA, 1935

                     Crl.MC.No. 3909 of 2013 ()
                     ---------------------------


      CC 22/2012 of C.J.M.PATHANAMTHITTA
      CRIME NO. 1132/2011 OF POLICE STATION , PATHANAMTITTA
                             ------------
PETITIONER/ACCUSED:
-------------------

       ALEX THOMAS
       S/O.THOMAS, EDASSERYPARAMBIL HOUSE,
       PUZHAVATHU POST,
       CHANGANACHERRY-686 101.

       BY ADV. SRI.SEBASTIAN JOSEPH (KURISUMMOOTTIL)

RESPONDENTS/STATE AND DEFACTO COMPLAINT:
----------------------------------------

          1. STATE OF KERALA
            REPRESENTED BY THE PUBLIC PROSECUTOR
            HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM 682 031.

          2. SUBY SUSAN SAM, AGED 28 YEARS
            D/O.V.M.SAMUEL, VATTAPPARAMBIL HOUSE, CHITTUR MURI
            PATHANAMTHITTA  689 640.

      R1 BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SMT.S.HYMA
      R2 BY ADV.SRI.JOHNSON K.KURIEN


       THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE  HAVING COME UP FOR ADMISSION  ON
10-09-2013, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE FOLLOWING:


VK

Crl.MC.No. 3909 of 2013 ()
---------------------------

                                   APPENDIX
                                   --------

PETITIONER(S)' EXHIBITS
-----------------------

ANNEXURE-A1.THE CERTIFIED COPY OF THE FIR NO.1132/2011 OF
PATHANAMTHITTA POLICE STATION.

ANNEXURE-A2.THE CERTIFIED COPY OF THE FINAL REPORT IN CC NO.22/2012
PENDING ON THE FILES OF CHIEF JUDICIAL MAGISTRATE COURT,
PATHANAMTHITTA.

ANNEXURE-A3.THE CERTIFIED COPY OF THE AFFIDAVIT BY THE 2ND RESPONDENT

RESPONDENT(S)' EXHIBITS : NIL
-----------------------


                                               / TRUE COPY /



                                               P.A. TO JUDGE



VK


                    V.K.MOHANAN, J.
                 -------------------------------
                Crl.M.C.No.3909 of 2013
                 -------------------------------
      Dated this the 10th day of September, 2013.


                         O R D E R


       The above petition is filed under Section 482 of the

Criminal Procedure Code (for short 'Cr.P.C.') at the

instance of the petitioner, who is the accused in

C.C.No.22/12 of the Chief Judicial Magistrate Court,

Pathanamthitta, which is a case instituted upon the police

report [in Crime No.1132/2012 of Pathanamthitta Police

Station] for the offences punishable under Sections 324 &

498 A of I.P.C. with a prayer to quash all further

proceedings as against the petitioner in Annexure-A1 FIR

and Annexure-A2 final report, as the matter is settled out

of court.

       2.   The allegation in the above case is that the

marriage between the petitioner and 2nd respondent herein

was solemnised on 25.8.2010 at St.Mary's Church,

Crl.M.C.No.3909 of 2013
                                 2

Changanacherry, as per Christian rites and ceremonies

prevailing in the community. At the time of marriage,

one lakh rupees and 15 sovereigns of gold were entrusted

with the petitioner by her mother. After marriage, the 2nd

respondent was harassed by the petitioner demanding more

dowry. In furtherance of the said demand, the petitioner

herein beaten the 2nd respondent with a stick and she was

subjected to physical and mental harassment during the

period     from      25/8/2010  to 22/10/2011   and  thereby

committed the offences punishable under Sections 324 &

498 A of I.P.C. Now, the case of the petitioner is that the

matter is settled out of court with the 2nd respondent/de

facto complainant and they are now residing together as

man and wife.         The 2nd respondent/de facto complainant

had also sworn into Annexure-A3 affidavit to the above

effect.

         3. Heard the learned counsel for the petitioner as

well as the 2nd respondent. I have also heard the learned

Public Prosecutor.

Crl.M.C.No.3909 of 2013
                                3

         4. The learned counsel for the petitioner submitted

that during the pendency of the above case, the matter is

settled amicably between the parties to the dispute which is

the subject matter of the above case. Therefore, the

continuation of the proceedings in the above case is abuse

of process of law and proceedings.

         5.     The learned counsel for the 2nd respondent who

on the basis of specific instruction received from the

respondent submitted that the above respondent, who is

the de facto complainant does not intend to proceed any

further against the petitioner and she has no grievance

against him.

         6.        I  have carefully  considered    the above

submissions of the respective counsel. I have verified the

documents and materials produced along with the above

petition. In the given facts and circumstances of the case

and especially in the light of the settlement arrived between

the parties to the dispute, the learned Public Prosecutor

has also no objection in allowing the above petition.

Crl.M.C.No.3909 of 2013
                                  4

         7. Having regard to the facts and circumstances

involved in the case, it can be seen that the offences

involved in the above case are only under Sections 324 &

498 A of I.P.C. which are more or less personal in nature

and no public interest is involved. It is pertinent to note

that though such offences are involved, the real parties to

the dispute approached this Court after having amicably

settled the matter.      From the submission made by the

counsel for the 2nd respondent, it appears to me that the de

facto complainant has no further grievance against the

petitioner/accused in the light of the settlement arrived by

them. In this juncture, it is relevant to note the decisions of

the Honourable Apex Court reported in Gian Singh v.

State of Punjab [2012(4) KLT 108(SC)]             and Jitendra

Raghuvanshi and Others v. Babita Raghuvanshi and

another [2013 (1) KLD 817 (SC)]. In Gian Singh's case, the

Supreme Court has held as follows:-

                "57. The position that emerges from the
         above discussion can be summarised thus:
         the power of the High Court in quashing a

Crl.M.C.No.3909 of 2013
                                  5

         criminal proceeding or FIR or complaint in
         exercise of its inherent jurisdiction is distinct
         and different from the power given to a
         criminal court for compounding the offences
         under S.320 of the Code. Inherent power is of
         wide plenitude with no statutory limitation but
         it has to be exercised in accord with the
         guideline engrafted in such power viz;(i) to
         secure the ends of justice or (ii) to prevent
         abuse of the process of any Court. In what
         cases power to quash the criminal proceeding
         or complaint or F.I.R. may be exercised where
         the offender and victim have settled their
         dispute would depend on the facts and
         circumstances of each case and no category
         can be prescribed."

It is further held as follows:-

         ".........  But the   criminal   cases   having
         overwhelmingly and pre-dominatingly civil
         flavour stand on different footing for the
         purposes      of quashing,   particularly    the
         offences arising from commercial, financial,
         mercandile, civil, partnership or such like
         transactions or the offences arising out of
         matrimony relating to dowry etc. or the
         family disputes where the wrong is basically
         private or personal in nature and the parties
         have resolved their entire dispute.      In this
         category of cases, High Court may quash
         criminal proceedings if in its view, because of
         the compromise between the offender and
         victim, the possibility of conviction is remote
         and bleak and continuation of criminal case
         would put accused to great oppression and
         prejudice and extreme injustice would be
         caused to him by not quashing the criminal
         case despite     full and complete settlement
         and compromise with the victim........"

Crl.M.C.No.3909 of 2013
                                    6

Further, in        Jitendra Raghuvanshi's case,            the Apex

Court has held as follows:-

                "7. It is not in dispute that matrimonial
         disputes have been on considerable increase
         in   recent     times   resulting   in  filing  of
         complaints under Sections 498A and 406 of
         I.P.C. not only against the husband but also
         against the relatives of the husband.         The
         question is when such matters are resolved
         either by the wife agreeing to rejoin the
         matrimonial home or by mutual settlement of
         other pending disputes for which both the
         sides approached the High Court and jointly
         prayed       for  quashing    of   the   criminal
         proceedings or the FIR or complaint by the
         wife under Sections 498A and 406 of I.P.C.,
         whether the prayer can be declined on the
         sole ground that since the offences are non-
         compoundable under Section 320 of the
         Code, it would be impermissible for the court
         to quash the criminal proceedings or FIR or
         complaint.
                8. It is not in dispute that in the case on
         hand subsequent to the filing of the criminal
         complaint under Sections 498A and 406 of
         IPC and Sections 3 and 4 of the Dowry
         Prohibition Act, 1961, with the help and
         intervention of family members, friends and
         well-wishers, the parties concerned have
         amicably       settled  their   differences   and
         executed a compromise/settlement. Pursuant
         thereto,      the   appellants  filed   the   said
         compromise before the Trial Court with a
         request to place the same on record and to
         drop the criminal proceedings against the
         appellants herein. It is also not in dispute
         that in additional to the mutual settlement
         arrived at by the parties, respondent/-wife

Crl.M.C.No.3909 of 2013
                                  7

         has also filed an affidavit stating that she did
         not wish to pursue the criminal proceedings
         against the appellants and fully supported the
         contents of the settlement deed.        It is the
         grievance of the appellants that no only the
         Trial Court rejected such prayer of the parties
         but also the High Court failed toe exercise its
         jurisdiction under Section 482 of the Code
         only on the ground that the criminal
         proceedings relate to the offences punishable
         under Sections 498A and 406 of IPC which
         are non-compoundable in nature."
                "12. In our view, it is the duty of the
         Courts to encourage genuine settlements of
         matrimonial disputes, particularly, when the
         same are on considerable increase. Even if
         the offences are non-compoundable, if they
         relate to matrimonial disputes and the Court
         is satisfied that the parties have settled the
         same amicably and without any pressure, we
         hold that for the purpose of securing ends of
         justice, Section 320 of the Code would not be
         a bar to the exercise of power of quashing of
         FIR, complaint or the subsequent criminal
         proceedings.
                13.    There has been an outburst of
         matrimonial disputes in recent times.        The
         institution of marriage occupies an important
         place and it has an important role to play in
         the society. Therefore, every effort should be
         made in the interest of the individuals in
         order to enable them to settle down in life
         and live peacefully. If the parties ponder over
         their defaults and terminate their disputes
         amicably by mutual agreement instead of
         fighting it out in a Court of law, in order to do
         complete justice in the matrimonial matters,
         the Courts should be less hesitant in
         exercising its extraordinary jurisdiction. It is
         trite to state that the power under Section

Crl.M.C.No.3909 of 2013
                                8

         482 should be exercised sparingly and with
         circumspection only when the Court is
         convinced, on the basis of material on record,
         that allowing the proceedings to continue
         would be an abuse of the process of the Court
         or that the ends of justice require that the
         proceedings ought to be quashed."

Considering the particular facts and circumstances in this

case, it can be seen further that the criminal proceedings

are initiated consequent to the matrimonial dispute arose

among the parties and both the disputes are now amicably

settled between the parties. According to me, in the light

of the facts and circumstances involved in the present case

and particularly in view of the settlement arrived in the

present case, the dictum laid in the above decisions will be

squarely applicable in the present case. According to me,

as the parties to the dispute settled the issues amicably, it

is the duty of this Court to promote such settlement,

instead of compelling the parties to go on with the dispute.

It is pertinent to note that since the matter is settled out of

court, in the event of proceeding with the trial, there would

not have any fruitful prosecution, resulting the conviction of

Crl.M.C.No.3909 of 2013
                                 9

the accused, rather the net result would be sheer waste of

judicial time and abuse of process of the court and

proceedings.          Thus, according to me, following the

decisions cited supra, this Crl.M.C.can be allowed granting

the relief as sought for.

         In the result, this Crl.M.C. is allowed, quashing

Annexure-A1 FIR and Annexure-A2 final report and all

further proceedings pending against the petitioner in

C.C.No.22/12 of the Chief Judicial Magistrate Court,

Pathanamthitta, in Crime No.1132/2012 of Pathanamthitta

Police Station.

                                                 Sd/-
                                          V.K.MOHANAN,
                                               Judge
ami/
                           //True copy//

                           P.A. to Judge



