
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                      PRESENT:

                          THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE P.BHAVADASAN

          TUESDAY,THE 26TH DAY OF NOVEMBER 2013/5TH AGRAHAYANA, 1935

                                           CRL.A.No. 1041 of 2005 ( )
                                                ---------------------------
                                AGAINST THE JUDGMENT IN SC 59/2002
      OF ADDL.SESSIONS (FAST TRACK COURT - I), ALAPPUZHA DATED 18-06-2005
                                                    ------------------

APPELLANT / ACCUSED :
---------------------------------------

            RAJAN, S/O.PADMANABHAN,
            RAJAN NIVAS, RAMAPURAM THEKKUMURI,
            KOORIKKADU VILLAGE.

            BY ADV. SRI.C.RAJENDRAN

RESPONDENT / COMPLAINANT :
------------------------------------------------

            STATE OF KERALA,
            REPRESENTED BY THE DY. S.P. KAYAMKULAM (CRIME NO.97/2000)
            KAREELAKULANGARA POLICE STATION
            THORUGH THE PUBLIC PROSECUTOR,
            HIGH COURT OF KERALA
            ERNAKULAM.

            BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SRI. DHANESH MATHEW MANJOORAN


            THIS CRIMINAL APPEAL HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD ON 26-11-2013,
            THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY DELIVERED THE FOLLOWING:




Mn


                      P.BHAVADASAN, J.
               ---------------------------------------
                 Crl. Appeal No.1041 OF 2005
               ---------------------------------------
         Dated this the 26th day of November, 2013.


                         J U D G M E N T


     The accused was prosecuted for the offences punishable

under Sections 306 and 498A of Indian Penal Code.       He was

found guilty of both counts. Accordingly, he was convicted and

sentenced to suffer rigorous imprisonment for a period of five

years and to pay a fine of Rs.20,000/- with default clause of

simple imprisonment for one year under Section 306 IPC and also

to suffer rigorous imprisonment for a period of two years and to

pay a fine of Rs.5,000/- with default clause of simple

imprisonment for three months under Section 498A IPC. The

substantive sentences were directed to run concurrently. Set off

as per law was allowed.

     2.     As per the prosecution allegations, the marriage

between the victim and the accused had taken place on

26.09.1999 under the guidance of PW16. The couple took up

residence in the matrimonial house. The allegation is that soon

after the marriage, the accused began to ill-treat the victim

Crl. Appeal No.1041/2005         2


demanding more dowry, coming home drunk and beating the

victim was a routine affair and unable to put up with the torture

any more, on 22.04.2000, she set herself on fire. Though she

was removed to the hospital, she did not survive.

       3. PW1, the brother of Sulochana, the victim, on the next

day at 8 a.m laid Ext.P1 First Information Statement. That was

recorded by PW20 who registered a crime a per Ext.P1(a) First

Information Report. He took over the investigation and prepared

Ext.P10 scene mahazar. He seized M.O.s 2 to 5 from the place of

occurrence. He had the inquest conducted by the R.D.O and sent

the body for postmortem. PW3, Forensic Surgeon conducted the

autopsy and prepared Ext.P3 report.          PW20 recorded the

statement of witnesses and after arresting the accused, filed

necessary report before court. He completed the investigation

and laid charge before court.

       4.      The court before which final report was laid took

cognizance of the offences and on finding that the offences are

exclusively triable by a Court of Sessions, the case was

committed to Sessions Court, Alappuzha under Section 209

Crl. Appeal No.1041/2005          3


Cr.P.C. The said court made over the case to Additional Sessions

Court, Fast Track-I, Alappuzha for trial and disposal. The latter

court, on receipt of records and on appearance of the accused,

framed charges for the offences punishable under Sections 498A

and 306 IPC. To the charge, the accused pleaded not guilty and

claimed to be tried. The prosecution therefore had PWs 1 to 20

examined and Exts.P1 to P14 marked. M.O.s 1 to 5 were got

identified and marked. From the defence side, Exts.D1 to D3

were marked.

       5. After the close of the prosecution evidence, the accused

was questioned under Section 313 Cr.P.C.        He denied all the

incriminating circumstances brought out in evidence against him

and maintained that he is innocent. He stated that he had not

married the victim as per the customary rites and they had never

been living as husband and wife. She was only a neighbour to

him and she had mental abrasions. On the date of the incident,

according to the accused, the victim had come to his house and

poured kerosene on her body without any reason and she set

herself on fire. Hearing her cries, people gathered at the place

Crl. Appeal No.1041/2005         4


and she was removed to the hospital. He too had tried to save

the victim and in the process, he suffered burns for which he had

undergone treatment.

       6. On finding that the accused could not be acquitted under

Section 232 Cr.P.C, he was asked to enter on his defence.      He

chose to adduce no evidence.

       7. The court below considerably impressed by the evidence

of PWs 1, 5, 8, 9, 16, 17 and 18, most of them are close relatives

of the victim, formed the opinion that the offences have been

made out and accordingly, he was found guilty and the conviction

and sentence followed.

       8. Learned counsel appearing for the appellant assailed the

findings of the court below on several grounds. Learned counsel

pointed out that the court below has acted mechanically in

narrating the evidence of the above witnesses and it has not

critically analysed the evidence. Most of the crucial statements

made by these witnesses at the time of evidence are

conspicuously absent in their previous statements and those

statements thus spoken in court could not have been acted upon.

Crl. Appeal No.1041/2005         5


Almost all the witnesses relied on say that the victim was beaten

mercilessly almost everyday. It is significant to notice that no

treatment was ever taken nor there was any visible injury on her

body. Drawing specific attention to an incident which took place

on the alleged date, it is pointed out that going by the evidence

of PW5, the victim after having beaten was thrown out of the

house and dragged along a barbed wire fence. Even going by the

evidence adduced by the prosecution, that caused severe injuries

on the body of the victim. Referring to Ext.P3, learned counsel

pointed out that the doctor concerned does not make mention of

any such anti mortem injuries corresponding to the injuries

spoken to by PW5. That belies the said version.

       9. Learned counsel for the appellant went on to point out

that PWs 1, 8, 9 and 18 are the siblings of the victim and their

knowledge about the cruelty is only as told to them by the victim

and they have no direct knowledge. It is not clear from their

evidence, according to the learned counsel, for what purpose the

accused was assaulting the victim.      Though there is a vague

suggestion that there was demand for more dowry, there is no

Crl. Appeal No.1041/2005           6


specific claim put forward by any of the witnesses, of the accused

having demanded more gold or money. It is, therefore, difficult

to believe, according to the learned counsel, that the accused

would have simply come home drunk and beaten the victim.

       10. Learned counsel appearing for the appellant then went

on to point out that even assuming that there was assault

committed by the accused on the victim and also accepting that it

was almost a routine affair, it is difficult to come to the

conclusion that, that by itself is sufficient to attract the offence

under Section 306 IPC. The offence under Section 498A IPC may

be made out. But, the prosecution has a long way to travel from

there to reach the offence under Section 306 IPC.          There is

nothing to indicate that the accused either intended that the

victim should commit suicide or that he created such a situation

on that particular day that she had no option but to commit

suicide.         At any rate, according to the learned counsel, the

conviction and sentence under Section 306 IPC cannot stand.

       11. Learned Public Prosecutor, on the other hand,

contended that unlike in any other case, here is overwhelming

Crl. Appeal No.1041/2005             7


evidence regarding ill-treatment meted out by the accused on the

victim and there is no reason to disbelieve PWs 1, 5, 8, 9, 16, 17

and 18. True, most of them are closely related to the victim.

But, according to the learned Public Prosecutor, none else can

speak about the ill-treatment meted out to a lady.           Learned

Public Prosecutor also drew attention of this Court to the fact that

it is not as if that the prosecution did not attempt to adduce

independent evidence. They examined a few neighbours to prove

ill-treatment.         But, unfortunately, for the prosecution, they

turned hostile though some of them too admit that they were

living together. Even assuming that the evidence of PWs 1, 8, 9,

16, 17 and 18 open to some doubt, that is not the case of the

evidence of PW5. On the eventful day and on the previous day,

PW5 happened to be in the house of the victim and he narrates

the details of what had transpired in the house on those two

days. There is nothing to show that he had any oblique motive

or ill-will towards the accused to falsely implicate him.       The

evidence of PW5 is clinching to the effect that the accused ill-

treated the victim.

Crl. Appeal No.1041/2005          8


       12. Learned Public Prosecutor went on to point out that the

evidence of PWs 1, 5, 8, 9, 16, 17 and 18 is clear to the effect

that not a day passed without the accused coming home fully

drunk and beating up his wife. It is only natural to assume that

the life was hell for the victim in the matrimonial house. Thus it

could not be said that the offence under Section 306 IPC cannot

be attracted. In short, the contention is that the conviction and

sentence do not call for any interference.

       13. The accused when questioned under Section 313 Cr.P.C

denied the marriage between him and the victim. He also went

to the extent of saying that they had never resided together. His

case was that the victim was suffering from mental abrasion and

on the date of the incident, she simply came to the house of the

accused, poured kerosene on her body and set herself on fire.

This is not to say that the prosecution case starts from that point

but only to elucidate the stand taken by the accused in his

defence.

       14. As rightly pointed out by the learned counsel for the

appellant, PWs 1, 5, 8, 9, 16, 17 and 18 are closely related to the

Crl. Appeal No.1041/2005           9


victim. Going by the evidence of PWs 8 and 17, the marriage

between the victim and the accused was on 26.09.1999. They

would say that the parties belong to Ezhava community and the

marriage was conducted according to customary rites of Ezhava

community. Here learned counsel for the appellant referred to

the evidence of PW16 who claims to have conducted the

marriage.        According to him, the marriage was conducted in

Bhadrakali temple. It is not normally done according to learned

counsel. In fact, PW16 accepts that suggestion. But, in the light

of the evidence furnished by PWs 1, 8, 9, 17 and 18, it becomes

difficult to accept the case of the accused that there was no

marriage.        There is overwhelming evidence to show that they

were residing together. It is here that the witnesses who turned

hostile namely, PWs 6, 10 etc. do say that the victim and the

accused were residing together though they may feign ignorance

about their marriage. The evidence of PWs 1, 8, 9, 17 and 18

are clear to the effect that the accused used to ill-treat the victim

almost everyday coming home drunk and according to them, that

was for more dowry.

Crl. Appeal No.1041/2005         10


       15. It has come out in evidence that both the victim as well

as the accused had married for the second time. The evidence of

PWs 1, 8, 9, 17 and 18 are sufficient to show that the life of the

victim was far from pleasant in the matrimonial house. PW1 in

no less terms says that it was at his instance that the marriage

was conducted. PW1 would also go on to say that in fact they

had complained to the community heads regarding the ill-

treatment meted out to the victim but it yielded no result.

       16. PW8 is the elder sister of the victim. She is one of the

witnesses who spoke about the marriage in the family temple.

According to her, the complaint of the accused was that he had

not been given adequate dowry. She too would depose that the

accused had developed a disliking for the victim and he used to

come home drunk everyday.

       17. PW9 is yet another sister of the victim. She would say

that after the marriage, the couple had taken up residence in the

house bought by them in the name of the victim. She would also

go on to say that at the time of marriage, 8= sovereigns of gold

were given to the victim.      She would say that whenever the

Crl. Appeal No.1041/2005          11


victim used to complain to her about the il-treatment, she tried

to pacify her and make her believe that things would turn out

alright in future.

       18. PW17 is the brother-in-law of the victim. He claims to

have participated in the marriage between the victim and the

accused. He asserts that their marriage was in accordance with

the customary rites of Ezhava community. He would say that the

property in which the couple took up residence was purchased in

the name of the victim before one month of their marriage.

       19. PW18 is the eldest sister of the victim. She says about

the ill-treatment.       She also speaks about the purchase of

property in the name of Sulochana, the victim covered by Ext.P11

document.

       20. As rightly pointed out by the learned counsel for the

appellant, the above witnesses speak out the incident as told to

them by the victim. None of them had a case that they had

occasion to see the accused assaulting or ill-treating the victim.

       21. But, the evidence of PW5 stands on an entirely different

footing.       It must be noticed that he is closely related to the

Crl. Appeal No.1041/2005        12


victim. He says that for a few days prior to the incident, he has

been staying with the victim. He was studying in the nearby U.P.

School. According to him, the accused leaves for work early in

the morning and returns in the night. He comes home in the

night in an inebriated condition and as soon as he enters the

house, immediately he showers abuses on the victim. He would

say that when they knew that the accused coming home drunk,

they used to hide in the kitchen and then the accused used to

pull out the victim and assault her. He would also say that he too

was beaten by the accused. On the date of the incident, in the

morning, he and the victim had gone to the house of the victim

and he was cautioned by the victim not to reveal what had

transpired in the morning in her house. On the previous day,

according to PW5, in the night, the accused came home fully

drunk and asked the victim to open the door. When the victim

refused to do so, he broke open the door and then PW5 says that

the routine assault followed. Crying aloud, the victim ran outside

and she fell on the floor and the accused in fury, dragged her

along the fence. As regards the incident, his evidence is that

Crl. Appeal No.1041/2005            13


hearing a loud cry, when he reached the place, he saw the victim

on fire. He also speaks about the assault on the victim earlier on

the day.

       22. Of course, there are minor contradictions brought out

in the evidence of PW5 with reference to his earlier statement.

But, there is no challenge to his claim that he was residing with

the victim from a few days prior to the date of incident and also

on the date of incident. There is no suggestion also to him that

he had any reason to falsely implicate the accused. His evidence,

at any rate, appears to be natural, cogent and convincing in spite

of certain deficiencies pointed out by the learned counsel for the

appellant.         Such infirmities are bound to occur when the

witnesses depose after few years and one cannot expect

mathematical precision. It must be noticed that contradictions

and inconsistencies pointed out in the evidence of PW5 do not

affect the core of the prosecution case and they have no bearing

on the issue involved in the case. From the evidence, it therefore

follows that the accused was in the habit of coming home drunk

and assaulting the victim.

Crl. Appeal No.1041/2005         14


       23. What now remains to be considered is what are the

offences committed by the accused.         On the basis of the

materials available and the evidence adduced by the prosecution,

there can be no manner of doubt that the offence under Section

498A IPC is squarely attracted to the facts of the case. It is not

necessary that the ill-treatment should be by way of demand for

dowry. If one is to believe the evidence of PW5, that is sufficient

to show that the accused used to physically assault the victim on

almost everyday and make the life hell for her. The court below

was therefore perfectly justified in coming to the conclusion that

the offence under Section 498A IPC is made out.

       24. However, the offence under Section 306 IPC may stand

on a different footing. Merely because the offence under Section

498A IPC is made out, that does not lead to the conclusion that

offence under Section 306 IPC is attracted.      Section 306 IPC

contemplates a situation whereby there is an instigation on the

part of the accused in driving the victim to commit suicide. That

pre supposes that the accused knew what was coming along and

then he aided or instigated for doing that particular thing. It

Crl. Appeal No.1041/2005          15


must be remembered that, going by Section 107 IPC, abetment

means instigation to do a thing.

       25. In the case on hand, even assuming that on the date of

the incident, the accused ill-treated the victim, that is hardly

sufficient to lead to the conclusion that he had instigated her to

commit suicide. Here, one of the prosecution witnesses, though

turned hostile to the prosecution, says that the accused was seen

holding the victim and pleading to her why she had taken this

extreme step. In the light of the well settled principles which

indicate the necessary ingredients to be established for attracting

the offence under Section 306 IPC, it is to be said that the

present case does not meet the standards. Though it may look

cruel, that by itself is not a ground to come to the conclusion that

the offence under Section 306 IPC is attracted.        That needs

certain specific grounds and ingredients to be established by the

prosecution. The mere commission of suicide by itself is not a

ground to attract the offence under Section 306 IPC.

       26. What now remains to be considered is the sentence

awarded for the offence under Section 498A IPC.          The court

Crl. Appeal No.1041/2005           16


below has awarded a sentence of two years rigorous

imprisonment and a fine of Rs.5,000/- with default clause of

simple imprisonment for three months for the offence under

Section 498A IPC. Considering the nature of the act committed

by the accused and the short span of marital life, it seems to be

just and reasonable. No grounds are made out to interfere with

the conviction and sentence passed by the court below for the

offence under Section 498A IPC.

       In the result, while confirming the conviction and sentence

for the offence under Section 498A IPC, the conviction and

sentence passed for the offence under Section 306 IPC is set

aside and it is held that the accused is not guilty of the offence

under Section 306 IPC. He stands acquitted of the said charge.

If he has paid the fine amount in respect of the offence under

Section 306 IPC, the same shall be refunded to him. Set off as

per law is allowed.

       This Crl. Appeal is partly allowed.

                                            Sd/-

                                        P.BHAVADASAN
                                            JUDGE
smp



