
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                      PRESENT:

                           THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE V.K.MOHANAN

               THURSDAY, THE 1ST DAY OF AUGUST 2013/10TH SRAVANA, 1935

                                           Crl.MC.No. 3223 of 2013 ()
                                                ---------------------------
        CRIME NO. 488/2013 OF TANUR POLICE STATION, MALAPPURAM DISTRICT
                                                   --------------------

PETITIONER/ACCUSED NO.3 :
---------------------------------------------

            VINOD.T.N,
            S/O.T.N.NEELAKANDAN ILAYATH, THOTTATHIL ILLAM
            VENGALLOOR P.O., KUMARAMANGALAM VILLAGE,
            THODUPUZHA.

            BY SENIOR ADVOCATE SRI.P.VIJAYA BHANU
            BY ADV. SRI.P.M.RAFIQ

RESPONDENTS/STATE & DEFACTO COMPLAINANT :
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

        1. AMBILI K.P., AGED 31 YEARS
            D/O.KESAVAN MOOSAD, KANNAMCHERI PANNIKKATTU ILLAM
            KARANGAPARA, OZHOOR, MALAPPURAM DISTRICT-676321.

        2. STATE OF KERALA,
            REPRESENTED BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR
            HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM-682031.

            R1 BY ADV. SRI.S.RAJEEV
            R2 BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SMT. S. HYMA


            THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE HAVING COME UP FOR ADMISSION
            ON 01-08-2013, ALONG WITH CRL.M.C. NO. 3232/2013, THE COURT ON
            THE SAME DAY PASSED THE FOLLOWING:


Mn

                                                                                 ...2/-

Crl.MC.No. 3223 of 2013 ()
-------------------------------------


                                                      APPENDIX

PETITIONERS' EXHIBITS :
-------------------------------------

ANNEXURE A                     TRUE COPY OF THE F.I.R.IN CRIME NO.488/2013 OF TANUR
                               POLICE STATION, MALAPPURAM DISTRICT.

ANNEXURE B                     TRUE COPY OF THE MEMORANDUM OF AGREEMENT IN B.A.
                               NOS.4553 AND 4713 OF 2013 ENTERED INTO BETWEEN THE
                               PARTIES BEFORE THIS HON'BLE COURT, DATED 24.07.2013.

ANNEXURE-C                     AFFIDAVIT SWORN BY THE IST RESPONDENT/DEFACTO
                               COMPLAINANT INFORMING THE FACTUM OF SETTLEMENT.

RESPONDENTS' EXHIBITS :                            NIL
--------------------------------------------------------

                                                                           //TRUE COPY//




                                                                          P.S. TO JUDGE

Mn


                       V.K.MOHANAN, J.
            ------------------------------------------------
             Crl.M.C.Nos.3223 & 3232 of 2013
            ------------------------------------------------
         Dated this the 01st day of August, 2013

                               ORDER

       As the parties to the above two M.Cs are more or less

same and the subject matter of the above M.Cs are identical

and interconnected and especially the parties to the above

M.C.s have settled the matter, the above two M.Cs. are heard

together and disposed of by this common order.

     2.   Crl.M.C.No.3223 of 2013 is directed against Crime

No.488    of   2013     of    Tanur     Police     Station,  whereas

Crl.M.C.No.3232 of 2013 is against Crime No.483 of 2013 of

the very same Police Station.           Crime No.488 of 2013 is

registered at the instance of the first respondent, who is the

wife of the petitioner herein. Whereas Crime No.483 of 2013

is based upon the intimation furnished by the first respondent,

who is the father-in-law of the petitioner. According to the

learned counsel for the petitioner as well as the counsel

appearing for the first respondent in the above two cases, both

the criminal as well as the matrimonial disputes are settled

Crl.M.C.Nos.3223 & 3232 of 2013
                              :-2-:


through the Mediation held in Kerala Mediation Centre at High

Court.   On the basis of the settlement arrived through the

mediation, now the spouses has decided to dissolve the

marriage and to put an end to their marital relationship. In

both the M.C.s they produced the settlement arrived in the

Mediation Centre as Annexure-B and the de facto complainant,

who is the first respondent in the above Crl.M.C.s have filed

separate affidavits as Annexure-C.

        3.   Having regard to the facts and circumstances

involved in the case, it can be seen that the offences involved

in the above case are only under Sections 341, 324, 326, 308,

406 and 498(A) of IPC which are more or less personal in

nature and no public interest is involved. It is pertinent to

note that though such offences are involved, the real parties to

the dispute approached this Court after having amicably

settled the matter. From the submission made by the counsel

for the 1st respondent, it appears to me that the de facto

complainant has no further grievance against the petitioner/

accused in the light of the settlement arrived by them. In this

Crl.M.C.Nos.3223 & 3232 of 2013
                                         :-3-:


juncture, it is relevant to note the decisions of the Honourable

Apex Court reported in Gian Singh v. State of Punjab [2012

(4) KLT 108(SC)] and Jitendra Raghuvanshi and Others v.

Babita Raghuvanshi and another [2013 (1) KLD 817 (SC)].

In Gian Singh's case, the Supreme Court has held as follows:-

                   "57.    The position that emerges from the above

           discussion can be summarised thus:         the power of the

           High Court in quashing a criminal proceeding or FIR or

           complaint in exercise of its inherent jurisdiction is distinct

           and different from the power given to a criminal court for

           compounding the offences under S.320 of the Code.

           Inherent power is of wide plenitude with no statutory

           limitation but it has to be exercised in accord with the

           guideline engrafted in such power viz;(i) to secure the

           ends of justice or (ii) to prevent abuse of the process of

           any Court. In what cases power to quash the criminal

           proceeding or complaint or F.I.R. may be exercised where

           the offender and victim have settled their dispute would

           depend on the facts and circumstances of each case and

           no category can be prescribed..

It is further held as follows:-

           "......... But the criminal cases having overwhelmingly and

           pre-dominatingly civil flavour stand on different footing

           for the purposes of quashing, particularly the offences

           arising from commercial, financial, mercandile, civil,

           partnership or such like transactions or the offences

           arising out of matrimony relating to dowry etc. or the

           family disputes where the wrong is basically private or

Crl.M.C.Nos.3223 & 3232 of 2013
                                    :-4-:


         personal in nature and the parties have resolved their

         entire dispute. In this category of cases, High Court may

         quash criminal proceedings if in its view, because of the

         compromise between the offender and victim, the

         possibility of conviction is remote and bleak and

         continuation of criminal case would put accused to great

         oppression and prejudice and extreme injustice would be

         caused to him by not quashing the criminal case despite

         full and complete settlement and compromise with the

         victim........"

Further, in   Jitendra Raghuvanshi's case,       the Apex Court has held as

follows:-

                "7. It is not in dispute that matrimonial disputes

         have been on considerable increase in recent times

         resulting in filing of complaints under Sections 498A and

         406 of I.P.C. not only against the husband but also against

         the relatives of the husband. The question is when such

         matters are resolved either by the wife agreeing to rejoin

         the matrimonial home or by mutual settlement of other

         pending disputes for which both the sides approached the

         High Court and jointly prayed for quashing of the criminal

         proceedings or the FIR or complaint by the wife under

         Sections 498A and 406 of I.P.C., whether the prayer can

         be declined on the sole ground that since the offences are

         non-compoundable under Section 320 of the Code, it

         would be impermissible for the court to quash the

         criminal proceedings or FIR or complaint.

                8. It is not in dispute that in the case on hand

         subsequent to the filing of the criminal complaint under

         Sections 498A and 406 of IPC and Sections 3 and 4 of the

         Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961, with the help and

         intervention of family members, friends and well-wishers,

Crl.M.C.Nos.3223 & 3232 of 2013
                                   :-5-:


        the parties concerned have amicably settled their

        differences   and  executed     a  compromise/settlement.

        Pursuant    thereto,  the    appellants    filed   the  said

        compromise before the Trial Court with a request to place

        the same on record and to drop the criminal proceedings

        against the appellants herein. It is also not in dispute that

        in additional to the mutual settlement arrived at by the

        parties, respondent/-wife has also filed an affidavit stating

        that she did not wish to pursue the criminal proceedings

        against the appellants and fully supported the contents of

        the settlement deed. It is the grievance of the appellants

        that no only the Trial Court rejected such prayer of the

        parties but also the High Court failed toe exercise its

        jurisdiction under Section 482 of the Code only on the

        ground that the criminal proceedings relate to the

        offences punishable under Sections 498A and 406 of IPC

        which are non-compoundable in nature."

               "12. In our view, it is the duty of the Courts to

        encourage genuine settlements of matrimonial disputes,

        particularly, when the same are on considerable increase.

        Even if the offences are non-compoundable, if they relate

        to matrimonial disputes and the Court is satisfied that the

        parties have settled the same amicably and without any

        pressure, we hold that for the purpose of securing ends of

        justice, Section 320 of the Code would not be a bar to the

        exercise of power of quashing of FIR, complaint or the

        subsequent criminal proceedings.

               13.  There has been an outburst of matrimonial

        disputes in recent times.     The institution of marriage

        occupies an important place and it has an important role

        to play in the society. Therefore, every effort should be

        made in the interest of the individuals in order to enable

        them to settle down in life and live peacefully. If the

Crl.M.C.Nos.3223 & 3232 of 2013
                                   :-6-:


        parties ponder over their defaults and terminate their

        disputes amicably by mutual agreement instead of

        fighting it out in a Court of law, in order to do complete

        justice in the matrimonial matters, the Courts should be

        less hesitant in exercising its extraordinary jurisdiction.

        It is trite to state that the power under Section 482

        should be exercised sparingly and with circumspection

        only when the Court is convinced,on the basis of material

        on record, that allowing the proceedings to continue

        would be an abuse of the process of the Court or that the

        ends of justice require that the proceedings ought to be

        quashed."


Considering the particular facts and circumstances in this

case, it can be seen further that the criminal proceedings are

initiated consequent to the matrimonial dispute arose among

the parties and both the disputes are now amicably settled

between the parties. According to me, in the light of the facts

and circumstances involved in the present case and

particularly in view of the settlement arrived in the present

case, the dictum laid in the above decisions will be squarely

applicable in the present case. According to me, as the parties

to the dispute settled the issues amicably, it is the duty of this

Court to promote such settlement, particularly when the

settlement is arrived through mediation at the Kerala

Crl.M.C.Nos.3223 & 3232 of 2013
                              :-7-:


Mediation Centre at High Court instead of compelling the

parties to go on with the dispute. It is pertinent to note that

since the matter is settled out of court, in the event of

proceeding with the trial, there would not have any fruitful

prosecution, resulting the conviction of the accused, rather the

net result would be sheer waste of judicial time and abuse of

process of the court and proceedings. Thus, according to me,

following the decisions cited supra, these Crl.M.C.s can be

allowed granting the reliefs as sought for.

        In the result, Crl.M.C.No.3223 of 2013 is allowed

quashing Annexure-A F.I.R. and all further proceedings

pending against the petitioner in Crime No.488 of 2013 of

Tanur Police Station, Malappuram District.

      Crl.M.C.No.3232 of 2013 is allowed quashing Annexure-A

F.I.R. and all further proceedings pending against the

petitioner in Crime No.483 of 2013 of Tanur Police Station,

Malappuram District.


                                      V.K.MOHANAN, JUDGE

skj



