
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                           PRESENT:

           THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE K.T.SANKARAN
                              &
          THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE B.KEMAL PASHA

     FRIDAY, THE 31ST DAY OF MAY 2013/10TH JYAISHTA 1935

                  CRL.A.No. 305 of 2009 (C)
                  --------------------------

 AGAINST THE ORDER/JUDGMENT IN SC 344/2007 of D.C. & SESSIONS
                COURT,KOLLAM DATED 27-01-2009
APPELLANT(S)/ACCUSED:
-------------------------

       USHA RADHAKRISHNAN
       D/O.SAROJINI AMMA, KRISHNAKRIPAYIL VEEDU
       KANNIMEL CHERRY, SAKTHIKULANGARA VILLAGE, KOLLAM.

       BY ADVS.SRI.P.K.VARGHESE
                        SRI.K.S.ARUN KUMAR
                        SMT.M.N.MAYA

RESPONDENT(S)/COMPLAINANT:
--------------------------

       STATE OF KERALA, REPRESENTED BY THE
       P.PROSECUTOR, HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM.

       R1 BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SMT. JASMINE

       THIS CRIMINAL APPEAL  HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD  ON
31-05-2013, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY DELIVERED THE FOLLOWING:


                                                             [CR]




             K.T. SANKARAN & B. KEMALPASHA, JJ.
                  ------------------------------------------
                      Crl.Appeal No.305 of 2009
                  ------------------------------------------
                  Dated this the 31st day of May, 2013


                           J U D G M E N T


Kemal Pasha, J.


     The appellant woman named Usha Radhakrishnan, is accused of

mariticide on the allegation that she has committed the murder of her

husband Radhakrishna Pillai, and also parricide on the allegation that

she has committed the murder of one of her relatives Unnikrishna Pillai

who is the son of the elder brother of Radhakrishna Pillai, on 12.2.2005

by administering Potassium Cyanide poison through liquor consumed

by them.

     2. Deceased Radhakrishna Pillai along with the accused and their

daughter Asha Krishnan (PW2), were residing together at Krishna

Crl. Appeal No.305/09
                                     -:2:-

Kripa, Kannimel Cherry, Sakthikulangara Village, Kollam. Their son

PW21, Arjun Krishnan was residing at the house of the elder sister of

the accused during the relevant period. Deceased Radhakrishna Pillai

was a military personnel, who after retirement has joined as peon in

Kerala State Financial Enterprises. Deceased Unnikrishna Pillai

residing in the neighbouring house, is the son of the elder brother of

deceased Radhakrishna Pillai.

       3. As an Ex-service man, deceased Radhakrishna Pillai used to

purchase his monthly quota of liquor from the military canteen at

Thiruvananthapuram, on all second Saturdays. He lastly collected his

quota of liquor, a total of 10 full bottles of Indian Made Foreign Liquor,

from the military canteen on 12.2.2005. After bringing it into his

house, he consumed some portion of the liquor from one of the bottles.

       4. The prosecution case is that on 12.2.2005, during some time in

the afternoon the accused mixed potassium cyanide with the liquor in

the said bottle from which the liquor was partly consumed. By about

6.30 p.m, both Radhakrishna Pillai and Unnikrishna Pillai consumed

Crl. Appeal No.305/09
                                 -:3:-

the said liquor contaminated with cyanide poison and thereby they

breathed their last within a few minutes. Radhakrishna Pillai who was

struggling and wriggling was taken to Upasana Hospital at Kollam

where his death was confirmed. Likewise, Unnikrishna Pillai who was

also struggling and wriggling was      taken to the District Hospital,

Kollam where his death was also confirmed. Initially, the relatives

other than the accused were of the impression that the death had

occurred due to the consumption of spurious liquor.

       5. On the basis of Ext.P1 First Information Statement furnished

by PW1 who is the elder brother of deceased Radhakrishna Pillai,

residing in the neighbourhood, PW22 Sub Inspector of Police

Sakthikulangara registered Crime No.41 of 2005 through Ext.P1(a)

F.I.R. at 10.30 p.m. under the caption "unnatural death" under Section

174 of the Cr.P.C.       He conducted the inquest of the body of

Radhakrishna Pillai and prepared Ext.P21 inquest report.           He

conducted the inquest of the body of deceased Unnikrishna Pillai and

prepared Ext.P12 inquest report. Some material objects were also

Crl. Appeal No.305/09
                                   -:4:-

collected through the inquest. The bodies were sent for postmortem

examination.

       6.   PW22 visited the scene of occurrence at 11.45 a.m. on

13.2.2005 and prepared Ext.P11 scene mahazar. Through Ext.P11 he

seized, MO1 glass tumbler by which deceased Radhakrishna Pillai has

allegedly consumed the poison contaminated liquor, and MO2 liquor

bottle carrying the label "old smugglers rum" which contained very

little liquor inside, and also some other material objects, including the

remaining nine bottles of liquor. He seized Ext.P23 bill by which

Radhakrishna Pillai has collected liquor from the military canteen on

12.2.2005.

       7. CW27 who was the then Circle Inspector of Police, Chavara,

took over the investigation and placed the accused under arrest on

16.2.2005. He prepared and furnished Ext.P30 remand application,

which contains Ext.P30(a) information allegedly furnished by the

accused, which led to the discovery of the shop of PW5 and the

consequent seizure of Ext.P8 bill book which contains Ext.P8(a)

Crl. Appeal No.305/09
                                  -:5:-

counter foil, from the shop of PW5. After completing the investigation,

PW23 who was the successor in office to CW27, filed the final report.

       8. Charges were framed against the accused for the offences

punishable under Sections 302 and 201 IPC.         On the side of the

prosecution, 23 witnesses were examined and Exts.P1 to P31 were

marked. Mos 1 to 18 were identified. When examined under Section

313 Cr.P.C, the accused has denied the entire incriminating

circumstances brought out against her through the prosecution

evidence. The contentions of the accused, in short, can be summarized

as follows:-

     Her husband,      deceased   Radhakrishna     Pillai, was a

     spendthrift and he had spent all his money. Thereafter, he

     used to borrow money from other persons in the locality.

     According to her, he had spent the loan amount obtained for

     the construction of his residential building also. When she

     used to ask about the said transactions, he used to keep mum.

     Around three to four days prior to his death, he was in utter

     disappointment and he did not use to take food. He used to

     drink. On one day Unnikrishna Pillai also came to the house

Crl. Appeal No.305/09
                                    -:6:-

     while deceased Radhakrishna Pillai was engaged in

     consuming liquor. Unnikrishna Pillai went to the room and

     after some time Unnikrishna Pillai went out.             When

     Radhakrishna Pillai exhibited some discomforts she went to

     the room and when asked, he told her that he had chest pain.

     Immediately, she procured a car and took him to the Upasana

     Hospital. On reaching there the doctor confirmed his death.

     After two days she was informed by the police that

     Radhakrishna Pillai and Unnikrishna Pillai died on

     consuming liquor contaminated with poison.           Deceased

     Radhakrishna Pillai committed suicide by consuming liquor

     mixed with poison and while so after its consumption,

     Unnikrishna Pillai also came over there and without knowing

     the impending danger, he also consumed the balance liquor

     contaminated with poison. Her further case is that PW1 who

     is a political leader took this opportunity to wreak vengeance

     against her and thereby cooked up the present false case.

       9. No defence evidence was adduced. The court below found the

accused guilty of the offences under Sections 302 and 201 IPC,

convicted her thereunder and sentenced her.

       10. The first point to be decided in this appeal is regarding the

Crl. Appeal No.305/09
                                    -:7:-

cause of death of the deceased. As pointed out by the learned counsel

for the appellant, the death can be, either suicidal, accidental or

homicidal. In this particular case, even after ascertaining the cause of

death, we have to proceed to decide further on the basis of the

remaining evidence as to whether the death is suicidal, accidental or

homicidal, especially when the appellant claims that the death of

Unnikrishna Pillai is accidental as he consumed without the knowledge

of the impending danger that the liquor is contaminated with poison.

Her further claim is that deceased Radhakrishna Pillai has committed

suicide by consuming liquor mixed with poison.

       11. In fact, there is no challenge at all regarding the actual cause

of death of both the deceased in this case. PW2, who is the daughter of

deceased Radhakrishna Pillai and the accused, has given evidence that

deceased Radhakrishna Pillai after consuming a portion of the liquor,

came out of his room with MO1 glass containing little bit of liquor and

complained that it had a bitter taste of soap and enquired the accused

whether soap was used to wash MO1. The deceased quickly answered

Crl. Appeal No.305/09
                                  -:8:-

that she had washed it with water. Soon after that, deceased

Radhakrishna Pillai became restless and he exhibited utter discomforts.

       12. PW6, who is the wife of the deceased Unnikrishna Pillai has

given evidence that Unnikrishna Pillai had gone out of their house by

the evening to the place where children were playing and at that time

she could see Radhakrishna Pillai also there. After a little bit of

conversation between Radhakrishna Pillai and Unnikrishna Pillai, both

of them went to the house of Radhakrishna Pillai. After some time

Unnikrishna Pillai returned to the house and he became restless. He

also exhibited utter discomforts and uneasiness. The lady who became

worried and frightened cried aloud which invited the attention of the

neighbours and immediately Unnikrishna Pillai was taken to the Kumar

Hospital, Kollam, from where he was referred to the District Hospital,

Kollam for better management.

       13. When deceased Radhakrishna Pillai exhibited uneasiness and

discomforts, the first advise given by the accused to him was to go to

bed and lie down. Complying with the direction, he went inside the

Crl. Appeal No.305/09
                                  -:9:-

room. When he was utterly struggling and wriggling, PW2 wanted the

accused to take him to the hospital. The sudden reaction of the accused

was that it would be better to bring a Homeo doctor. Disregarding the

words of the accused, PW2 went to the house of PW8 and invited him

to help her. PW2 telephoned from there for a car. Then Radhakrishna

Pillai was immediately taken to Upasana Hospital, where his death was

confirmed.

       14.    PW18, who was the Assistant Professor of Forensic

Medicine of the Medical College Hospital, Thiruvananthapuram,

conducted the postmortem examination on the body of Radhakrishna

Pillai as well as Unnikrishna Pillai and prepared Exts.P14 and P16

postmortem certificates respectively. Even in Exts.P14 and P16, his

opinion as to the cause of death was that the "postmortem findings are

consistent with death due to poisoning". He reserved his final opinion

pending the report of chemical examination. On obtaining chemical

examination report, he prepared and furnished Exts.P15 and P17 final

postmortem certificates in respect of deceased Radhakrishna Pillai and

Crl. Appeal No.305/09
                                  -:10:-

deceased Unnikrishna Pillai respectively.     In Ext.P15 as well as

Ext.P17, PW18 has clearly reported that the "death was due to cyanide

poisoning". It has to be noted that there is absolutely no challenge

with regard to his opinion as to the cause of death in the cross-

examination by the learned counsel for the accused. In fact, there is no

reason to have a different opinion as to the cause of death of either

Radhakrishna Pillai or Unnikrishna Pillai, than the one expressed by

PW18.

       15. PW4 is the Joint Chemical Examiner and Chief Chemical

Examiner of Forensic Science Laboratory, Thiruvananthapuram. She

received the viscera and contents collected and sent by PW18 from the

postmortem examination of Radhakrishna Pillai and Unnikrishna Pillai.

Exts.P4 and P5 are the reports of such chemical examination. PW4 has

clearly proved Exts.P4 and P5. As per Ext.P4, item No.1 is the part of

stomach and intestine, item No.2 is the part of liver and kidney, item

No.3 is blood, item No.4 is urine and item No.6 is the spleen of

deceased     Radhakrishna Pillai.   In Clause II in Ext.P4 regarding

Crl. Appeal No.305/09
                                   -:11:-

volatile poisons, it has been reported that item Nos.1 to 4 and 6 noted

above were found to be positive for the test of ethyl alcohol. Likewise,

the Guiacum resin test and Prussian blue test for cyanide poison also

was positive in respect of the aforesaid item Nos.1 to 4 and 6.

Therefore, it has clearly come out that the death of Radhakrishna Pillai

was due to cyanide poisoning.

       16. Similarly, as per Ext.P5, item No.1 is the part of stomach and

intestine, item No.2 is the part of liver and kidney, item No.3 is blood,

item No.4 is urine and item No.6 is the spleen of deceased Unnikrishna

Pillai. In Clause II in Ext.P5 regarding volatile poisons, it has been

reported that item Nos.1 to 4 and 6 noted above were found to be

positive for the test of ethyl alcohol. Likewise, the Guiacum resin test

and Prussian blue for cyanide poison also was positive in respect of the

aforesaid item Nos.1 to 4 and 6. Therefore, it has clearly come out that

the death of Unnikrishna Pillai also was due to cyanide poisoning.

       17.    It has been reported by PW4 in Exts.P4 and P5 that

hydrocyanic acid together with ethyl alcohol was detected in item

Crl. Appeal No.305/09
                                   -:12:-

Nos.1, 2, 3, 4 and 6. Hydrocyanic acid and its alkali metal salts are

highly poisonous. PW4 has reported in Ext.P4 that item No.3 blood of

Radhakrishna Pillai contained 2.16 milligrams of hydrocyanic acid and

57.5 milligrams of ethyl alcohol per 100 millilitres of blood. Similarly,

PW4 has reported in Ext.P5 that item No.3 blood of Unnikrishna Pillai

contained 1.62 milligrams of hydrocyanic acid and 46 milligrams of

ethyl alcohol per 100 millilitres of blood.

       18. From all the evidence discussed above, there cannot be any

quarrel with the findings entered by the court below regarding the

cause of death of both the deceased. It clearly stands proved that both

Radhakrishna Pillai and Unnikrishna Pillai suffered an unnatural death

due to cynide poisoning. Whether it was suicidal, accidental or

homicidal, can be decided only after the appreciation of other

evidences adduced by the prosecution.

       19. The case entirely rests upon circumstantial evidence. It is

trite law that in a case based on circumstantial evidence, the court has

to analyze and scrutinize the following points, viz.:-

Crl. Appeal No.305/09
                                  -:13:-

       (1)   Whether    the   prosecution   has   made   out    definite

circumstances clearly and cogently?

       (2)   Whether such circumstances form a complete chain without

any missing link?

       (3)   Whether such circumstances cumulatively point towards the

guilt of the accused and none else?

       (4)   Is there is any hypothesis other than the guilt of the

accused?

       (5)   Whether the inculpatory circumstances are incompatible

with the innocence of the accused?

In the light of these legal propositions, we are examining the evidence

adduced by the prosecution in this case.

       20. PW1 is the elder brother of deceased Radhakrishna Pillai.

According to him, Radhakrishna Pillai used to purchase his usual

quota of liquor every month. On 12.2.2005 also Radhakrishna Pillai

brought his military quota of liquor. The deceased used to supply a

portion of such liquor to his friends and relatives. On that day, by

about noon, Radhakrishna Pillai consumed a portion of the liquor from

MO2 bottle and went out for inviting his friends. In the afternoon, the

Crl. Appeal No.305/09
                                  -:14:-

deceased went out to purchase garland for decorating the pictures at his

house as the next day being the first day of Malayalam month. In the

evening, Unnikrishna Pillai came over there and requested his usual

quota separately in another bottle. Radhakrishna Pillai refused to part

with liquor in a separate bottle whereas agreed to give some liquor for

consumption. Radhakrishna Pillai supplied a glass of liquor to

Unnikrishna Pillai, who consumed it by standing outside the compound

wall and then returned to his house. Again Radhakrishna Pillai came

back and started consuming the balance liquor in the bottle. When

Radhakrishna Pillai exhibited uneasiness and discomforts, PW2 who

was there in the house came out and cried aloud and thereafter took

Radhakrishna Pillai to the Upasana hospital. The accused was also

present at the hospital. According to PW1, the accused told him that

Radhakrishna Pillai has suffered a heart attack. The nurse at the

hospital told them that the death being one due to heart attack, the body

of Radhakrishna Pillai could be taken back to his house. By that time,

the news regarding the death of Unnikrishna Pillai at the District

Crl. Appeal No.305/09
                                  -:15:-

Hospital, Kollam also came out. PW1 was enquired from the office of

the Mathrubhoomi News Daily as to whether anybody was taken to the

Upasana Hospital due to the consumption of spurious liquor.

Immediately the body of Radhakrishna Pillai was removed to the

mortuary, and postmortem examination was conducted at the Medical

College on the next day.

       21. PW1 has made some revelations regarding the on-going

quarrel and disputes between the accused and deceased Radhakrishna

Pillai. According to him, Radhakrishna Pillai had 16 cents of land in

his name.      Accused caused the sale of the said property and by

investing some more funds of Radhakrishna Pillai, he purchased a

property at Myannad, in the name of the accused.          Subsequently,

without informing him and seeking his permission, the accused

disposed of the said property and misappropriated the money. When

Radhakrishna Pillai retired from military service, he constructed the

present residential building in the 5 cents of property at the roadside.

The accused disliked the construction of the said building at the said

Crl. Appeal No.305/09
                                 -:16:-

property. Apart from the above, the accused had disposed of her gold

ornaments and also spent the money obtained as dowry, without the

knowledge and consent of Radhakrishna Pillai. There occurred

frequent quarrels between Radhakrishna Pillai and the accused in

respect of the aforesaid transactions. According to PW1, both the

deceased died on account of consumption of liquor contaminated with

poison. On the same night, at 10 p.m. he reached Sakthikulangara

Police Station and furnished Ext.P1 First Information Statement before

PW22, Sub Inspector of Police. He has also revealed that the accused

had obtained the five cents of property and building in her name from

Radhakrishna Pillai.

       22. PW2 is none other than the daughter of the accused and

deceased Radhakrishna Pillai. During the course of investigation, she

has voluntarily turned up to furnish Ext.P3 statement under Section

164 of Cr.P.C. before PW3, Judicial First Class Magistrate,

Karunagappally. On a perusal of Ext.P3 which clearly stands proved

by PW2 and PW3, it seems that PW2 has a specific case that the entire

Crl. Appeal No.305/09
                                  -:17:-

financial management at the house was being done by the accused and

not by deceased Radhakrishna Pillai. According to her, the deceased

used to entrust all the monies with the accused. The accused had spent

the entire amounts procured through the sale of the family property of

Radhakrishna Pillai, and also his entire retirement benefits from the

military. There occurred frequent quarrels at the house between

Radhakrishna Pillai and the accused, by raising the question as to how

such amounts were spent. PW2 stated in Ext.P3 statement that the

accused had spent the entire amounts received by her by way of dowry

and also the gold ornaments and properties. Raising this point also

there occurred frequent quarrels between deceased Radhakrishna Pillai

and the accused. According to her, in spite of all the above, deceased

Radhakrishna Pillai had utmost love and affection towards the accused.

In Ext.P3, PW2 has described the incident occurred at the house on the

fateful day just as a caricature. In the evening when the deceased

Radhakrishna Pillai had returned to the house after he had gone out for

the purchase of garland, PW2 was watching the T.V. programmes.

Crl. Appeal No.305/09
                                   -:18:-

While so, her father came out of his room by holding MO1 glass

tumbler and enquired the accused whether it was washed by using

soap, by complaining that it had a taste of soap. The accused suddenly

replied that she had used only water for washing the same.

       23.   According to PW2, her father usually used to consume

liquor by sitting alone inside the room and he did never use to consume

liquor in the vicinity of the other members of the family. After making

such an enquiry, deceased Radhakrishna Pillai went to the washbasin

and emptied MO1 glass tumbler by pouring the balance liquor into it

and thereafter, he washed his mouth well by using water. Immediately,

the accused told him to go and lie down. He went inside and lay down

as directed. All of a sudden, the accused went inside and took the

bottle containing liquor from the room, went to the kitchen sink, and

poured the remaining liquor in the bottle into it. On seeing such an

unusual act of the accused, PW2 asked her as to why she had poured

out the liquor from the bottle. The accused replied that, if not, the same

would again be consumed by Radhakrishna Pillai. Thereafter, PW2

Crl. Appeal No.305/09
                                   -:19:-

returned to her father. She could see him in a miserable state with utter

discomforts. The accused also came over there. When PW2 told the

accused that immediately the deceased should be taken to the hospital,

the accused casually replied that they could call a Homoeo Doctor.

PW2 insisted that her father should be taken immediately to the

hospital. Thereafter, PW2 called one Sasi from the neighbourhood.

Other neighbours also came over there and the deceased was taken to

the hospital. On a close scrutiny of the versions of PW2 in Ext.P3, it

seems that all the versions are quite natural.

       24. Now, coming to the evidence of PW2 before the court below

also, it seems that her versions regarding the incident are consistent

with the versions in Ext.P3. It seems that even without purchasing

garland, deceased Radhakrishna Pillai returned to the house, after

making arrangements with somebody to bring the garland. It has

clearly come out from the evidence of PW2 and the contents of Ext.P3

that, apart from the accused, PW2 and the deceased, no others were

present at the house. Even though the accused has attempted to make

Crl. Appeal No.305/09
                                   -:20:-

out a case that Unnikrishna Pillai had visited the room of the accused,

the evidence of PW2 clearly brushes aside such an argument raised by

the accused. It has also come out from the evidence of PW2 that,

whenever the accused or PW2 was present at the house, the deceased

was not in the habit of permitting any outsider to have a company with

him for consuming liquor. Only in their absence, the deceased used to

entertain others for consumption of liquor in company with him.

       25. It has to be noted that the accused was working as a Lab

Technician and it cannot be imagined that she did not know the

seriousness of the discomforts and uneasiness shown by deceased

Radhakrishna Pillai. She had made a casual approach to the request of

PW2 even when PW2 clamoured that her father had to be taken to the

hospital. The accused very casually replied that they could procure a

Homoeo Doctor.

       26. In cross examination, PW2 has deposed that, after the death

of her father, she has detached all her connections with the accused, and

she has never resumed contacts with the accused. According to PW2,

Crl. Appeal No.305/09
                                   -:21:-

after the incident, she has never talked to the accused. The evidence of

PW2, as a whole, clearly reveals that PW2 had, in fact, realised the foul

play staged by the accused in the matter and that was why the accused

had immediately taken away the bottle and poured out its contents. It is

pertinent to note that PW2 had questioned the said act of the accused.

The explanation offered by the accused to PW2 to such query that it

was for disabling her husband to consume more liquor that she had

poured it into the sink, is devoid of any bonafides. Even the accused

was aware that other nine bottles of liquor were there in the room of the

deceased. If as a matter of fact, she wanted to restrain the deceased

from consuming more liquor, she would have thrown away those nine

bottles of liquor also. The words of PW2 in her deposition in cross

examination that 'after the incident, I have never cared to talk to my

mother' clearly reveals that PW2 could then and there realise the foul

play on the part of her mother, in causing the death of her father.

       27. PW6 is the wife of deceased Unnikrishna Pillai. According

to her, when she returned to her house after her job, her husband

Crl. Appeal No.305/09
                                  -:22:-

Unnikrishna Pillai was engaged in watering the plants at their courtyard

by about 5-5.30 p.m. on 12.02.2005. Their children were playing ball in

the neighbouring property. Unnikrishna Pillai went over there and she

also accompanied him. They could see deceased Radhakrishna Pillai

standing there. Unnikrishna Pillai and Radhakrishna Pillai talked

something together. According to her, Radhakrishna Pillai used to get

liquor quota from Military canteen every month, from which he used to

give a portion to her husband also. After talking together, Radhakrishna

Pillai and Unnikrishna Pillai were seen walking to the house of

Radhakrishna Pillai. She returned to her house. After some time, her

husband returned to the house. She teased him by asking whether he

had gone to the house of Radhakrishna Pillai to consume his quota.

Her husband went inside the house and drank water. He switched on

the T.V. and sat there. After some time, when she looked, she could see

him beating his hands and legs violently by complaining of chest pain.

She shook him and called him. He could not respond. She became

frightened and she cried aloud. On hearing it, their children and

Crl. Appeal No.305/09
                                   -:23:-

neighbours rushed to the spot. He was taken to the hospital in an

autorickshaw. According to her, he developed discomforts only after

his coming back from the house of Radhakrishna Pillai. At first, he was

taken to Kumar Hospital, Kollam, from where he was referred to the

District Hospital, Kollam for better management. The Doctor declared

his death. Then, she came to know that Radhakrishna Pillai also died.

At that time, she developed a suspicion that it might have occurred

from the liquor consumed by them. According to her, there were

intermittent quarrels between the accused and deceased Radhakrishna

Pillai regarding the financial transactions of the accused.

       28. PW7 is one of the neighbours of both the deceased. On

12.02.2005 by 6.30 p.m, while she was going to her daughter's house

situated nearby, she saw both the deceased talking together by standing

near the compound wall of deceased Radhakrishna Pillai. She heard

Unnikrishna Pillai requesting Radhakrishna Pillai to give his quota in a

separate bottle. Then, she heard Radhakrishna Pillai replying that there

was nothing to be given in a bottle, whereas, something could be given

Crl. Appeal No.305/09
                                  -:24:-

for drinking. While she was returning from her daughter's house

immediately, she could see Radhakrishna Pillai giving a glass tumbler

containing red liquid to Unnikrishna Pillai standing near the compound

wall. By standing outside the compound wall, Unnikrishna Pillai

obtained the liquid and consumed it. Just after she reached her house,

she heard that Radhakrishna Pillai was taken to the hospital. Just after

that, she heard that Unnikrishna Pillai was also taken to the hospital.

By 10 p.m. she heard about the death of both the deceased. After two

days, she learned that their death was due to poisoning through liquor

and that it was the accused who had done it. According to her, police

came and asked the accused to tell the truth. Then, the accused revealed

that, while she was coming from the clinic, she purchased poison and

mixed it with liquor.

       29. PW8 is one of the neighbours of both the deceased, whose

house is situated just opposite to the house of deceased Radhakrishna

Pillai, at the opposite side of the road. According to him, on

12.02.2005, by about 6.30 p.m., PW2 came running to his house by

Crl. Appeal No.305/09
                                  -:25:-

crying aloud stating that her father was not well and had to be taken to

the hospital and she wanted to telephone. He pointed out the telephone

to her and immediately went to the house of deceased Radhakrishna

Pillai. He went the room of Radhakrishna Pillai and asked him as to

what had happened. Even though he shook him, he did not tell

anything. He saw saliva and froth oozing out of his mouth. PW8 called

the accused and asked as to what had happened. She replied that he

had consumed liquor earlier and then again came and consumed liquor.

PW8 asked her to bring the balance liquor, if any, in the bottle from

which he had consumed liquor. Then, she told him that she had poured

it away immediately and had washed the bottle and the glass tumbler.

On hearing it, he became angry. He scolded her and came out of the

room. By about that time, the neighbours had gathered there. At that

time, he heard that Unnikrishna Pillai was also taken to the hospital. A

car was brought, and Radhakrishna Pillai was taken to the hospital.

After one or two hours, he heard that both of them died. According to

PW8, he heard the accused telling the police after 2-3 days that when

Crl. Appeal No.305/09
                                   -:26:-

she came back, she had purchased cyanide from the shop and mixed it

in the liquor.

       30. PW14 is one of the neighbours of deceased Unnikrishna

Pillai. He had also accompanied Unnikrishna Pillai when he was taken

to the hospital. According to him, Unnikrishna Pillai had died even

prior to his reaching the District Hospital. According to him, the

accused had mixed poison in the liquor consumed by Radhakrishna

Pillai and Unnikrishna Pillai and thereby they died. He has not stated

as to how he came to know about it. At the same time, his said versions

are not seen challenged in cross examination.

       31. PW9 is another neighbour of both the deceased. According

to him, the incident had occurred in the evening on 12.02.2005. On all

months, Radhakrishna Pillai used to get Military quota of liquor and he

used to supply a portion of it to some of his friends, free of cost. In the

evening, by about 6.30 p.m., he saw deceased Radhakrishna Pillai was

being taken to the hospital in a car. After some time, he heard that

Unnikrishna Pillai was also taken to the hospital due to heart attack.

Crl. Appeal No.305/09
                                  -:27:-

After some time, he heard that both of them died. Then, he felt a

suspicion that there might have been poison in the liquor consumed by

them. According to him, on 11.02.2005 there had occurred a quarrel in

between the accused and deceased Radhakrishna Pillai.

       32. PW11 was the Doctor attached to the casualty of Upasana

Hospital, Kollam on 12.02.2005. He identified the accused and deposed

that the accused had brought a patient by name Radhakrishna Pillai

dead, to the hospital by about 7.30 p.m. on that day. He gave requisition

for postmortem examination. According to him, the accused brought

the deceased to the hospital by stating that the deceased was suffering

from chest pain.

       33. PW12 is a Doctor, who is conducting 'Senan's Poly Clinic

and Day Care'. From 17.03.2004 onwards, the accused was working

there as Lab Assistant. According to him, on 12.02.2005, the clinic as

well as the lab was closed at 1 p.m. as usual. On Saturdays and

Sundays, there was only a half day duty for the accused.

       34. PW19 is the son of PW1. According to him, Radhakrishna

Crl. Appeal No.305/09
                                  -:28:-

Pillai and Unnikrishna Pillai died on consumption of liquor

contaminated with cyanide. He is residing just in the neighbourhood of

Radhakrishna Pillai. According to him, he had affixed his signature in

Ext.P18 mahazar prepared by the police, by which the police had seized

Ext.P19, which is written as a suicide note in a single sheet of paper by

the accused. He identified Ext.P19 letter as one in the handwriting of

the accused. Further, he has stated that the accused and deceased

Radhakrishna Pillai were not in good terms. According to him, Ext.P19

was seized through Ext.P18 about four days after the incident. Ext.P19

is addressed to the elder sister of the accused. A translation of its

contents is as follows:-

           "I am going. Manichi should bring up my daughter,

           and should maintain my son also. You should not

           give my children to anybody and you should

           maintain them as your own children. I am fed up

           with my life. I am doing this voluntarily according

           to my own will. No others are responsible for this.

           You should tell Vinod and Vimal that they should

           treat my daughter as their own younger sister,

Crl. Appeal No.305/09
                                   -:29:-

           Usha".

Even though it has not been stated in Ext.P19 that the accused was not

in good terms with her husband, from the statement that she was fed up

with her life clearly reveals that her relationship with her husband was

totally strained.

       35. PW21 is the son of deceased Radhakrishna Pillai. According

to him, during the period of incident, he was residing at Mayyanad

along with his mother's elder sister, Padmavathi Amma. The accused

used to call Padmavathi Amma as 'Manichi'. On coming to know about

the incident, he reached Upasana Hospital, Kollam, from where he

came to know that his father was discharged from there. Immediately,

he reached his house at Sakthikulangara. He saw many persons

gathered there. It was then only he came to know that his father had

died. He came to know about the death of Unnikrishna Pillai also. He

came to know that both of them died on account of consumption of

liquor, which was contaminated with poison. According to him, his

father used to consume liquor occasionally. Whenever deceased

Crl. Appeal No.305/09
                                  -:30:-

Radhakrishna Pillai consumes liquor, he used to talk loudly and to raise

his voice and used to quarrel with the accused. Occasionally on such

occasions, deceased Radhakrishna Pillai used to assault the accused.

The accused had told him that there occurred a quarrel between her and

deceased Radhakrishan Pillai. He has deposed that, after the accused

was questioned by the police, he had never visited his mother or talked

to her. Further, according to him, when he came to know that it was his

mother, who had mixed poison in the liquor consumed by

Radhakrishna Pillai and Unnikrishna Pillai, at first, he could not

believe it.

       36.   Learned counsel for the appellant has argued that Ext.P30

(a) cannot be treated as a statement admissible under Section 27 of the

Indian Evidence Act. Ext.P30 is the remand report dated 17.2.2005

prepared and filed by CW27. CW27 could not be examined before the

court below as he was on deputation abroad. The circumstances in

which CW27 could not be examined before the court below has been

detailed in paragraph 33 of the impugned judgment, which is

Crl. Appeal No.305/09
                                    -:31:-

reproduced as follows:

           "CW27 was not available to examine and he had

           done a major part of the investigation. Even though

           initially learned Public Prosecutor submitted that it

           is not necessary to examine CW27 as PW23 can

           speak about the step taken by CW27. However, after

           hearing PW21 the learned Public Prosecutor

           changed his stand and filed a petition requesting

           that summons be issued to CW27 who according to

           the records had carried out the major part of the

           investigation. This Court then came to know that

           CW27 was gone abroad on deputation and it is

           unlikely that he will return soon. Since the learned

           Public Prosecutor insisted that he should be

           examined, the learned Public Prosecutor was asked

           to furnish the correct address of CW27 and the trial

           was adjourned. The adjournment by this court of

           the trial of the case was challenged before the

           Hon'ble High Court of Kerala and after adverting to

           all the facts and circumstances of the case this court

           was directed to examine the available investigating

           officer who had laid the charge in case the presence

Crl. Appeal No.305/09
                                  -:32:-

           of CW27 could not be procured, provided the

           learned Public Prosecutor agreed for the same.

           Based on the decision of the Hon'ble High Court,

           learned Public Prosecutor dispensed with the

           examination of CW27 and represented that since

           PW23 could speak about the steps taken by CW27, it

           is sufficient that PW23 be examined.  Accordingly

           PW23 speak about the various steps taken by

           CW27."

       37.   Therefore, it is evident that the court below has taken

necessary steps for procuring the presence of CW27. Of course, those

steps would have taken some more time.         In order to cash that

opportunity, the appellant had approached this Court against the

adjournments granted by the court below for the examination of

CW27. This Court directed the court below to examine the available

Investigating Officer who had laid the charge in case the presence of

CW27 could not be procured. It was based on the said direction of this

Court, the learned Public Prosecutor had dispensed with the

examination of CW27 before the court below and examined PW23 to

Crl. Appeal No.305/09
                                    -:33:-

speak about the steps taken by CW27 also. Therefore, there is no

meaning in contending that the prosecution has failed to examine

CW27 and that Ext.P30(a) could not be pressed into service.

       38.   Relating to Section 27 of the Indian EvidenceAct, in Anter

Singh v. State of Rajastan (AIR 2004 SC 2865) it was held as

follows:-

           "The various requirements of the section can be

           summed up as follows: (1) The fact of which

           evidence is sought to be given must be relevant to

           the issue. It must be borne in mind that the provision

           has nothing to do with question of relevancy. The

           relevancy of the fact discovered must be established

           according to the prescription relating to relevancy of

           other evidence connecting it with the crime in order

           to make the fact discovered admissible. (2) The fact

           must have been discovered. (3) The discovery must

           have been in consequence of some information

           received from the accused and not by accused's own

           act. (4) The person giving the information must be

           accused of any offence. (5) He must be in the

           custody of a police officer. (6) The discovery of a

Crl. Appeal No.305/09
                                   -:34:-

           fact in consequence of information received from an

           accused in custody must be deposed to. (7)

           Thereupon only that portion of the information

           which relates distinctly or strictly to the fact

           discovered can be proved. The rest is inadmissible."

       39.   In the decision reported in Swamy Shraddananda @

Murali Manohar Mistra v. State of Kerala (AIR 2007 SC 2531) it has

been held in paragraph 44 as follows:-

       "In his statements before the investigating officer, he made

       a confession; but what was admissible in evidence is only

       that part which would come within the purview of Section

       27 of the Evidence Act and not the rest."

       40.   In Ext.P30 remand report, CW27 has incorporated the

information furnished by the accused, when she was interrogated. The

said information referred within inverted commas in page No.5 of

Ext.P30 was marked as Ext.P30(a) which reads as follows:

           "I have purchased the potassium cyanide from a

           shop situated at the S.N. College Junction, Kollam.

           I will show the shop and the person who gave

           potassium cyanide, if I am taken there."

Crl. Appeal No.305/09
                                  -:35:-

       41.   The version of CW27 in Ext.P30 is that, he reached the

shop named 'Veekey Scientific Traders' situated at S.N. College

Junction, Kollam as led by the accused. Accused pointed out the shop

as well as PW5 who was present at the shop.According to CW27, PW5

identified the accused as well as the accused identified PW5; and PW5

had admitted that on 11.2.2005, the accused had purchased potassium

cyanide from his hop. It is true that the accused had led CW27 to that

shop on 16.2.2005. Thereafter, he took the accused to her house, from

where some more seizures were effected. Subsequently, by about 7

p.m. he along with the accused reached Chavara Police Station and the

custody of the accused was entrusted with W.P.C. 5688. On 17.2.2005,

he reached Veekey Scientific Traders again, from where he seized

Ext.P8 bill book through Ext.P20 mahazar. Ext.P8(a) is the counter foil

of Bill No.4238 by which 100 gms. of potassium cyanide was sold to

Usha Radhakrishnan, Kannimel on 11.2.2005, for Rs.400/-. The said

Usha Radhakrishnan is none other than the appellant.

       42.   It has clearly come out that PW5 had acted in a most

Crl. Appeal No.305/09
                                 -:36:-

negligent manner in giving that much quantity of potassium cyanide.

PW5 had attempted to make out a case that it was deceased

Radhakrishna Pillai who purchased the said quantity of potassium

cyanide by representing that it was for his daughter for her laboratory

works at the college. At the same time, it is a fact that it was the

accused who led CW27 to the shop of PW5 after furnishing Ext.P30(a)

information. The learned counsel for the appellant has argued that

Ext.P30(a) is not admissible in evidence under Section 27 of the Indian

Evidence Act as it has not been incorporated in Ext.P20 mahazar. The

said argument is devoid of merits as no mahazar has been prepared by

CW27 in respect of the pointing out of the shop of PW5 as well as

PW5, by the appellant. Ext.P30 remand report clearly shows that the

appellant had led CW27 to the shop of PW5 and she had pointed out

PW5 who was present at the shop. She identified PW5, as well as PW5

identified the appellant. The discovery in respect of Ext.P30(a)

information is the shop of PW5 as well as PW5 who supplied

potassium cyanide to the appellant, and not the discovery of Ext.P8 or

Crl. Appeal No.305/09
                                  -:37:-

P8(a). It is true that on the next day CW27 reached the shop of PW5

and seized Ext.P8 through Ext.P20 mahazar. The said visit of CW27 to

the shop of PW5 for effecting the seizure of Ext.P8 bill book which

contains Ext.P8(a) counter foil on the next day, of course is a

continuation of the discovery of the shop and PW5 consequent to

Ext.P30(a) information. Matters being so, one cannot expect

incorporation of Ext.P30(a) information in Ext.P20 mahazar. At the

same time, all the course of events were correctly entered in Ext.P30

remand report. Hence, there is no meaning in contending that Ext.P30

(a) cannot be pressed into service as it has not been incorporated in

Ext.P20 mahazar. We are of the considered view that Ext.P30(a) is

clearly admissible in evidence under Section 27 of the Indian Evidence

Act. Over and above it, it is admissible in evidence under Section 8 of

the Indian EvidenceAct also.

       43.   PW5 has also admitted the seizure of Ext.P8 which

contains Ext.P8(a). PW20 has admitted his signature in Ext.P20

mahazar through which Ext.P8 was seized. PW5 has turned hostile to

Crl. Appeal No.305/09
                                  -:38:-

the prosecution. When questions that could be put in cross-examination

were put to him by the prosecution, he stated that he had admitted to

the police that he had sold potassium cyanide to Usha Radhakrishna

Pillai, when the police reached his shop with the accused and asked

him whether he had sold potassium cyanide. He has admitted that he

had committed a gross illegality in the matter. It seems that later his

licence was cancelled. It clearly stands proved that it was the appellant

who purchased 100 gms. of potassium cyanide on 11.2.2005 from the

shop of PW5.

       44.   PW4 has proved Ext.P6 certificate of chemical analysis in

respect of 10 items including MO1 glass tumbler, MO2 bottle

containing 1 ml of colourless liquid, and the other nine bottles

containing liquor. Item No.4 in Ext.P6 is MO2 bottle described as

'washed bottle' containing 1 ml of colourless liquid. Ext.P6 clearly

shows that item No.4 was found positive to the test for cyanide, i.e.,

both Guiacum resin test and Prussian blue test. Likewise, item No.6 in

Ext.P6 is MO1 glass tumbler which also was found positive to the test

Crl. Appeal No.305/09
                                 -:39:-

for cyanide, both Guiacum resin test and Prussian blue test. The

chemical analysis of the contents of other nine bottles proved that the

same contained ethyl alcohol, and it did not contain any cyanide

poison. Therefore, it has come out that the remnants of the liquid in

MO2 showed the presence of cyanide poison in it. MO1 glass tumbler

also is proved to have been used for taking liquid containing cyanide

poison.

       45.     From the discussions made above, the following

circumstances have been clearly and cogently established in this case.

       (1)   The accused had sold away the properties acquired in her

name by using the funds obtained from the sale of the properties of

Radhakrishna Pillai and also other amounts raised by him, without his

knowledge and consent.

       (2)   The appellant had sold away her gold ornaments and also

money obtained as dowry from her house, that too without the

knowledge and consent of deceased Radhakrishna Pillai.

       (3)   There   were   frequent   quarrels   between     deceased

Crl. Appeal No.305/09
                                  -:40:-

Radhakrishna Pillai and the accused, as deceased Radhakrishna Pillai

used to question the aforesaid acts of the accused.

       (4) Ext.P19, which was written as a suicide note by the accused

clearly reveals that the accused was fed up with her life along with

deceased Radhakrishna Pillai, and their relationship was totally

strained.

       (5)   On 11.2.2005, the accused purchased 100 gms. of

potassium cyanide from the shop of PW5.

       (6)   The accused has not explained regarding the purpose for

which she purchased the said quantity of potassium cyanide or the

manner in which she has made use of it.

       (7)   On the date of incident, duty of the accused as lab

technician at the laboratory and clinic was over by 1.30 pm.

       (8)   On 12.2.2005, from 2.30 p.m. onwards the accused was

present at the house.

       (9)   The accused was aware of the fact that deceased

Radhakrishna Pillai used to purchase his monthly quota of liquor from

Crl. Appeal No.305/09
                                   -:41:-

the military canteen on all second Saturdays, and that 12.2.2005 was a

second Saturday.

       (10) After 2.30 p.m. PW2 went out for taking tuition classes and

returned prior to 6 p.m.

       (11) On the date of incident, in the afternoon, deceased

Radhakrishna Pillai consumed a portion of the liquor from MO2 bottle

and thereafter he went out.

       (12) When PW2 returned prior to 6 p.m., the accused and

deceased Radhakrishna Pillai were present at the house.

       (13) Then deceased Radhakrishna Pillai went out for purchasing

garland, as the next day was the first day of the Malayalam month.

       (14) Immediately the accused also went out to give insulin

injunction to a patient in the neighbourhood and then the accused came

back.

       (15) After some time, deceased Radhakrishna Pillai came back.

Deceased Unnikrishna Pillai who is the elder brother's son of deceased

Radhakrishna Pillai also came over there and requested for his usual

Crl. Appeal No.305/09
                                 -:42:-

quota of liquor separately in a bottle. Then deceased Radhakrishna

Pillai told him that there was no liquor to be provided in a separate

bottle, whereas he would give some quantity of liquor to Unnikrishna

Pillai for consumption, and thereafter deceased Radhakrishna Pillai

gave a glass of liquor to Unnikrishna Pillai, which Unnikrishna Pillai

consumed and went back to his house.

       (16) Decesed Radhakrishna Pillai went back to his room and

started consuming liquor.

       (17) After some time, deceased Radhakrishna Pillai came out of

the room with the liquor contained in MO1 glass tumbler and asked the

accused whether the glass tumbler was washed by using soap, by

complaining that it tasted soap.

       (18) The accused immediately answered that it was washed with

water.

       (19) Then deceased Radhakrishna Pillai poured the liquor

contained in MO1 to the washbasin and washed his mouth well with

water.

Crl. Appeal No.305/09
                                  -:43:-

       (20) At that time deceased Radhakrishna Pillai complained that

there was burning sensation in his chest.

       (21) Immediately, the accused directed deceased Radhakrishna

Pillai to go and lie down and deceased Radhakrishna Pillai went to his

room.

       (22) Immediately the accused went inside the room of the

deceased and took out MO2 bottle containing the balance liquor and

poured the contents from it into the kitchen sink.

       (23) On seeing it, PW2 became suspicious in the said unusual

conduct of the accused and questioned her as to why she was doing it.

       (24) The accused gave a false explanation that it was for

avoiding further consumption of liquor by deceased Radhakrishna

Pillai.

       (25) Nine more full bottles of liquor were available inside the

room even at that time, which fact was known to the accused also.

       (26) When PW2 saw deceased Radhakrishna Pillai wriggling

and struggling with utter discomforts, she asked the accused to take the

Crl. Appeal No.305/09
                                  -:44:-

deceased immediately to the hospital and on such request and demand,

there was only a cold response from the accused.

       (27) Instead of taking the deceased immediately to the hospital,

the accused suggested PW2 that they could procure the presence of a

homeo doctor.

       (28) It was PW2 who took all the arrangements to take

deceased Radhakrishna Pillai to the hospital.

       (29) On reaching the hospital with deceased Radhakrishna

Pillai, the accused told the doctor at the Upasana Hospital that the

deceased was suffering from chest pain.

       (30) By that time when deceased Radhakrishna Pillai exhibited

discomforts and utter irritation, deceased Unnikrishna Pillai also

exhibited utter discomforts and he was also wriggling and struggling.

       (31) Immediately the wife of Unnikrishna Pillai took him to the

Kumar hospital, Kollam from where he was referred to the District

Hospital, Kollam.

       (32) Both     deceased  Radhakrishna    Pillai  and    deceased

Crl. Appeal No.305/09
                                 -:45:-

Unnikrishna Pillai died of cyanide poisoning.

       (33) Both the deceased had consumed the liquor from MO2

bottle by using MO1 glass tumbler.

       (34) Chemical analysis revealed that, the remnants in MO2

bottle and MO1 glass tumbler were contaminated with cyanide poison.

       (35) The accused furnished Ext.P30(a) information which is

admissible in evidence under Section 27 of the Indian EvidenceAct.

       (36) The accused led CW27 to the shop of PW5 and pointed out

the shop, as well as PW5 who supplied her 100 gms. of potassium

cyanide on 11.2.2005.

       (37) CW27 seized MO8 bill book which contained MO8(a)

counter foil showing the sale of 100 gms. of potassium cyanide to the

accused on 11.2.2005 for an amount of Rs.400/-.

       (38) When examined under Section 313 Cr.P.C. the accused has

given a false version that deceased Radhakrishna Pillai was in utter

disappointment, and he did not use to consume food around three to

four days prior to his death.

Crl. Appeal No.305/09
                                   -:46:-

       (39)    Ext.P14 postmortem certificate of deceased Radhakrishna

Pillai showed his stomach full of rice and other food materials.

       (40) When examined under Section 313 Cr.P.C, the accused has

given a false version that deceased Radhakrishna Pillai has committed

suicide, and unknowingly deceased Unnikrishna Pillai also consumed

the balance liquor contaminated with potassium cyanide and thereby he

also died.

       (41) After the incident, PW2 has severed all her connections

with the accused who is her mother and has not even cared to talk to

her afterwards.

       (42) Similar is the case with PW21 who is the son of the

accused and he also has severed all his connections with his mother and

has not even cared to talk to her afterwards.

       46. In Manivel & Ors. V State of Tamil Nadu (2008 CRI. L.J.

4362) it was held,

           "The circumstances from which the inference as to

           the guilt of the accused is drawn have to be proved

           beyond reasonable doubt and have to be shown to

Crl. Appeal No.305/09
                                    -:47:-

           be closely connected with the principal fact sought

           to be inferred from those circumstances."

       47.   In Kusuma Ankama Rao V State of A.P (2008 CRI. L.J.

3502) it was held as follows: -

           "The conditions precedent in the words of this

           Court, before conviction could be based on

           circumstantial evidence, must be fully established.

           They are:

           (1)the circumstances from which the conclusion of

           guilt is to be drawn should be fully established. The

           circumstances concerned `must'or `should'and not

           `may be'established;

           (2)the facts so established should be consistent only

           with the hypothesis of the guilt of the accused, that

           is to say, they should not be explainable on any

           other hypothesis except that the accused is guilty;

           (3)The circumstances should be of conclusive nature

           and tendency;

           (4)They should exclude every other hypothesis

           except the one to be proved; and

           (5)There must be a chain of evidence so complete as

           not to leave any reasonable ground for the

Crl. Appeal No.305/09
                                   -:48:-

           conclusion consistent with the innocence of the

           accused an must show that in all human probability

           the act must have been done by the accused."

These very same principles were enunciated in Paragraph 153 of the

decision in Sharad Birdhichand Sarda V state of Maharashtra

reported in 1984 SCC (Cri) 487 = AIR 1984 SC1622.

       48.   As held in Ashok Kumar Chatterjee v. State of Madhya

Pradesh (AIR 1989 SC 1890), when a case rests upon circumstantial

evidence, such evidence must satisfy the following tests:-

           1) the circumstances from which an inference of

           guilt is sought to be drawn, must be cogently and

           firmly established;

           2) those circumstances should be of a definite

           tendency unerringly pointing towards guilt of the

           accused;

           3) the circumstances, taken cumulatively, should

           form a chain so complete that there is no escape

           from the conclusion that within all         human

           probability the crime was committed by the accused

           and none else, and;

Crl. Appeal No.305/09
                                   -:49:-

           4) the circumstantial evidence in order to sustain

           conviction must be complete and incapable of

           explanation on any other hypothesis than that of the

           guilt of the accused and such evidence should not

           only be consistent with the guilt of the accused but

           should be inconsistent with his innocence.

In Vithal Tukaram Mure and others v. State of Maharashtra[(2002) 7

Supreme Court Cases 20] it was held as follows: -

           "The essential ingredients to prove the guilt of an

           accused by circumstantial evidence are:-

           a) the circumstances from which the conclusion is

           drawn should be fully proved;

           b)    the circumstances    should be conclusive in

           nature;

           c) all the facts so established should be consistent

           only with the hypothesis of guilt and inconsistent

           with innocence;

           d) the circumstances should to a moral certainty,

           exclude the possibility of guilt of any person other

           than the accused."

       49.   In Shivaji Sahabrao Bobade and another V State of

Crl. Appeal No.305/09
                                    -:50:-

Maharashtra, reported in 1973 SCC (Cri) 1033, it was held,

           "Certainly it is a primary principle that the accused

           must be and not merely may be guilty before a court

           can convict and the mental distance between `may

           be' and `must be' is long and divides vague

           conjectures from sure conclusions." It was also held

           therein that "It is a platitude to say that witnesses

           have to be weighed and counted since quality

           matters more than quantity in human affairs."

       50.   It is trite law that in a case based on circumstantial

evidence, in order to prove the guilt of the accused, such incriminating

facts and circumstances should be incompatible with the innocence of

the accused. It is also the cardinal principle that suspicion however

strong it be, will not take the place of proof.

       51.   The learned counsel for the appellant has argued that in the

case of an accusation of murder by administering poison, the

prosecution is expected to prove certain materials as prescribed by the

Apex Court. Our attention has been invited to the decisions reported in

Mohan v. State of Uttar Pradesh (A.I.R. 1960 SC 659), Sharad

Crl. Appeal No.305/09
                                   -:51:-

Birdhichand Sarda V state of Maharashtra (1984 SCC (Cri) 487) and

Ramgopal V. State of Maharashtra (AIR 1972 SC 656). In Mohan's

case (AIR 1960 SC 659) (supra), it was held as follows:-

           "In the case of a murder by administering poison,

           the prosecution has, along with the motive, also to

           establish that the deceased died of a particular

           poison said to have been administered, that the

           accused was in possession of that poison and that

           he had the opportunity to administer the same to the

           deceased".

       52.   In Sharad Birdhichand Sarda V state of Maharashtra

1984 SCC (Cri) 487, it was held ;

           "In case of death by poisoning the Court must

           carefully scan the evidence and determine the four

           important circumstances which alone can justify a

           conviction:

           (1) there is a clear motive for the accused to

           administer poison to the deceased,

           (2) that the deceased died of poison said to have

           been administered,

Crl. Appeal No.305/09
                                   -:52:-

           (3) that the accused had the poison in his

           possession,

           (4) that he had an opportunity to administer the

           poison to the deceased".

In Ramgopal's case (AIR 1972 SC 656) (supra), it was held as

follows:-

           "In a case of death by poisoning it is only when the

           motive is there and it is proved, that the deceased

           died of the poison in question, that the accused had

           that poison in his possession and that he had an

           opportunity to administer the poison to the deceased

           that the Court can infer that the accused

           administered the poison to the deceased resulting in

           his death".

       53.   Learned counsel for the appellant has strenuously argued

that the prosecution has failed to prove any motive on the part of the

accused in this case. The prosecution has adduced evidence to prove

that the accused had sold away the properties acquired in her name by

using the funds obtained from the sale of the properties of deceased

Radhakrishna Pillai and also other amounts raised by him, without the

Crl. Appeal No.305/09
                                  -:53:-

knowledge and consent of Radhakrishna Pillai. Further, the appellant

had sold away her gold ornaments and spent the money obtained as

dowry from her house, that too without the knowledge and consent of

deceased Radhakrishna Pillai. There were frequent quarrels between

deceased Radhakrishna Pillai and the accused at the house, as deceased

Radhakrishna Pillai used to question the aforesaid acts of the accused.

The aforesaid circumstances proved by the prosecution clearly lend

support to the existence of sufficient motive. Motive is something

which always locks up in the mind of the accused and some times, it is

difficult to unlock. When facts are clear, the absence of proof of motive

does not break the link in the chain of circumstances connecting the

accused with the crime.

       54.   In Mulakh Raj and others v. Satish Kumar and others

[ (1992) (3) SCC 43 at page 44] it was held,

           "In cases of circumstantial evidence motive bears

           important significance. Motive always locks up in

           the mind of the accused and some time it is difficult

           to unlock. People do not act wholly without motive.

Crl. Appeal No.305/09
                                    -:54:-

           The failure to discover the motive of an offence does

           not signify its non existence. The failure to prove

           motive is not fatal as a matter of law. Proof of

           motive is never indispensable for conviction. When

           facts are clear it is immaterial that no motive has

           been proved. Therefore, absence of proof of motive

           does not break the link in the chain of circumstances

           connecting the accused with the crime, nor militates

           against the prosecution case."

       55.   It stands clearly proved that the contentions resorted to by

the accused were false and such false contentions were deliberately

resorted to by the accused. It has to be noted that when examined

under Section 313 Cr.P.C, the accused has resorted to a false plea of

total denial, and has also resorted to a false contention that deceased

Radhakrishna Pillai has committed suicide. To all the questions relating

to the aforementioned proved circumstances in this case, the accused

has deliberately chosen to give the answer as, "It is not correct" or

"false".

Crl. Appeal No.305/09
                                    -:55:-

       56.    In Tanviben Pankajkumar Divetia v. State of Gujarat

(1997 SCC(Cri) 1030), it was held in paragraph 44 as follows:-

           "The Court has drawn adverse inference against the

           accused for making false statement as recorded

           under Section 313 of the Code of Criminal

           Procedure. In view of our findings, it cannot be held

           that the accused made false statements. Even if it is

           assumed that the accused had made false statements

           when examined under Section 313 of the Code of

           Criminal Procedure, the law is well settled that the

           falsity of the defence cannot take the place of proof

           of facts which the prosecution has to establish in

           order to succeed. A false plea may be considered as

           an additional circumstance if other circumstances

           proved and established point out the guilt of the

           accused.

         57.     In Shankaralal v. Gyarasilal Dixit v. State of

    Maharashtra (AIR 1981 SC 765), it was held in Paragraph 30

    as follows:-

           "The last circumstance relied on by the prosecution

           is that the total ignorance of the incident pleaded by

Crl. Appeal No.305/09
                                     -:56:-

           the appellant is false, and would itself furnish a link

           in the chain of causation. We have come to the

           conclusion that the appellant was not present in the

           house at the time when Sunita's dead body was

           discovered. That makes it impossible to hold that the

           appellant's plea is false. Besides, falsity of defence

           cannot take the place of proof of facts which the

           prosecution has to establish in order to succeed. A

           false plea can at best be considered as an additional

           circumstance,     if   other    circumstances    point

           unfailingly to the guilt of the accused".

       58.   In Geetha v. State of Karnataka (AIR 2000 SC 3475), it

was held in paragraph No.8 as follows:-

           "When all these incriminating circumstances were

           put to the appellant in her examination u/S. 313

           Cr.P.C she merely stated that they were false and

           failed   to  give   any     other   explanation.   The

           prosecution evidence which has been found reliable

           proves that the answers given by the appellant in

           her 313 statement were really false. The appellant

           did not explain how the dead body and articles

           belonging to the deceased were found from her

Crl. Appeal No.305/09
                                   -:57:-

           house. She denied that they were found from her

           house. This being the case of circumstantial

           evidence, this false denial assumes importance as it

           would supply a missing link in the chain of

           circumstances."

       59.   This being a case based on circumstantial evidence, the

aforesaid false denials and false explanations resorted to by the accused

assume much importance as the same would supply missing links, if

any, in the chain of circumstances. Apart from the motive as aforesaid,

it is proved, that the deceased died of the poison in question, that the

accused had that poison in her possession, and that she had an

opportunity to administer the poison to the deceased.

       60.   All the aforesaid circumstances are clearly and cogently

established by the prosecution. All the said circumstances form a

complete chain. It stands proved that it was the accused who

administered potassium cyanide poison to deceased Radhakrishna

Pillai. Deceased Radhakrishna Pillai without the least knowledge of

the impending danger, as he was unaware of the mixing of poison with

Crl. Appeal No.305/09
                                   -:58:-

the liquor, gave a portion of that poison contaminated liquor to

deceased Unnikrishna Pillai. Both of them consumed the liquor and

within no time met with their death. All the inculpatory circumstances

are incompatible with the innocence of the accused. There is no other

hypothesis than the guilt of the accused. All the proved circumstances

clearly point towards the guilt of the accused, and none else.

       61.   Apart from all these, the false explanations by the accused

also created additional links in the chain of circumstances. The

cumulative effect of all such circumstances clearly prove that in all

human probability, it was the accused and none else, who administered

poison by name potassium cyanide to deceased Radhakrishna Pillai by

mixing it in the liquor in MO2 bottle.

       62.   From all the above, it clearly stands proved that the accused

has administered poison to deceased Radhakrishna Pillai intentionally

in order to cause his death. As stated earlier, deceased Radhakrishna

Pillai who was unaware of the presence of poison in the liquor, gave a

portion of it to his brother's son late Unnikrishna Pillai, and both of

Crl. Appeal No.305/09
                                 -:59:-

them consumed the liquor and met with their death. The acts committed

by the accused which have resulted in the death of Radhakrishna Pillai

and Unnikrishna Pillai, clearly constitute the offence of murder as

defined in Section 300 of the IPC, which is punishable under Section

302 of the IPC.

       63.   Immediately    on   becoming      aware    that   deceased

Radhakrishna Pillai consumed the liquor in which she had mixed

potassium cyanide, as Radhakrishna Pillai showed utter discomforts

and uneasiness, the accused took out MO2 bottle containing poison

contaminated liquor and poured out its contents to the kitchen sink.

The act of the accused in draining out the balance liquor from the bottle

in a hurry and hasty manner, clearly indicate the intention of the

accused to destroy the evidence in order to screen her from legal

punishment, which squarely falls within the ambit of S.201 IPC.

       64.   The discussions made above clearly reveal that the

prosecution has proved the offences under Sections 302 and 201 IPC

against the appellant. The court below has carefully considered all the

Crl. Appeal No.305/09
                                   -:60:-

aspects and evidence in their correct perspective and has arrived at the

correct conclusion. From the above, we have no hesitation to conclude

that all the reasoning, observations and conclusions made by the court

below are correct. There is absolutely nothing to interfere with the

finding of guilt and conviction entered by the court below.

       65.   Similarly, regarding the sentence also we are satisfied that

the sentences imposed by the court below are proportionate to the

gravity of the offences proved against the appellant, and therefore, the

sentences imposed by the court below are also not liable to be

interfered with. This appeal is devoid of merits, and is only to be

dismissed, and we do so.

       In the result, this appeal is dismissed and the conviction and

sentence passed by the court below are confirmed.




                               K.T. SANKARAN, JUDGE




                             B. KEMALPASHA, JUDGE
ul/-



