
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                PRESENT:

               THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE ANTONY DOMINIC
                                   &
                 THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE P.D.RAJAN

         WEDNESDAY, THE 5TH DAY OF JUNE 2013/15TH JYAISHTA 1935

                     OP (FC).No. 1524 of 2013 (R)
                     -----------------------------

PETITIONER(S):RESPONDENT:
--------------------------

       PRAKASH, AGED 44 YEARS
       S/O.P.C.NAIR @ CHINDAN NAIR MASTER,
        VRINDAVAN HOUSE
       CHANDERA, PO MANIYATH, TRIKARIPUR VILLAGE
       KASARAGOD DISTRICT.

       BY ADV. SRI.M.V.AMARESAN

RESPONDENT(S): PETITIONER:
----------------------------

       PADMAKUMARI, AGED 34 YEARS,
       D/O.PADMANABHA KURUP,
        PUTHOOR HOUSE, KEEZHAL,
       MEETHALE VILLAGE, VADAKARA TALUK,
        KOZHIKODE DISTRICT.


        THIS OP (FAMILY COURT)   HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD   ON 05-06-
2013, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY DELIVERED THE FOLLOWING:

OP (FC).No. 1524 of 2013 (R)
-----------------------------

                               APPENDIX

PETITIONER(S)' EXHIBITS:-
----------------------------

EXHIBIT P1  TRUE COPY OF THE OP NO.112/12 FILED BY THE PETITIONER
            BEFORE FAMILY COURT, VADAKARA
EXHIBIT P2  TRUE COPY OF THE AFFIDAVIT DATED 6/6/2012 FILED BY THE
            RESPONDENT
EXHIBIT P3  TRUE COPY OF THE PETITION IN IA NO.735/12 IN OP 112/12
            FILED BY THE PETITIONER BEFORE FAMILY COURT , VADAKARA
EXHIBIT P3(a) TRUE COPY OF AFFIDAVIT FILED IN SUPPORT OF EXHIBIT P3
EXHIBIT P4  TRUE COPY OF ORDER DATED 11/2/2013 IN IA NO.735/12 IN OP
            112/12 FILED BY THE PETITIONER BEFORE FAMILY COURT,
            VADAKARA.


             ANTONY DOMINIC & P. D. RAJAN, JJ.
        =.=~=~=~=~=~=~=~=~=~=~=~=~=~=~=~=~=~=~=~=.=
                O.P.(FC) No. 1524 of 2013
        =.=~=~=~=~=~=~=~=~=~=~=~=~=~=~=~=~=~=~=~=.=
             Dated this the 6th day of June, 2013

                           JUDGMENT

ANTONY DOMINIC, J.

       In this Original Petition, the petitioner challenges

Ext.P4 order passed by the          Family Court, Vadakara

rejecting I.A. No.735/2012 filed by him disputing the

territorial jurisdiction of the Family Court to entertain O. P.

No.112/2012 filed by the respondent.

       2. Petitioner and respondent are husband and wife

and in their wedlock the respondent had given birth to two

minor children. After their marriage in 2005, the couple was

residing in Mumbai, where the petitioner is employed in a

multi national company. For various reasons, which are

alleged in Ext.P1 petition, the details of which are irrelevant

for the purpose of this case, in August, 2011 the respondent

left the petitioner's house and since then, is residing in her

paternal house which is situated within the jurisdiction of

the Family Court, Vadakara.

OP(FC) 1524/2013                2

       3. While so, the respondent filed O.P. No.112/2012

seeking custody of the minor children. It was in that O.P.,

the petitioner who was respondent therein, filed I.A.

No.735/2012 contending that he is an ordinary resident of

Mumbai and that the children were born and brought up

and are admitted in a school in Mumbai. Therefore, the

Family Court, Vadakara has no territorial jurisdiction to

entertain the petition. I.A. was considered and by Ext.P4

order the Family Court overruled the objection and held

that since one of the parents of the minors was a resident of

Vadakara, it had territorial jurisdiction to entertain the

petition. It is this order which is challenged in this petition.

       4. Though notice issued in this petition was served on

the respondent, she has not chosen to appear or contest the

matter.

       5. We heard the learned counsel for the petitioner

and considered the contentions raised. Section 9(1) of the

Guardians and Wards Act provides that if the application is

with respect to the guardianship of the minor, it shall be

OP(FC) 1524/2013                 3

made to the court having jurisdiction in the place where the

minor ordinarily resides. The "term ordinarily resides" is not

defined in the Act. However, this expression has received

judicial interpretation on different occasion. The latest

judgment of this court on this aspect is the one rendered by

the Division Bench of this Court in Pramod Vidyandhar

Panicker V. Bindu Pramod Panicker, 2013 (1) KLT 332

where in paras 8, 9, 10 and 13 this Court held as follows:-

            "8. We have given our anxious consideration
       into the rival submissions    addressed at the Bar.
       Section 9 of the Guardians and Wards Act confers
       jurisdiction to deal with matters pertaining to
       guardianship and custody of the children only on
       that court within whose territorial limits the child
       ordinarily resides.  The Hon'ble Supreme Court in
       Jeewanti v.Kishan Chandra (cited supra) dealing
       with the concept of 'residence' within the meaning of
       Section 19 clause (ii) of the Hindu Marriage Act,
       held that in order to give jurisdiction on the ground
       of 'residence' something more than a temporary stay
       is required. It must be more or less of a permanent
       character, and of such a nature that the court in
       which the respondent is sued, is his natural forum.
       Stating that the word 'reside' is by no means free
       from all ambiguity and is capable of a variety of
       meanings according to the circumstances to which it
       is made applicable and the context in which it is
       found, their Lordships go on to say that in the
       ordinary sense 'residence' is more or less of a
       permanent character.        The expression 'resides'
       means to make an abode for a considerable time: to

OP(FC) 1524/2013                  4

       dwell permanently or for a length of time: to have a
       settled abode for a time.     Justice K.T.Thomas as a
       Judge of this court in Chandy v. Mary Neena (cited
       supra) relied on the above decision of the Supreme
       Court and in the context of Section 9 of the
       Guardians and Wards Act held that the expression
       "ordinarily resides" connotes a regularly settled
       home and not a place of study where the children
       are obliged to dwell by force of circumstances or
       compulsion of parents employment. A Division
       Bench of this court in     Sarada Nayar v. Vayankara
       Amma        & others (cited supra)      held that the
       expression in Section 9 of the Guardians & Wards
       Act "where the minor ordinarily resides" appears to
       have been deliberately used to exclude places to
       which the minor may be removed, at or about the
       time of the filing of the application for the
       enforcement of the guardianship and custody of the
       minor.    It is laid down that the phrase"ordinarily
       resides" indicates ordinary residence even at the
       time of the presentation of      presentation of the
       application.     It is pointed out that emphasis is
       undoubtedly on the minor's ordinary place of
       residence.

            9. The judgment of the Supreme Court in Nil
       Ratan Kundu And Another v. Abhijit Kundu (cited
       supra) does not expressly deal with the concept of
       'ordinary residence" under Section 9 of the
       Guardians and Wards Act . It has only reiterated
       the well known proposition that in parens patriae
       jurisdiction the issue has to be resolved with a
       human touch and that due weightage must be given
       to the child's ordinary comfort, contentment, health,
       education, intellectual development and favourable
       surroundings as well as physical comfort and moral
       values.    It is also laid down that the court should
       ascertain the child's preference. The Full Bench of
       this court in Poonen v.Rathi Varghese (cited supra)
       dealing with Section (3) clause (3) of the Divorce Act
       1869,    explained 'Reside or last resided together'

OP(FC) 1524/2013                   5

       and held inter alia that the         main factors to be
       considered in deciding the question where the
       parties last resided together are (1) to constitute
       'residence', it is not necessary that the party or
       parties must have his or their own house:(2) to
       constitute   'residence'    the    stay  need    not   be
       permanent it can also be temporary, so long as there
       is animus manendi or an intention to stay for an
       indefinite period; (3)"residence" will not take in a
       casual stay in, or a flying visit to a particular place; a
       mere casual residence in a place for a temporary
       purpose, with no indention or remaining, is not
       covered by the word 'reside'; (4) "residence"
       connotes, something more than stay: it implies some
       intention to remain at a place, and not merely to pay
       it a casual visit: (5) by staying in a particular place,
       in order to constitute "residence" the intention must
       be to make it his or their abode or residence, either
       permanent or temporary (6) the expression "last
       resided" also means the place where the person had
       his   last  abode     or  residence,     permanent     or
       temporary; (7) where there has been residence
       together of a more permanent character, and a
       casual or brief residence together it is only the
       former that can be considered as              "residence
       together" for determining the jurisdiction" (8) the
       question as to whether a particular person has
       chosen to make a particular place His abode, is to be
       gathered from the particular circumstances of each
       case.    Strong reliance was placed by the learned
       counsel for the respondent in a Division Bench of
       this court in      Vasu v.Muralidharan (cited supra)
       which takes the view that ordinary residence of
       child can be the ordinary residence of either of the
       parents where both the parents are living apart- if
       one of the spouse is not living, necessarily the only
       other place having jurisdiction is the place where
       the spouse living resides.        It will be seen on a
       reading of this judgment that their Lordships were
       following an earlier judgment of this court            in
       Prabhu v. Rajani (2007 (2) KLT SN 38).

OP(FC) 1524/2013                 6

            10. We have gone through the full text of the
       judgment in Prabhu's case. The observation made
       by the Bench in the beginning of paragraph 5 of the
       judgment that "the ordinary residence of the child
       can be the ordinary residence of either of the
       parents as well in a situation where both parents are
       living apart" is made by the Bench as a general
       observation without referring to any precedent.
       Interestingly in that case the Bench did not accept
       the case of the mother that as she and the child are
       residing at Tripunithura and as the child is admitted
       to a school in Tripunithura, the Ernakulam court has
       jurisdiction. This Court remitted the matter back to
       the Family Court to decide the question whether the
       mother who came to reside in Tripunithura recently
       can be said to be ordinarily residing at Tripunithura.
       The facts in Vasu v.Muralidharan (cited supra) will
       now have to be noticed. That was a case where the
       dispute was between the maternal grand parents of
       the child with whom the child was residing at the
       time of presentation of the application and father of
       the child whose ordinary place of residence was at
       Palakkad. The respondent in that case, the mother
       of the child had committed suicide and the police
       had in fact charge sheeted the father of the child for
       dowry death.      Nevertheless the trial court found
       that place of ordinary residence of the child is not
       the place where the child was residing at the time
       of presentation of the application - place of
       residence of its maternal grant parents, but the
       same is Palakkad, the residence of the father of the
       child.    The Division Bench referred to Prabhu v.
       Rajani (cited supra) and held that that the principles
       laid down in Prabu v. Rajani's case will apply also to
       cases where both the parents are living and living
       apart.    In that view of the matter, the     Division
       Bench held that it is the court at Palakkad, the place
       of residence of the father, which         is   having
       jurisdiction under Section 9 of the Guardians and
       Wards Act.           The Division Bench however,
       elsewhere in the judgment        has stated that the

OP(FC) 1524/2013                  7

       question as to the ordinary residence of a minor is
       always a question to be decided on the facts and
       particulars of each case.      According to us, the
       judgment in Vasu v. Maralidharan can apply only to
       the cases where the fact situation is identical to that
       case.

            13. When the concept of ordinary residence is
       analysed in the context of the various decisions
       referred to herein before especially the judgment of
       the Supreme Court in Jeewanti v. Kishan Chandra
       (cited supra), Sarada Nayar v. Vayankara Amma &
       others (cited supra) and also the judgment of the
       Full Bench Poonen v. Rathi Varghese (cited supra) it
       will be seen that the first respondent, mother, is not
       ordinarily residing at Palarivattom within the limits
       of the Ernakulam Family Court. On the contrary, it
       can be very easily found that the child is ordinarily
       residing at Mumbai along with its father. There is
       yet another aspect which cannot go unnoticed. The
       principle that a minor child can be considered to be
       ordinarily residing at the place of ordinary residence
       of either of its parents is based on the theory that
       the parents will always provide shelter to the child.
       In this particular case, where the first respondent
       mother is lying in a semi coma condition in the
       hospital at Palarivattom, the above principle cannot
       have any application."

       6. In so far as this case is concerned, the respondent

claimed to be an ordinary resident of Vadakara and that

therefore, according to her, the Family Court, Vadakara has

jurisdiction to entertain the petition for the guardianship of

the minor. As against this, the petitioner contended before

the Family Court that he is a resident at Mumbai where the

OP(FC) 1524/2013              8

children are also residing and are studying. Since, in a case

of this type where both parents are living separately, the

place of residence of the parents can be taken as the place

of residence of minors. However the issue that requires to

be decided by the Family Court is whether the respondent

can be said to be an ordinary resident of Vadakara merely

for the reason that she left her matrimonial home at

Mumbai and is now residing in her paternal house. This

question, which should have been decided in the light of the

legal principles mentioned in the Pramod Vidyandhar

Panicker's case (Supra), was neither decided nor brought

to the attention of the Family Court and instead it has

chosen to decide the issue on the assumption that the

ordinary residence of the respondent is within Vadakara. As

indicated by this Court in this judgment referred to above

"mere temporary residence"      will not make it "ordinary

residence" and something more that including an intention

to remain at the place is necessary. Therefore, we are of the

view that the issue has not been properly decided by the

OP(FC) 1524/2013               9

Family Court.

       7. For these reasons we set aside Ext.P4 order passed

by the Family Court, Vadakara and direct the Family Court

to consider the matter and pass fresh orders in accordance

with law as early as possible.

       8. We are told that the children are studying in

Mumbai and that if the children are made to come to

Vadakara repeatedly that will affect their study and welfare.

Therefore, we direct that till orders are passed as directed

above, further orders shall not be issued requiring the

petitioner to bring the children to Vadakara.

       The O.P. is disposed of as above.


                               ANTONY DOMINIC, JUDGE.


                               P. D. RAJAN, JUDGE.

nkm.



