
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                             PRESENT:

                THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE P.BHAVADASAN

    MONDAY, THE 18TH DAY OF NOVEMBER 2013/27TH KARTHIKA, 1935

                                    CRL.A.No. 1409 of 2005
                                       ---------------------------
    SC NO.92/2005 OF ADDL.SESSIONS COURT (ADHOC) I, KOTTAYAM
                                            DATED 29-07-2005
                                                      .....

    APPELLANT(S)/ACCUSED::
    ------------------------------------------

   1. LALITHAMMA, W/O. PURUSHAN,
      MANGATTU HOUSE, MAILADUMKUNNU, KUZHIMATTOM KARA,
      PANACHIKKADU.

   2. HEMALATHA @ LATHA, W/O. SANTHOSH,
      PUTHUPARAMBIL HOUSE, MAILADUMKUNNU BHAGOM,
     KUZHIMATTOM, PANACHIKADU.

      BY ADV. SRI.V.K.SUNIL

    RESPONDENT(S)/COMPLAINANT::
    ------------------------------------------------------

      STATE OF KERALA, REPRESENTED BY THE
      PUBLIC PROSECUTOR, HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM.

      BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SMT. P.MAYA


      THIS CRIMINAL APPEAL HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD
      ON 18-11-2013, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY DELIVERED
      THE FOLLOWING:

Kss


                      P.BHAVADASAN, J.
               ---------------------------------------
                 Crl. Appeal No.1409 OF 2005
               ---------------------------------------
         Dated this the 18th day of November, 2013.


                         J U D G M E N T


      Two ladies namely, mother and daughter, were prosecuted

for the offences punishable under Sections 498A and 306 read

with Section 34 of Indian Penal Code on the allegation that they

instigated the daughter-in-law of the 1st accused to commit

suicide. Both of them were found guilty of the above offences.

They   were    convicted   and    sentenced    to  suffer rigorous

imprisonment for a period of three years each and to pay a fine

of Rs.10,000/- each under Section 498A IPC and also to suffer

rigorous imprisonment for three years each and to pay a fine of

Rs.15,000/- each under Section 306 IPC.          Default clause of

rigorous imprisonment for six months each was also added. The

sentences were directed to run concurrently. If the fine amount

was realised, it was directed that a sum of Rs.40,000/- from that

Crl. Appeal No.1409/2005           2


of the fine amount shall be paid to PW9 who is the father of the

victim and who is currently looking after the child left behind by

the deceased.

       2. The victim namely, Bindu, got married to the son of the

1st accused on 23.01.2000.       At the time of marriage, he was

promised 20 sovereigns of gold ornaments and Rs.1 lakh. Out of

which, 20 sovereigns of gold was given and Rs.60,000/- was paid

and the balance was outstanding. PW1, the father-in-law of the

victim, was staying with his eldest daughter-in-law where the

victim was also residing at the relevant time. It is seen from the

records that the accused were residing elsewhere. The records

also indicate that the husband of the deceased, Rajeshkumar

alias Biju and the husband of the 2nd accused were in military

service. Soon after the marriage, the victim was taken to Bhopal

where her husband was employed. He was then transferred to

Sreenagar. He had to make arrangements and therefore, he left

his wife with PW1. On 28.11.2002, Bindu was found hanging in

the house where PW1 was residing along with his eldest son and

daughter-in-law.          He furnished Ext.P1  First   Information

Crl. Appeal No.1409/2005            3


Statement which was recorded by PW12 who registered a crime

for unnatural death as per Ext.P1(a) First Information Report.

       3.       PW13 took over the investigation.    Inquest was

conducted over the body of the deceased and the body was sent

for autopsy.           PW3 conducted autopsy and furnished Ext.P2

certificate. PW13 prepared the scene mahazar and recorded the

statement of witnesses. Subsequent investigation was conducted

by PWs 14 and 15. PW15, after completing the investigation,

laid charge before court.

       4.      The court before which final report was laid took

cognizance of the offences and on finding that the offences are

exclusively triable by a Court of Sessions, committed the case to

Sessions Court, Kottayam under Section 209 Cr.P.C.            The

committal court made over the case to Additional Sessions Court

(Adhoc)-I, Kottayam for trial and disposal. The latter court, on

receipt of records and on appearance of the accused, framed

charges for the offences punishable under Sections 498A and 306

read with Section 34 IPC. To the charge, the accused pleaded

not guilty and claimed to be tried. The prosecution therefore had

Crl. Appeal No.1409/2005          4


PWs 1 to 15 examined and Exts.P1 to P9 marked. From the

defence side, Ext.D1 was marked.          M.O.1 series were also

marked.

       5. After the close of the prosecution evidence, the accused

were questioned under Section 313 Cr.P.C. They denied all the

incriminating circumstances brought out in evidence against them

and maintained that they were innocent. The 1st accused stated

that while her daughter namely, the 2nd accused conceived on the

second occasion, she had been with her. She stated that soon

after his son married the victim, they went to Bhopal and when

Biju, her son was transferred, he brought the deceased home.

Whenever Biju and his wife used to come home, they did not stay

for long with them. They were leading a happy life. She denied

that she had ever demanded gold and money on behalf of her

son from anybody.         She would say that there was no reason

which she could conceive of, which had led the victim to commit

suicide.

       6. The 2nd accused inter alia stated that she got married on

18.01.1999 and she was residing in the matrimonial house.

Crl. Appeal No.1409/2005          5


When her eldest child was three years old, they took up separate

residence and when she conceived on the 2nd time, her mother

resided with them. She too says about the happy life which the

deceased had with her brother and his transfer etc. She would

also say that she was not in the habit of visiting the house of her

brother quite often mainly because she was pregnant at the

relevant time.

       7. On finding that the accused could not be acquitted under

Section 232 Cr.P.C, they were asked to enter on their defence.

But they chose to adduce no evidence.

       8.     The court below, probably, greatly impressed by the

evidence of PWs 2, 6, 8, 9 and certain self drawn presumptions,

came to the conclusion that the offences have been made out.

The conviction and sentence followed.

       9.      Learned counsel appearing for the appellants very

severely assailed the findings of the court below. It is pointed

out that there is absolutely no evidence as to the conduct of 1st

and 2nd accused which had driven the victim to commit suicide.

True, PWs 2, 6, 8 and 9 do say that there was mental torture.

Crl. Appeal No.1409/2005            6


But, there is no mention of any specific act or occasion on which

she was ill-treated or the manner in which she was ill-treated.

There is no case for the prosecution, according to the learned

counsel, that 1st and 2nd accused had ever asked for the balance

amount due as dowry from the deceased or from anybody of the

house of the victim. It is also pointed out that the prosecution

has no case that the 1st accused or the 2nd accused had ever

misappropriated any portion of the gold ornaments given to the

victim at the time of marriage. Merely stating that the victim

was mentally tortured, does not take the prosecution anywhere.

It can be very easily said that the person is mentally tortured.

But, in the case of present nature, it becomes necessary on the

part of the prosecution to establish in what manner the torture

has meted out. Of course, a vague assertion is made by PWs 2

and 6 that the 1st and the 2nd accused used to come to the house

where the victim was residing and also used to pick up quarrels

with her.         This, according to the learned counsel, was the

information which PWs 2 and 6 had and they have no case that

they had ever actually witnessed the quarrels between accused

Crl. Appeal No.1409/2005              7


persons and the victim.

       10. Referring to the evidence of PW8, learned counsel for

the appellants pointed out that he is more loyal than the king and

he would even attribute ill-treatment to Raji, the wife of the

eldest son of PW1 with whom PW1 was residing at the relevant

time. This is a case which PW2 or PW6 or PW9 did not have. It

was an exclusive statement made by PW8 in his over enthusiasm

to somehow fasten liability on the accused. It is pointed out that

PW8 even goes to the extent of saying that he and PW9 at the

behest of the victim had gone to the house of the victim and

mediated, had pacified and had assured them that the balance

amount will be paid as soon as possible. Drawing attention to

the evidence of PW9, learned counsel pointed out that he has no

such case.         It is interesting to note, according to the learned

counsel, that even as per the prosecution case and as deposed to

by PWs 2 and 6, it was at the behest of PWs 2 and 6 that the

marriage was conducted . If that be so, according to the learned

counsel, the demand for the balance amount would have been

made either to PW2 or PW6. The prosecution has no such case.

Crl. Appeal No.1409/2005         8


In short, learned counsel pointed out that there is nothing to

show that the accused had either misappropriated any portion of

the gold ornaments given to the victim, they had utilised any

portion of the money given to the victim, they had ever made

any demand for more dowry or they had ever made demand for

the balance amount.

       11. According to the learned counsel for the appellants, the

findings of the court below are based on conjectures and

surmises. The fact that the accused persons did not take care of

the child after the death of the victim was taken as a ground to

come to the conclusion that they are guilty.       This is too far

fetched, according to the learned counsel. Learned counsel went

on to point out that not a single conduct is attributed to the

accused persons which would spell out the ill-treatment meted

out to the victim. It is therefore contended that the conviction

and sentence cannot stand.

       12. Learned Public Prosecutor, on the other hand,

contended that there is overwhelming evidence regarding the

cruelty meted out by the accused to the victim in the form of

Crl. Appeal No.1409/2005        9


testimony furnished by PWs 2, 6, 8 and 9.            There is no

suggestion to them that they had any oblique motive to falsely

implicate the accused. All of them do say that the victim was

being mentally tortured by the accused persons demanding the

balance amount. There is no other reason as to why the victim

should have taken the extreme step especially when she had a

child. The lower court has chosen to accept the evidence of PWs,

2, 6, 8 and 9 and unless there are compelling materials to take a

different view, merely because they had not specified any acts

which the accused had committed, it may not be appropriate to

discard their evidence.    At any rate, according to the learned

Public Prosecutor, the court below has chosen to accept their

evidence and there is no reason to take a different view.

       13. That the marriage between the victim and the younger

son of the 1st accused took place on 23.01.2000 is not in dispute.

Going by the evidence furnished by PW1, who is none other than

the father-in-law of the victim, dowry promised at the time of

marriage was Rs.1 lakh and 20 sovereigns of gold. He admitted

that at the time of marriage, 20 sovereigns of gold and only

Crl. Appeal No.1409/2005           10


Rs.60,000/- out of Rs.1 lakh promised was given. The balance

was due.         The prosecution allegation is that for the balance

amount due, the weapon used by the accused persons was to

taunt, harass and ill-treat the victim which ultimately drove her

to commit suicide. If one simply goes by the parrotlike versions

given by PWs 2, 6, 8 and 9, it may be so. But, it is significant to

notice that none of them i.e. PWs 2, 6, 8 and 9 refer to any

specific instance or conduct on the part of the accused which

would indicate that they were harassing or torturing the victim.

       14. It must be remembered that the cruelty attributed is

mental cruelty. PW2 is the husband of PW6. PWs 2 and 6 would

boast that they were instrumental in arranging the marriage

between the victim and Biju. PW2 would say that the 1st and 2nd

accused made the life miserable for the victim demanding that

she should bring the balance amount immediately. He claims

that the victim had conveyed the information to him. PW6 also

says the same thing. She would also say that almost everyday,

the 1st and the 2nd accused used to come to the house where the

victim was residing and also used to taunt her. Her evidence

Crl. Appeal No.1409/2005          11


shows that on the date of the incident also, the victim had visited

her house. When it was suggested to PW6 in cross examination

that she and her husband had managed to obtain certain gold

ornaments belonging to the victim and pledged the same to buy

an autorickshaw, that was denied by her.      Further suggestion to

PW6 was that when the gold ornaments were demanded back

and when PWs 2 and 6 found it impossible to redeem the pledge

immediately, the victim might have been driven to commit

suicide. This was also stoutly denied by PW6. PW6 even goes to

the extent of saying that the husband of the victim had no

intention to taker her to his place of employment because he was

cautioned by the 1st accused that unless the balance amount is

paid, she should not be taken along with him. This is a case, it

must be remembered that the father of the victim himself did not

have.

       15. A reading of the evidence of PW6 would indicate that

she is over enthusiastic to throw allegations against the accused

persons.       Further, a reading of the evidence of PWs 2 and 6

would show that except for the statement that the victim was

Crl. Appeal No.1409/2005           12


mentally harassed, they do not make mention of any specific

conduct on the part of the accused persons which caused mental

agony to the victim. There is no case that the victim was being

ill-treated physically or that she was deprived of food or clothes

which would make her life miserable in the matrimonial house.

The evidence of PW6 shows that even after the death of the

victim, Biju was on very cordial terms with his wife's family.

What is significant is that neither PW2 nor PW6 who boast of

having arranged the marriage have a case that at any point of

time, the 1st or the 2nd accused had made a demand for the

balance amount.           Normally, if they were instrumental in

conducting the marriage, the demand would have been made to

them first by the accused persons.

       16. Coming to the evidence of PWs 8 and 9, as already

noticed, they too simply say that the victim was mentally

harassed. However, it must be said to the credit of PW9 that he

admitted that his daughter was leading a happy life with her

husband. PW8 goes to the extent of saying that the victim used

to often complain to him about the conduct of the accused

Crl. Appeal No.1409/2005         13


persons. But, however, it is important to notice that no specific

conduct or specific instance is seen referred to by PW8. PW8

then goes on to say that when the problem became acute, he and

the father of the victim namely, PW9 went over to the

matrimonial house of the victim and assured that the balance of

Rs.35,000/- would be paid within an year. This fact spoken to by

PW8 is conspicuously absent in the testimony of PW9. PW9 has

no case that his daughter had informed about her miserable

plight in the matrimonial house because of the constant and

persistent demands made by the accused persons for the balance

amount and that he had gone along with PW8 for a mediation

talk. As already noticed, there is no case for the prosecution that

at any point of time, the accused persons had demanded any

portion of the amount received as part of dowry or that they had

misappropriated any portion of the gold which belonged to the

victim. It is very easy to allege mental torture but there has to

be evidence for the same.        At least there would be some

incidents which would indicate the conduct of the accused and

which would spell out that they were on enmical terms with the

Crl. Appeal No.1409/2005          14


victim and they were making the life miserable for her. Except

for saying that the accused persons asked the victim for the

balance amount, there is no accusation or evidence to show that

they had either physically ill-treated the victim or had done

anything to her which would make her life miserable in the

matrimonial house. The grounds relied on by the court below like

after the death of the victim, the child was not being looked after

by the accused persons are of no significance.

       17. It is the case of the prosecution that the husband of the

victim was more obedient to his mother and the Bank account

was in the joint name of the husband of the victim and the

mother. May be, it is so. But that is too fragile a ground to

accuse the 1st and the 2nd accused for having meted out mental

agony to the victim.

       18. In order to attract Section 306 IPC, the acts of the

accused must be such that they intended the suicide of the victim

or that they created such a situation that the victim had no

option but to commit suicide. None of the witnesses examined

on behalf of the prosecution say so nor is there any evidence in

Crl. Appeal No.1409/2005        15


that regard. If, as a matter of fact, the 1st accused was greedy

and wanted the balance amount, surely and certainly demand

would have been made to PWs 2, 6 or at least to PW9. As to

what they did to the victim, there is no evidence at all. It is

difficult under these circumstances to believe that the victim was

driven to commit suicide because of the so called mental

harassment spoken to by PWs 2, 6, 8 and 9 without any specific

details or narrations. Vague allegations cannot take the place of

proof.

       19. Under the above circumstances, this Court is unable to

accept the finding of the court below that the prosecution has

succeeded in establishing the offences as against the accused

persons. This Court finds the evidence wanting in large measure

to do so. At best if evidence would create that there might have

been some taunting on the part of the accused persons. But that

is far from saying that they had meted out mental cruelty to such

an extent which had driven the victim to commit suicide.

       For the above reasons, this appeal is allowed.          The

conviction and sentence passed by the court below for the

Crl. Appeal No.1409/2005         16


offences under Sections 498A and 306 read with Section 34 of

Indian Penal Code, as against the accused persons, are set aside.

It is held that they are not guilty of the offences under Sections

498A and 306 IPC. Their bail bonds shall stand cancelled and

they are set at liberty. If they have paid the fine amount, the

same shall be refunded to them.




                                            Sd/-

                                       P.BHAVADASAN
                                            JUDGE


smp




                                            // True Copy //


                                              P.A. to Judge.



