
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                      PRESENT:

                          THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE P.BHAVADASAN

              FRIDAY,THE 8TH DAY OF NOVEMBER 2013/17TH KARTHIKA, 1935

                                           CRL.A.No. 1253 of 2003 ( )
                                                ---------------------------
                                AGAINST THE JUDGMENT IN SC 41/1999
             OF ADDL.DISTRICT AND SESSIONS COURT (ADHOC-I), KOTTAYAM
                                                DATED 19-07-2003
                                                      ---------------

APPELLANT : ACCUSED :
--------------------------------------

            MUHAMMED USEFF,
            S/O. MUHAMMED HANEEFA
            PUTHUPARAMBIL HOUSE,
            ALLAPPARA BHAGOM
            VAZHAPPALLYEAST KARA.

            BY ADVS.SRI.V.V.RAJA
                          SRI.M.T.SURESHKUMAR

RESPONDENT : COMPLAINANT :
--------------------------------------------------

            STATE OF KERALA,
            REPRESENTED BY THE PUBLIC PROSECUTOR
            HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM.

            BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SRI. DHANESH MATHEW MAJOORAN


            THIS CRIMINAL APPEAL HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD ON 29/10/2013,
            THE COURT ON 08-11-2013 DELIVERED THE FOLLOWING:




Mn


                       P. BHAVADASAN, J.
                 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                Crl.Appeal. No. 1253 of 2003
                 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
           Dated this the 8th day of November, 2013.

                            JUDGMENT


          The accused was prosecuted for the offences

punishable under Sections 498A, 304B and 306 of Indian

Penal Code.   He was found guilty on all counts.         He was

therefore convicted for all the offences and sentenced to

undergo rigorous imprisonment for three years for the offence

under Section 498A, rigorous imprisonment for seven years

under Section 304B of I.P.C. and also directed to undergo

rigorous imprisonment for five years for the offence under

Section 306 of I.P.C.     The sentences were directed to run

concurrently.

          2. The victim was got married to the accused about

two years prior to the date of the incident.        To be more

precise, on 2.4.1995. The couple took up residence together

and a child was born to them.          The allegation is that the

accused quite often used to complain about the inadequate

Crl.Appeal.1253/2003.
                                2

gold ornaments and money brought by the victim and used to

persist and insist that she should bring more money and gold

from her relatives. It is stated that after consuming liquor, he

used to physically torture the victim. On the dee date, i.e., on

15.8.1997, it is alleged that after taking considerable quantity

of liquor, the accused came home and picked up quarrel with

him and thrashed her and then he picked up the child and

attempted to walk away from the house.         When the victim

resisted, the accused told her to go and die.       Despite the

resistance offered by the victim,     the accused continued to

insist that he will take away the child and in the process

slapped the victim. Finding that the accused was living the

house along with the child, unable to bear the agony any

more, it is alleged by the prosecution that the victim poured

kerosene over her body and set herself on fire.        She was

initially    taken    to  Taluk    Head     Quarters   Hospital,

Changanassery from where he was             referred to Medical

Crl.Appeal.1253/2003.
                                3

College Hospital, Kottayam      where she was admitted and

treated for her injuries. While undergoing treatment there, at

about 4.30 p.m. on 18.8.1997 she bid farewell to this world.

             3. P.W.1, the brother of the victim, laid Ext.P1 FIS

before the Changanassery Police Station,       P.W.13 recorded

Ext.P1 FIS furnished by P.W.1 and registered crime under

Section 498A of I.P.C. as per Ext.P10 FIR. P.W.15 took over

investigation. He prepared Ext.P3 scene mahazar. Meanwhile

inquest over the body was conducted and Ext.P4 report was

drawn up. The body was sent for autopsy and the Forensic

Surgeon after conducting autopsy has prepared Ext.P9

postmortem certificate. On intimation from the hospital and

on the request of the Investigating Officer, P.W.14 JFCM

concerned went over to the Medical College Hospital and

recorded Ext.P11 dying declaration furnished by the victim.

P.W.15 recorded statements of witnesses and seized the

articles     found    during investigation.     On    19.8.1997

Crl.Appeal.1253/2003.
                                 4

investigation was taken over by P.W.16.           He recorded

statements of witnesses and finding that the offences under

Sections 304B and 306 of I.P.C. were made out and

accordingly       filed Ext.P12  report.     After  completing

investigation, he laid charge before court.

             4.   The court, before which final report was laid,

took cognizance of the offences and finding that the offences

are exclusively triable by a court of sessions, committed the

case to Sessions Court, Kottayam, The said court made over

the case to Additional District and Sessions Court (Adhoc) I,

Kottayam for trial and disposal. The latter court, on receipt of

records, framed charges for the offences punishable under

Sections 498A, 304B and 306 of I.P.C., to which the accused

pleaded not guilty and claimed to be tried. The prosecution

therefore had P.Ws. 1 to 17 examined and had Exts.P1 to P13

marked.       After the close of the prosecution evidence, the

question was questioned under Section 313 Cr.P.C..           He

Crl.Appeal.1253/2003.
                                5

denied all the incriminating circumstances brought out in

evidence against him and maintained that he is innocent. He

pointed out that his wife Ajina hails from a very poor family,

at the time of marriage her parents were no more, the

marriage was conducted through the Juma-ath, and no dowry

was paid at the time of marriage as there was no one to pay

the same. He stated that he had never demanded any dowry.

In the marriage, it is stated that the brother of the victim had

not taken part, and after marriage they were living a very

happy marital life and a female child was born to them. It is

further stated that she had a boil on her left leg which did not

heal even after considerable treatment. According to him, it

was revealed that the said boil as a result of cancer ailment.

That had caused considerable       depression   to Ajina.  Even

though the accused used to pacify her that things would

become better, she did not believe.         He claimed to be

innocent.       Finding that he could not be acquitted under

Crl.Appeal.1253/2003.
                                 6

Section 232 of Cr.P.C., he was asked to enter on his defence.

He examined D.W.1 and had Exts.D1 to D3 marked.

             5. The court below, relying on the oral testimony of

P.Ws.1, 3 and 4 and also the evidence of P.W.14 and in the

light of the recitals in Ext.P11, came to the conclusion that the

offences have been made out. Conviction and sentence as

already mentioned followed.

             6.    Learned counsel appearing for the appellant

assailed the finding of the court below on several grounds. It

was pointed out by him that there is absolute want of evidence

to show that the accused had ill-treated his wife demanding

more dowry and had tortured her. According to the learned

counsel, even as per the prosecution case, the victim's parents

was not alive at the time of marriage and the marriage was

conducted by the Juma-ath concerned. It was the Juma-ath

which gave some amount of gold and money at the time

marriage and even though the victim          had brothers, they

Crl.Appeal.1253/2003.
                               7

contributed nothing to the marriage and in fact one of the

brothers did not take part in the marriage. In the light of the

above fact, according to learned counsel for the appellant,

asthere was nobody to        provide funds to Ajina, it is

inconceivable that the accused would have ill-treated the

victim demanding more dowry when he fully know that there

was no one to provide the funds. The claim therefore that the

accused used to beat the victim asking her to bring more

dowry cannot be accepted.       Though however severe the

ill-treatment would have been, no purpose would be served

as there was nobody to provide the funds. The evidence of

P.W.14 and Ext.P11, the dying declaration, was assailed by the

learned counsel on several grounds. Relying on Ext.P5 wound

certificate prepared by the doctor at Taluk Hospital at

Changanassery, it is pointed out that from the certificate it is

discernible that the dying declaration was recorded by the

Head Constable concerned. If that be so, there are multiple

Crl.Appeal.1253/2003.
                                8

dying declarations and in all fairness, the prosecution ought to

have produced the statement recorded by the Head Constable

which is shown as dying declaration in Ext.P5.              The

non-production of the said document has considerably

prejudiced the accused and it could only be taken that if

produced, it would have gone against the prosecution.

Relying on the decision reported in Bhadragiri Venkata Ravi v.

Public Prosecutor, High Court of A.P. (2013(2) K.L.T. SN 182)

it was contended that when there are more than one dying

declaration and there are discrepancies, it is quite unsafe to

rely on any one of the dying declarations            to enter a

conviction.

             7. At any rate, according to the learned counsel,

offences under Sections 306 and 498A of I.P.C. cannot be

attracted. In order to attract Section 306 I.P.C., it should be

clearly proved that the accused instigated the doing of a thing.

In the case on hands, there is no evidence to show that the

Crl.Appeal.1253/2003.
                                9

accused had either aided or instigated the victim to commit

suicide.     According to the learned counsel, the prosecution

cannot take aid of      Sections 113A and 113B of the Indian

Evidence Act also. In support of this contention, he relied on

the decision reported in Hans Raj v. State of Haryana (AIR

2004 SC 2790). Relying on the decision reported in Gananath

Pattanaik v. State of Orissa (2002(1) K.L.T. SN 105) it was

contended that the statements in the dying declaration cannot

be taken aid of to find the accused guilty of offence Section

498A of I.P.C. Accordingly, it is contended that the conviction

and sentence on all the three counts will have to be set aside.

             8. The learned Public Prosecutor on the other hand

pointed out that the evidence of P.Ws.1, 3 and 4 would clearly

show that there was ill-treatment and harassment of the

victim by the accused and it became unbearable and infact

impossible to continue residence with the accused. The final

blow came on the date of the incident when fully drunk, he

Crl.Appeal.1253/2003.
                               10

came home and after having physically assaulted the victim,

took away the child from her and threatened her that he was

going to leave the house leaving her to her fate. Inspite of the

obstruction offered by the victim, the accused continued to

insist that he will leave the house along with the child. Even

assuming that one could take the evidence of P.Ws. 1, 3 and 4

only with some reservation, there is the dying declaration as

evidenced by Ext.P11 and the evidence of P.W.14 which would

clearly indicate what had transpired in the matrimonial life

between the accused and the victim and that tells the tale.

The court below found Ext.P11 to be acceptable. According to

the learned Public Prosecutor, if one is to believe the contents

of Ext.P11, there is no reason why a conviction could not be

based on the same. Drawing attention to the fact that the

death was within seven years of marriage and there is

considerable material in Ext.P11 to show that the victim was

subjected to cruelty, ill-treatment and harassment demanding

Crl.Appeal.1253/2003.
                                 11

more dowry and also since the same document also shows

that the accused asked her to go and live elsewhere she likes

would indicate that the offences are made out. The learned

Public Prosecutor went on to point out that it is a very sad case

where an young girl whose parents was no more and who is

solely dependent on her husband for survival had to give up

her life because of him. The learned Public Prosecutor pointed

out that no grounds are made out to interfere with the

conclusion reached by the court below.

             9. P.W.1 is the elder brother of the victim. He laid

Ext.P1 first information statement. He says that about two

years prior to the date of the incident, the victim was given in

marriage to the accused and at the time of marriage, five

sovereigns of gold and Rs.15,000/-           was given to the

deceased. He admitted that it was given as presentation and

not as dowry by the Juma-ath and the community members.

He speaks about the ill-treatment meted out by the accused

Crl.Appeal.1253/2003.
                               12

to the victim. According to him, on the date of the incident,

he happened to hear shriek from the back side of the house

of the victim which took him to the place, there he found his

sister on fire. He would say that he tried to douse the fire and

he along with the neighbour had taken the victim to Taluk

Hospital, Changanassery in an autorickshaw. P.W.1 would say

that while in the auto, he asked her what had happened in the

house. She is alleged to have told that she had been thrashed

on the date of the incident by her husband and that taking the

child from her he told her that he was leaving the house

leaving her alone and she was asked to leave the house. Then

she attempted to commit suicide. It would also show that the

gold and the money given at the time of marriage were not

available at the time when the incident had occurred. He also

speaks about the occasional visits by the victim after marriage

to his house and he would say that she had complained of

ill-treatment by the accused.

Crl.Appeal.1253/2003.
                                 13

             10. P.W.3 is another brother of the victim who is

younger to her. He says that on the date of the incident while

he was standing in the private bus stand some one came

running to him and told that his sister has been removed to

the hospital. He rushed to the place, and when he reached

the hospital, he found the victim capable of talking and he

asked her what had happened. She repeated what she had

told to P.W.1 to P.W.3 also. He would say that there were

previous occasions when the accused demanding more money

and gold used to beat the victim and sent her out of the

house.

             11. P.W.4 is related to the victim and in fact her half

sister.    As per her evidence, she had come to the Medical

College Hospital on getting information about the incident and

on meeting Ajina she had asked her what had happened and

Ajina told her what had transpired on the date of the incident.

She also speaks about an incident which occurred one and a

Crl.Appeal.1253/2003.
                                14

half week prior to the date of the incident. She also deposed

that on two or three occasions when Ajina came to her house,

she used to complain about the ill-treatment of the accused.

             12. It is true that there are inconsistencies and

contradictions in the evidence of these witnesses, some of the

statements made by them did not find a place in their

statement under Section 161 Cr.P.C. given by them before the

police. It can be said that there is development of the incident

by these witnesses.

             13. But what persuaded the court below to come to

the conclusion that the offences have been made out is

Ext.P11 and the evidence of P.W.14 who had recorded Ext.P11.

The evidence of P.W.14 shows that on receiving intimation

from the CJM concerned, at 11.16 a.m. he reached the Medical

College Hospital, Kottayam and found the victim. He deposed

that he had recorded the statement of the victim in the

presence of Dr.Anil Kumar who was working in the hospital at

Crl.Appeal.1253/2003.
                                 15

the relevant time. He deposes to have recorded the statement

of the victim after following the necessary procedures and

Ext.P11, according to him, is the statement recorded by him.

The learned Magistrate is definite that at the time of recording

the statement, the victim was both mentally and physically fit

to give the statement.

             14. Ext.P11 is the dying declaration alleged to have

been given by the victim.       The said statement shows that

according to the victim, her husband was an alcoholic. He

used to go for work only occasionally.         Whether it be on

consumption of liquor or not, he used to assault the victim.

Not a day passed without she being beaten or scolded. He

used to ask her to leave the house or to die. He also used to

insist that either she should die or she should leave the house

when she had nothing to do in the house. When she asked

why she should leave the house, the accused used to say that

he had to do so many things once she left the house. The

Crl.Appeal.1253/2003.
                               16

victim is alleged to have stated while giving the statement

that then she asked him to return the gold and money that

were given at the time of marriage, then she would call her

relatives and leave the house. She also says that her husband

used to tell her that similarly situated husbands were getting

considerable help from the relatives of their   wives and he

alone was unfortunate in not getting any help from the

relatives of his wife. He used to abuse the mother and sisters

of the victim. She also stated to the learned Magistrate that

her step mother of her husband and his brothers and sisters

were used to harass her. On the previous day of bringing her

to the hospital, according to her, her husband had gone for

work. She would say that on the previous day, he had taken

the ear studs of the child and pledged the same.   In order to

redeem the pledge he had borrowed money from other

persons. Coming to know the same, the victim is alleged to

have told him that by borrowing the money the pledge need

Crl.Appeal.1253/2003.
                              17

not be redeemed. She went to sleep with the child thereafter.

The next day morning even though she offered milk to her

husband, he did not take it. He left the house in the early

morning. He came home by about 5 p.m. Fearing what would

happen, she hid herself behind the door of her house. A

short while thereafter she would say that her husband came in

and asked her to fetch his clothes as well the child's.    He

told her that he was leaving the house and she could remain

there or go and die. She would also say that a lot of abuses

were showered on her mother and her. When she came in

front of him, she was kicked which fell on her navel. Then the

accused told her that she could live as she pleased and he will

leave with the child. He also threatened that if her relatives

did not give money, he would set the house on fire. He then

took the can containing kerosene and about to put the house

on fire, she agreed to bring his and the child's clothes. While

she was about to do so, she would say that she was beaten

Crl.Appeal.1253/2003.
                                 18

with a wooden log. Considerably frightened she at once gave

the clothes as he wanted. When she objected to the accused

taking away the child, the accused alleged to have told her to

go and die and he would take the child with him. She then

told the learned Magistrate that she poured kerosene over the

body and set herself on fire. She would say that there was

consistent and persistent harassment from her husband and

the inmates of his house and her life had been ruined.

             15.     If Ext.P11 and the evidence of P.W.14 are

acceptable, then there would be clinching evidence to show

the acts of the accused, that would also go a long way in

establishing the offences against the accused.

             16. The evidence of P.W.14 and contents of Ext.P11

are attacked on several grounds. The first of them is with

reference to Ext.P5, the wound certificate. P.W.7 is the person

who had prepared Ext.P5 wound certificate.         He    at the

relevant time was working as Assistant Surgeon in Medical

Crl.Appeal.1253/2003.
                                19

College Hospital and he deposes of having examined the

victim. He however stated that when the patient was brought

to the hospital, she was conscious and she had stated to him

what had transpired. He would also say that he had intimated

to the police to come and take the dying declaration before

she goes to the unconscious stage. He deposes that it was he

who had prepared Ext.P5 wound certificate.

             17.     In column 15 it is seen stated that dying

declaration taken by PC 3520. It is this entry in Ext.P5 which

is taken aid of by the defence to contend for the position that

prior to Ext.P11 there had already been a dying declaration

taken by the Head Constable concerned and that document is

not seen produced at all. The evidence would show that had

that document been produced, it would have been shown that

the allegations against the accused are not true. At any rate,

there was a bounden duty on the part of the prosecution to

Crl.Appeal.1253/2003.
                               20

produce that document and withholding of that document has

caused considerable prejudice to the accused.

             18. Here, one needs to take notice of the evidence

of P.W.13, the Head Constable, who is alleged to have gone to

the hospital to take the first information statement of the

victim. His evidence shows that when he reached the hospital,

he found the injured being examined by the doctor and that

he found that the victim was unable to give a statement. He

admitted that the patient was seen talking to the doctor but

she was not in a fit position to give statement to him.

Therefore, he recorded the statement from P.W.1. He denied

having taken any dying declaration from the victim.

             19. Even though in Ext.P5 it is stated that the dying

declaration has been taken, it is significant to notice that there

was no suggestion to P.Ws.13 and 15 that there was infact a

dying      declaration  taken   from     the    Taluk    Hospital,

Changanassery by the Police Constable concerned and that has

Crl.Appeal.1253/2003.
                                21

been suppressed. If as a matter of fact the accused had a

case that the dying declaration was taken from the Taluk

Hospital at Changanassery, P.Ws. 13 and 15 ought to have

been questioned with reference to the same. In the absence of

any such suggestion to these witnesses, the mere entry in

Ext.P5 may not be a ground to come to the conclusion that

there was an earlier dying declaration.

             20.    Another ground of attack on Ext.P11 is that

admittedly the patient had suffered 90% burns and at the time

when the victim was admitted in the hospital, her condition

was stuperous.       Relying on the evidence of P.W.17 learned

counsel for the appellant contended that a patient in such a

condition will be incapable of giving statement to anybody. It

was also pointed out relying on the evidence of P.W.17 that

the condition of the patient was gradually deteriorating. In the

light of the evidence furnished by P.W.17, according to the

learned counsel for the appellant, Ext.P11 dying declaration

Crl.Appeal.1253/2003.
                                  22

taken on the next day of admitting cannot be taken as a true

and genuine one.

             21. First of all, P.W.17 does not completely rule out

the patient being capable of giving the statement. He does

not rule out the possibility of patient coming out of stuperous

stage.

             22. Therefore, it may not be possible based on the

evidence of P.W.17 alone to come to the conclusion that the

dying declaration could not have been recorded as claimed by

P.W.14.      It is to be noted that surprisingly enough in the case

sheet maintained in the Medical College Hospital, there is no

mention of dying declaration having been recorded. The case

sheet is marked as Ext.P13.

             23. P.W.14 has categorically stated that on getting

necessary orders from the CJM concerned, he had proceeded

to the hospital and recorded the dying declaration. He speaks

about the procedure followed by him and he also deposes that

Crl.Appeal.1253/2003.
                               23

while he was recording the statement Dr.Anil Kumar was

present. He also stated that he, the victim and the said doctor

were the only persons present at the place at the time of

recording the dying declaration. He deposes of having been

followed the procedure for recording the dying declaration and

his evidence shows that he recorded the statements after

being fully convinced that the victim was in a fit physical and

mental condition to give the statement. He deposes that

Ext.P11 is infact given by Ajina.

             24. Learned counsel for the appellant pointed out

that in Ext.P11 the following question may be relevant:

      "          :                     Judicial 1st Class

      Magistrate      K.V.  Thampikutty      
         ?

       :                 ."

The above question and answer, according to the learned

counsel for the appellant, would show that either the victim

was tutored or the statement was manipulated.

Crl.Appeal.1253/2003.
                                    24

             25. It is difficult to accept the above plea. Probably

the victim might have been informed that the officer

concerned is coming to take a statement. But her reply in the

affirmative to the question put by the Magistrate does not

certainly indicate that the victim had been tutored to give a

statement as recorded by P.W.14. Further P.W.14 has stated in

his evidence that the statement was given voluntarily by the

victim. It is also seen stated in Ext.P11 that the statement was

read over to the victim and she accepted it to be true. Ext.P11

also contains the certificate by Dr.Anil Kumar to the effect that

dying declaration was taken in his presence and that the

patient was conscious throughout.

             26. There is no reason as to why P.W.14 should

stray away from truth. He had nothing to achieve. He had

recorded the statements as per the orders and in accordance

with law.       It is true that the prosecution ought to have

examined Dr.Anil Kumar to ensure that the patient was in a fit

Crl.Appeal.1253/2003.
                                 25

condition to give the dying declaration. But at the same time,

there is no justification or reason or logic in suspecting the

statement of P.W.14 that it was after being fully convinced that

the victim was both mentally and physically fit to give the

statement that Ext.P11 statement was recorded.

             27. In the light of the above discussion, it follows

that the contention that there are two dying declarations

cannot be countenanced. Therefore, the decision relied on by

the learned counsel for the appellant for the proposition that

in case of conflicting dying declarations, it may not be proper

to rely on any one of them to find the accused guilty has no

application.

             28.     Even assuming that P.Ws.1, 2 and 4 have

exaggerated the state of affairs, as already noticed, Ext.P11

states what had transpired in the marital life of the victim.

There is no reason to disbelieve Ext.P11 dying declaration and

the evidence of P.W.14. There is nothing to indicate as of now

Crl.Appeal.1253/2003.
                               26

that at the time of furnishing Ext.P11 statement, the victim

was either unconscious or was not in such a state that she

could not have given the statement. Even the case sheet does

not show that         the patient was either unconscious or

disoriented at any point of time.      Of course, there is the

evidence of P.W.17 which had already been referred to. In the

light of the above evidence furnished by P.W.14 and the

contents of Ext.P11, the finding of the court below that the

victim was harassed and ill-treated seems to be fully justified.

             29. The contention based on multiplicity of dying

declarations has only to be rejected. Even though in Ext.P5, it

is seen stated that the Head Constable had taken the dying

declaration, there is nothing in the evidence of P.Ws.13 and 15

to show that the said claim is true. The evidence of P.W.13 is

very clear to the effect that when he reached the hospital, he

found the victim not in a position to give the statement and

Crl.Appeal.1253/2003.
                                 27

he took the statement of her brother. Here the decision relied

on by the learned counsel for the appellant has no application.

             30. Therefore, it follows that the victim was driven

to commit suicide by the ill-treatment and cruel act meted

out by the accused.

             31. What then arises for consideration is what are

the offences committed by the accused. The court below has

found the accused guilty on all the three counts, namely,

under Sections 498A, 304B and 306 of I.P.C.

             32. Before going into the question of the offences

that are committed by the accused, one fact will have to be

borne in mind. Suicide committed by the victim was within

two years of the marriage. In order to attract offence under

Section 304B of I.P.C., it has to be shown that (i) the woman

died under unnatural circumstances and (ii) that soon before

her death, she had been subjected to cruelty or ill-treatment

in connection with any demand for dowry. Of course, P.W.3,

Crl.Appeal.1253/2003.
                              28

one of the brothers of the deceased says about the demands

made by the accused for gold and money. He also says that

the accused used to send her out of the house demanding her

to bring more gold and money. But it has been brought out in

cross-examination that these crucial statement made by him

in chief-examination is conspicuously absent in his statement

to the police under Section 161 Cr.P.C. It is therefore quite

evident      that    it is a subsequent    development     and

embellishment. It is also significant to notice that P.W.1, the

brother of the victim, does not have a case that the deceased

used to be harassed demanding more dowry by the accused.

His evidence shows that at the time of marriage, the victim

was given 5 sovereigns of gold and Rs.15,000/-. That was

given by the community to which the parties belonged and at

the instance of Juma-ath. There is nothing to show that the

brothers of the victim had either contributed      any money

towards dowry or gold ornaments.

Crl.Appeal.1253/2003.
                               29

             33. The evidence would disclose that the parties

hail from very poor circumstances. It is difficult to believe that

knowing fully the circumstances under which the victim is

placed and that her brothers were not in a position to help the

victim, the accused would have demanded her to bring more

dowry from her relatives. He was well informed that they had

no financial capacity to provide the same. Even in Ext.P11 the

only complaint made by the deceased is that the accused used

to tell her that similarly placed persons like him used to

receive help from the bride's house and he was not receiving

any help. She does not make mention of any specific demand

made by him for money or gold.      In Ext.P11 there is nothing

to show that soon before the          suicide, there was any

ill-treatment by the accused of the deceased demanding

dowry. Merely because the death occurred within seven years

of marriage and even assuming that the accused had stated

that he did not get any help from the relatives of his bride's

Crl.Appeal.1253/2003.
                                30

relatives like similarly placed persons like him, that does not

lead to the conclusion that the victim was harassed or

ill-treated demanding more dowry. In fact, there is no specific

finding by the court below in this regard at all. After having

found that the victim was driven to commit suicide due to the

ill-treatment meted out by him that the court below simply

comes to the conclusion that the offences are made out. The

court below has not considered whether the ingredients to

attract each of the offences are established. Thus viewed from

any angle, the offence under Section 304B I.P.C. cannot be

attracted and the conviction and sentence in this regard is bad

in law.

             34. But the position is entirely different as far as

the offences under Sections 498A and 306 of I.P.C. are

concerned.       Relying on the decision reported in   Ganapath

Pattanaik v. State of Orissa (2002(1) K.L.T. SN 105) more

specifically paragraph 10 of the judgment it was contended

Crl.Appeal.1253/2003.
                                  31

that the evidence regarding cruelty in this case is confined to

the hearsay evidence and therefore the offence under Section

498A of I.P.C. cannot be attracted. In the decision relied on

by the learned counsel for the appellant, it was held as

follows:

             "Another circumstances of cruelty is with respect to
      taking away of the child from the deceased. To arrive at
      such a conclusion, the trial curt has referred to the
      statement of P.W.5, who is the sister of the deceased. In
      her deposition recorded in the court on 4.5.1990 P.W.5
      had stated:
             "Whenever I had gone to my sister, all the times
      she was complaining that she is not well treated by her
      husband and in-laws for non-fulfillment of balance
      dowry amount of scooter and twin one."
      and added:
      "On 3.6.1987 for the last time I had been to the house of
      the deceased i.e. To her separate residence. Sworna,
      Snigdha, Sima Apa, Baby Apa accompanied me to her
      house on that day. At that time, the decease complained
      before us as usual and added to that she said that she is
      being assaulted by the accused non a days. She further

Crl.Appeal.1253/2003.
                                  32

      complained before us that the accused is taking away
      the child from her, and that her mother in law has come
      and some conspiracy is          going against her (the
      deceased).     She further told that "Mata Au Banchei
      Debenahin" , such a statement appears to have been
      taken on record with the aid of S.32 of the Indian
      Evidence Act at a time when the appellant was being
      tried for the offence under S.304B and such statement
      was admissible under Clause (1) of the said section as it
      related to the cause of death of the deceased and the
      circumstances of the transaction which resulted in her
      death.
      Such a statement is not admissible in evidence for the
      offence punishable under S.498A of the Indian Penal
      Code and has to be termed as being only a hearsay
      evidence. S.32 is an exception to the Hearsay Rule and
      deals with the statements or declarations by a person,
      since dead, relating to the cause of his or her death or
      the circumstances leading to such death. If a statement
      which otherwise is covered by the Hearsay Rule does not
      fall within the exceptions of S.32 of the Evidence Act, the
      same cannot be relied upon for finding the guilt of the
      accused."

Crl.Appeal.1253/2003.
                               33

             35. Unlike the evidence in the decision referred to

above, there is clinching evidence in this case to show that the

victim was treated cruelly and was very badly ill-treated right

from the day of marriage. P.Ws.1 and 3 categorically deposed

about the ill-treatment meted out by the accused and that is

also reflected in Ext.P11. It is imprudent on the part of the

court to insist that there should be direct evidence of

ill-treatment. Even though one can only say that there were

quarrels and squabbles, they may not be in a position to

depose that they had actually seen the ill-treatment or cruelty

meted out to the victim. The two brothers who were examined

as P.Ws.1 and 3 have spoken about the sufferings which their

sister had undergone in the matrimonial house and there is no

reason to disbelieve them. In Ext.P11 also the victim has

narrated the agonies undergone by her right from the day of

marriage and how she is used to be treated in the matrimonial

house.      Those evidence cannot be simply discarded by the

Crl.Appeal.1253/2003.
                                34

court below          though they did appear only in the dying

declaration. That may not be the cause of death. But certainly

they are not valueless.

             36. The evidence is very clear to the effect that she

has been constantly ill-treated and on the date of the incident,

the accused came home drunk and picked up quarrel with his

wife. He not only asked her to bring his clothes, but was also

very adamant that he will take the child along with him. The

evidence discloses that the victim had objected to the taking

away of the child. But then the accused threatened that he

would burn down the house. Not only did he say that, he also

beat her with a wooden log. The evidence is clear to the effect

that the accused had ill-treated the victim in such a manner

that the acts of the accused fall within the            ambit of

Explanation (a) of Section 498A of I.P.C.       The court below

rightly found him guilty.

Crl.Appeal.1253/2003.
                                 35

             37. Equally unassailable is the finding of the court

below that the offence under Section 306 of I.P.C. is attracted

to the facts of the case.      The evidence discloses that the

accused had        constantly asking the victim to go from the

house and suggested that why she should continue her life in

his house. Times without number, he is alleged to have stated

that he would be better off without her. He has also stated

that she is a constant nuisance to him and he would be better

off without her. Of course, the physical assaults and the other

ill-treatments of the accused have already been referred to.

On the date of the incident also, after taking the child with him

and after beating her with a wooden log, at the time of leaving

the house, the accused is alleged to have told the victim that

she may go and die. Unable to bear it anymore, she poured

kerosene and set fire to herself.

             38. The act of the accused squarely falls within the

definition of abetment as contained in Sections 107 and 108

Crl.Appeal.1253/2003.
                                 36

of I.P.C. There is clear instigation on his part inciting the

victim to commit suicide. Apart from the above fact, she was

left with no choice but to commit suicide in the light of the act

committed by the accused.

             39. All the necessary ingredients to attract Section

306 of I.P.C. are available in the case on hand. It may be

recollected here that the marriage was very short lived.

             40. The result is that the court below was perfectly

justified in coming to the conclusion that offences under

Sections 498A and 306 of I.P.C. have been made out.

             41.     What now remains to be considered is the

sentence awarded for the offences under Section 498A and

306 of I.P.C. For the offence punishable under Section 498A

of I.P.C. the accused has been awarded three years rigorous

imprisonment and for the offence under Section 306 I.P.C.he

has been sentenced to           undergo     five years rigorous

imprisonment.

Crl.Appeal.1253/2003.
                                37

             42. Considering the nature of the acts committed

by the accused, the manner in which it was committed and the

agony which the victim had to undergo in the matrimonial

house right from the day of marriage till the end, the sentence

awarded to him is just and reasonable. They do not call for

any interference at all.

             In the result, this appeal is partly allowed, the

conviction of the accused for the offence punishable under

Section 304B of I.P.C. is set aside while confirming the

conviction and sentence for the offences under Sections 498A

and 306 of I.P.C. The sentences shall run concurrently.




                                           P. BHAVADASAN,
                                                 JUDGE
sb.



