
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                      PRESENT:

                           THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE V.K.MOHANAN

            THURSDAY, THE 12TH DAY OF SEPTEMBER 2013/21ST BHADRA, 1935

                                           Crl.MC.No. 3951 of 2013 ()
                                           ------------------------------------
      CRIME NO. 809/2013 OF OTTAPALAM POLICE STATION , PALAKKAD DISTRICT.
                                                         ..........

PETITIONER(S):ACCUSED
--------------------------------------

            A.M.RAFEEQ, AGED 31 YEARS, S/O. MOHAMMED
            AYINITHARAYIL VEED, ALANGAD, KOKKUR POST
            PONNANI MALAPPURAM DISTRICT.

            BY ADV. SRI.R.SREEHARI

RESPONDENT: COMPLAINANT AND STATE
---------------------------------------------------------------

        1. SUNITHA, D/O. CHAMI, AGED 31 YEARS
            KOZHISSERIKALAMPADI, PERUR VILLAGE
            LAKKIDI POST OTTAPALAM TALUK, PIN. 679 301

        2. STATE OF KERALA
            REPRESENTED BY THE PUBLIC PROSECUTOR
            HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM THROUGH S.H.O.
            OTTAPALAM POLICE STATION, OTTAPALAM 679 101.

            R1 BY ADV. SRI.K.RAJESH SUKUMARAN
            R2 BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SMT.V.H.JASMINE

            THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE HAVING COME UP FOR ADMISSION ON
            12-09-2013, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE FOLLOWING:




tss

Crl.MC.No. 3951 of 2013 ()
-------------------------------------

                                       APPENDIX

PETITIONER(S)' EXHIBITS
-------------------------------------

ANNX.A1 - PHOTO COPY OF THE COMPLAINT CMP NO.1361/2013 FILED BEFORE THE
JFCM COURT OTTAPALAM.

ANNX.A2 - PHOTO COPY OF FIR IN CRIME NO.809/2013 OF OTTAPALAM POLICE
STATION.

RESPONDENT(S)' EXHIBITS
---------------------------------------

          NIL


                                                         TRUE COPY


                                                         P.S. TO JUDGE


tss


                            V.K.MOHANAN, J.
                     ----------------------------------------
                        Crl.M.C.No. 3951 of 2013
                     ----------------------------------------
                Dated this the 12th day of September, 2013

                                  O R D E R

                    The above petition is filed under Section 482 of the

Criminal Procedure Code (for short 'Cr.P.C.') at the instance of the

petitioner, who is the accused in C.M.P.No.1361/2013 of the Judicial First

Class Magistrate Court, Ottappalam which is a case instituted upon the

police report in Crime No. 809/2013 of Ottappalam Police Station for the

offence punishable under Section 498A of I.P.C. with a prayer to quash

Crime No.809 of 2013 of Ottappalam Police Station as the matter is

settled out of court.

         2.   The allegation in the above case is that the marriage between

the petitioner and the de facto complainant was registered in the Sub-

Registrar Office on 11.7.2005 and thereafter, the accused mis-appropriated

ten sovereigns of gold ornaments of the de facto complainant, under the

guise that he wants to go abroad and thereafter, a sum of `5 lakhs was also

obtained from the de facto complainant on various occasions and when

Crl.M.C.No.3951 of 2013

                                    :-2-:

demanded back the cash and the gold ornaments, the de facto complainant

was subjected to harassment and thereby the accused committed the

offence punishable under Section 498A of I.P.C. Now, according to the

petitioner, during the pendency of the above case, the entire dispute is

settled and the first respondent/the de facto complainant does not propose

to prosecute the matter any further against the petitioner and to that effect,

an affidavit dated 9.9.2013 is sworn to by the first respondent. Thus, the

case of the petitioner is that the matter is settled out of court.

         3. Heard the learned counsel for the petitioner as well as the

counsel for the respondent.         I have also heard the learned Public

Prosecutor.

         4. The learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that during the

pendency of the above case, the matter is settled amicably between the parties

to the dispute which is the subject matter of the above case. Therefore, the

continuation of the proceedings in the above case is abuse of process of law and

proceedings.

Crl.M.C.No.3951 of 2013

                                       :-3-:

          5.   The learned counsel for the respondent, who on the basis of

specific instruction received from the respondent submitted that the above

respondent, who is the de facto complainant does not intend to proceed any

further against the petitioner and she has no grievance against him

          6. I have carefully considered the above submissions of the respective

counsel. I have verified the documents and materials produced along with the

above petition. In the given facts and circumstances of the case and especially

in the light of the settlement arrived between the parties to the dispute, the

learned Public Prosecutor has also no objection in allowing the above petition.

          7. Having regard to the facts and circumstances involved in the case,

it can be seen that the offences involved in the above case is only Section

498A of I.P.C. which is more or less personal in nature and no public interest is

involved. It is pertinent to note that though such offence is involved, the real

parties to the dispute approached this Court after having amicably settled the

matter. From the submission made by the counsel for the respondent, it appears

to me that the de facto complainant has no further grievance against the

petitioner/accused in the light of the settlement arrived by them.       In this

juncture, it is relevant to note that the Honourable Apex Court, in the decision

Crl.M.C.No.3951 of 2013

                                             :-4-:

reported in Jitendra Raghuvanshi and Others v. Babita Raghuvanshi and

another [2013 (1) KLD 817(SC)], has held as follows:-


                  "7. It is not in dispute that matrimonial disputes have been on
         considerable increase in recent times resulting in filing of complaints
         under Sections 498A and 406 of I.P.C. not only against the husband but
         also against the relatives of the husband. The question is when such
         matters are resolved either by the wife agreeing to rejoin the matrimonial
         home or by mutual settlement of other pending disputes for which both
         the sides approached the High Court and jointly prayed for quashing of
         the criminal proceedings or the FIR or complaint by the wife under
         Sections 498A and 406 of I.P.C., whether the prayer can be declined on
         the sole ground that since the offences are non-compoundable under
         Section 320 of the Code, it would be impermissible for the court to quash
         the criminal proceedings or FIR or complaint.
                  8. It is not in dispute that in the case on hand subsequent to the
         filing of the criminal complaint under Sections 498A and 406 of IPC and
         Sections 3 and 4 of the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961, with the help and
         intervention of family members, friends and well-wishers, the parties
         concerned have amicably settled their differences and executed a
         compromise/settlement. Pursuant thereto, the appellants filed the said
         compromise before the Trial Court with a request to place the same on
         record and to drop the criminal proceedings against the appellants
         herein. It is also not in dispute that in additional to the mutual settlement
         arrived at by the parties, respondent/-wife has also filed an affidavit
         stating that she did not wish to pursue the criminal proceedings against
         the appellants and fully supported the contents of the settlement deed. It
         is the grievance of the appellants that no only the Trial Court rejected
         such prayer of the parties but also the High Court failed toe exercise its
         jurisdiction under Section 482 of the Code only on the ground that the
         criminal proceedings relate to the offences punishable under Sections
         498A and 406 of IPC which are non-compoundable in nature."
                  "12. In our view, it is the duty of the Courts to encourage
         genuine settlements of matrimonial disputes, particularly, when the same
         are on considerable increase.           Even if the offences are non-
         compoundable, if they relate to matrimonial disputes and the Court is
         satisfied that the parties have settled the same amicably and without any
         pressure, we hold that for the purpose of securing ends of justice, Section
         320 of the Code would not be a bar to the exercise of power of quashing
         of FIR, complaint or the subsequent criminal proceedings.
                      13. There has been an outburst of matrimonial disputes in
         recent times. The institution of marriage occupies an important place
         and it has an important role to play in the society. Therefore, every effort

Crl.M.C.No.3951 of 2013

                                             :-5-:

          should be made in the interest of the individuals in order to enable them
          to settle down in life and live peacefully. If the parties ponder over their
          defaults and terminate their disputes amicably by mutual agreement
          instead of fighting it out in a Court of law, in order to do complete justice
          in the matrimonial matters, the Courts should be less hesitant in
          exercising its extraordinary jurisdiction. It is trite to state that the power
          under Section 482 should be exercised sparingly and with circumspection
          only when the Court is convinced, on the basis of material on record, that
          allowing the proceedings to continue would be an abuse of the process of
          the Court or that the ends of justice require that the proceedings ought to
          be quashed."


In the present case, the only offence involved is under Section 498A of I.P.C.

The criminal proceedings for the said offence originated from the matrimonial

issues, which are now settled. Consequently, the parties want a quietus to the

criminal case as well.

          According to me, in the light of the facts and circumstances involved

in the present case and particularly in view of the settlement arrived in the

present case, the dictum laid in the above decision will be squarely applicable

in the present case. According to me, as the parties to the dispute settled the

issues amicably, it is the duty of this Court to promote such settlement, instead

of compelling the parties to go on with the dispute. It is pertinent to note that

since the matter is settled out of court, in the event of proceeding with the trial,

there would not have any fruitful prosecution resulting the conviction of the

accused, rather the net result would be sheer waste of judicial time and abuse of

Crl.M.C.No.3951 of 2013

                                     :-6-:

process of the court and proceedings. Thus, according to me, following the

decisions cited supra, this Crl.M.C. can be allowed granting the relief as sought

for.

         In the result, this Crl.M.C. is allowed, quashing Crime No.809 of

2013 of Ottappalam Police Station and all further proceedings thereto.




                                                    V.K.MOHANAN,
                                                          Judge

MBS/

Crl.M.C.No.3951 of 2013

                           :-7-:



