
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                             PRESENT:

                THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE P.BHAVADASAN

    FRIDAY, THE 15TH DAY OF NOVEMBER 2013/24TH KARTHIKA, 1935

                                    CRL.A.No. 1417 of 2005
                                       ---------------------------
     SC NO.505/2003 OF SESSIONS COURT,THRISSUR DATED 17-09-2004
                                                     ....

    APPELLANT(S)/RESPONDENT::
    ------------------------------------------------

      STATE OF KERALA, REP. BY THE PUBLIC
      PROSECUTOR, HIGH COURT OF KERALA.

      BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SRI.DHANESH MATHEW MANJOORAN


    RESPONDENT(S)/ACCUSED::
    ----------------------------------------------

   1. MANOJ, PARANGODATHU HOUSE,
      ADATT VILLAGE, THRISSUR.

   2. THANKAMONY OF DO. DO.

   3. NARAYANANKUTTY OF DO. DO.


      R1 TO 3 BY SRI.P.VIJAYA BHANU,SENIOR ADVOCATE
                  ADV. SRI.P.M.RAFIQ


      THIS CRIMINAL APPEAL HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD
      ON 15-11-2013, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY DELIVERED
      THE FOLLOWING:

Kss


                       P.BHAVADASAN, J.
               ---------------------------------------
                 Crl. Appeal No.1417 OF 2005
               ---------------------------------------
         Dated this the 15th day of November, 2013.


                         J U D G M E N T


     Four persons were arrayed as accused for having committed

the offences punishable under Sections 302, 306, 304B read with

Section 34 of Indian Penal Code. Among them, the 1st accused

died and the proceedings against her abated. The court below,

after trial, acquitted accused Nos.2 to 4 for all the offences

finding that the evidence adduced is insufficient to warrant a

conviction.

     2.    The marriage between the 1st accused and the 2nd

accused was solemnised on 19.11.1999. The incident which gave

rise to the crime occurred on 14.09.2002 when Suja, the 1st

accused, after killing her two year old son by hanging, committed

suicide by hanging.      The allegation against the rest of the

accused is that they had abetted commission of suicide by the

victim.

Crl. Appeal No.1417/2005          2


       3.      PW1, the mother of the victim, laid Ext.P1 First

Information Statement which was recorded by PW6 who

registered a crime as per Ext.P1(a) First Information Report.

Inquest of the body was conducted by PW11. Investigation was

taken over by PW12.           He obtained necessary certificates,

recorded the statement of witnesses, completed the investigation

and laid charge before court.

       4.      The court before which final report was laid took

cognizance of the offence and on finding that the offences are

exclusively triable by a Court of Sessions, the case was

committed to Sessions Court, Thrissur. The said court, on receipt

of records, framed charges for the offences punishable under

Sections 302, 306, 304B read with Section 34 of Indian Penal

Code. To the charge, the accused pleaded not guilty and claimed

to be tried. The prosecution therefore had PWs 1 to 12 examined

and Exts.P1 to P24 marked. M.O.s 1 to 5 were got identified and

marked.

       5. After the close of the prosecution evidence, the accused

were questioned under Section 313 Cr.P.C. They denied all the

incriminating circumstances brought out in evidence against them

Crl. Appeal No.1417/2005          3


and maintained that they were innocent. The 2nd accused stated

that the life of the couple was very happy and smooth and

nothing has been done by the accused persons to contribute to

the death of the 1st accused. It is also pointed out that the 1st

accused was unable to read and write. The 2nd accused also says

that the accused persons were on very cordial terms with the

deceased.

       6. On finding that the accused could not be acquitted under

Section 232 Cr.P.C, they were asked to enter on their defence.

But they chose to adduce no evidence.         Since the evidence

adduced was insufficient to warrant a conviction, the court below

acquitted the accused of all charges.

       7.      Learned Public Prosecutor appearing for the State

contended that the acquittal is unjustified and unmerited. The

documents namely, Exts.P2 to P5 and P7 are sufficient to show

that the victim was driven to take the extreme steps due to the

demand for dowry made by the accused persons and harassing

her for that purpose. It is contended that the court below was

not justified in discarding those items of evidence.      Learned

Public Prosecutor went on to point out that even in Ext.P1 First

Crl. Appeal No.1417/2005          4


Information Statement given by PW1, the mother of the victim,

there is reference to the ill-treatment meted out by the accused

on the victim and PW1 in her evidence confirms this.

Accordingly, it is contended that the acquittal has to be set aside.

       8. Learned counsel appearing for the accused persons, on

the other hand, pointed out that the court below has analysed

the evidence and found that the evidence adduced by the

prosecution is not sufficient to come to the conclusion that the

offences had been made out. The evidence of PW1 has been

referred to in detail and the infirmities in her evidence have been

noticed. The court below has also noticed the dates of various

letters and then pointed out that there is nothing to show that

the commission of suicide was soon after the demands were

made. Probably, according to the learned counsel, there might

have been pressure on the family of the victim to assign the

property in the name of the 3rd accused.         But, that by itself

cannot be a ground to come to the conclusion that the offences

have been made out.

       9. The marriage between the 1st and the 2nd accused was

on 19.11.1999 and the victim committed suicide on 14.09.2002.

Crl. Appeal No.1417/2005         5


That means the marriage lasted for less than three years. The

couple had a child in that wedlock. PW1 is the mother of the

victim. She would say that her daughter is no more. In no less

terms she asserts that it was due to the ill-treatment and

harassment meted out by accused Nos.2 to 4 that her daughter

was driven to commit suicide. She would say that a week after

the marriage, the 2nd accused asked for more money to be

brought from bride's home.     After 10-15 days, he demanded

Rs.20,000/- and he is stated to have told the family of the victim

that if that amount is not given to him, his father will have to go

to jail. PW1 says that a sum of Rs.20,000/- was in fact paid.

She then makes a general statement that there was continuous

harassment by the accused demanding more and more money.

She says that since her daughter and the 2nd accused were living

in a rented house, in order to provide a house to them, she

purchased a house in the name of the 1st accused, her child and

herself and that was not to the liking of the accused persons who

insisted that the share enjoyed by the mother of the victim be

transferred to the 3rd accused.    PW1 and the family members

were not amenable to such a course.          Even though the 2nd

Crl. Appeal No.1417/2005          6


accused was employed in Gujarat, he was aiding the other

accused persons in harassing and ill-treating the victim.      She

says that on 25.05.2002 when she went to the house of the 2nd

accused, she was told by her daughter that she had been beaten

up by the accused persons and the reason being that the

property has to be assigned in favour of the 3rd accused. Though

a complaint was filed to the Police, after the mediation talks, she

was sent back to the matrimonial house. She would then say

that at a later stage, the victim was left in her paternal house by

the 1st accused and thereafter he did not come to fetch her. She

identified the handwritings in Exts.P2, P3 to P5 and P7 as that of

her daughter.

       10. PW2 is the father of the victim. His evidence is almost

on similar lines of PW1. Considerable reliance is placed by the

learned Public Prosecutor on the evidence of PWs 1 and 2 and it

is contended that their evidence is sufficient to show that the

victim was harassed and ill-treated demanding that the share

enjoyed by the mother of the victim be assigned in favour of the

3rd accused. Learned Public Prosecutor also invited the attention

of this Court to Exts.P2 to P5 and P7 which are letters said to

Crl. Appeal No.1417/2005          7


have been written by the victim which would clearly show that

the victim was being continuously harassed.

       11. One fact has to be immediately noticed. The victim has

been staying in her house for a considerable period before the

incident took place. Ext.P2 does not contain any date and nor is

it signed. In Ext.P2, it is merely stated that death was due to

harassment by accused Nos.2 to 4.         The date of Ext.P3 is

06.01.2002 and Ext.P4 is 24.12.2001. In fact, Ext.P4 is not seen

addressed to any particular person and Ext.P5 letter is seen not

posted nor does it contain any date. In Ext.P7, there is no date

mentioned and there is no signature also. The accused had a

definite case that the handwriting found in these letters does not

belong to the victim.      Surprisingly enough, at a later stage,

Ext.P10 had been produced. It is a note book alleged to have

been kept by the victim when she used to study the beautician

course. Even at that time, the handwriting was disputed. The

non examination of the handwriting by an expert was not proper.

The court below came to the conclusion that the handwriting is

open to serious doubt and at least there is no convincing

evidence to show that they are written by the victim.

Crl. Appeal No.1417/2005           8


       12. It is significant to notice that soon after the patch up

alleged to have been taken place as a result of mediation, the

victim went back to her paternal house and she was residing with

her parents. During the time when she left the company of her

husband and was residing with her parents, according to the

court below, there was nothing to show that she was harassed or

ill-treated. True, in Ext.P1, there is mention of ill-treatment. It

has also come out in evidence that the victim was earlier married

to another person which lasted only for 15 days.            Several

statements which have spoken to by her at the time of

examination in court are conspicuously absent in Ext.P1.        On

going through the omissions and contradictions, it is found that

they are material in nature. Ext.P1 also does not mention about

any intimidation alleged to have been meted out by the 2nd

accused to the victim.         The accusation and allegation in the

evidence regarding the demand for more money is not supported

by evidence.           The main accusation appears to be that the

accused insisted that the share which PW1 had over the property

which was intended for the benefit of the victim and her husband

should be assigned in favour of the 3rd accused. Even though it is

Crl. Appeal No.1417/2005          9


claimed by PWs 1 and 2 that the victim was brutally beaten up,

there is no evidence regarding the same.

       The      court   below had appreciated    the   evidence   in

considerable detail and had come to the conclusion that the

evidence is insufficient to warrant a conviction.      After having

independently considered the evidence, it could not be said that it

is not a possible view nor it can be said that the findings are

perverse and are contrary to the evidence on record. The mere

fact that this Court may be inclined to take a different view is not

a ground. There are no grounds made out to interfere with the

order of the court below.

       The appeal is without merits and it is accordingly dismissed.




                                      P.BHAVADASAN
                                              JUDGE



smp



