
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM


                                     PRESENT:


                    THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE K.HARILAL


        THURSDAY, THE 3RD DAY OF OCTOBER 2013/11TH ASWINA, 1935


                            Crl.Rev.Pet.No. 1881 of 2012 ()
                          --------------------------------
CRL.A 514/2010 of ADDL.DISTRICT & SESSIONS COURT, FAST TRACK (ADHOC-I),
MAVELIKKARA
MC 15/2009 of J.M.F.C., KAYAMKULAM


REVISION PETITIONER/APPELLANT/PETITIONER:
------------------------------------------------


       SULAIMAN KUNJU, AGED 48 YEARS,
       S/O.YOUNUS KUNJU, PALLIYAMBHI KIZHAKKATHIL VEEDU
       KANNIMEL MURI, VALLIKUNNAM P.O, VALLIKUNNAM VILLAGE
       MAVELIKARA TALUK, ALAPPUZHA
       NOW RESIDING AT KURUMBOLIL HOUSE, KANNIMEL MURI
       VALLIKUNNAM VILLAGE, MAVELIKKARA TALUK
       ALAPPUZHA- 690 501.


       BY ADV. SRI.B.HARISH KUMAR


RESPONDENTS/RESPONDENT/RESPONDENT & STATE:
------------------------------------------------------


    1. NABEESA BEEVI, AGED 43 YEARS
       PALLIYAMBHI KIZHAKKATHIL VEEDU, KANNIMEL MURI
       VALLIKUNNAM P.O, VALLIKUNNAM VILLAGE
       MAVELIKKARA TALUK, ALAPPUZHA- 690 501.


    2. STATE OF KERALA
       REPRESENTED BY THE PUBLIC PROSECUTOR
       HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM- 682 031.


       R1 BY ADV. SRI.AJAYA KUMAR. G
       R2 BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SRI.LIJU V. STEPHEN.


       THIS CRIMINAL REVISION PETITION HAVING COME UP FOR ADMISSION
ON 03-10-2013, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE FOLLOWING:



OKB


                         K.HARILAL, J.
             ---------------------------------------------
                  Crl.R.P. No.1881 of 2012
             ---------------------------------------------
           Dated this the 3rd day of October, 2013


                            O R D E R




         The revision petitioner is the respondent in

M.C.No.15/2009 on the files of the Judicial First Class

Magistrate's Court, Kayamkulam. The above M.C. was filed

under Section 12 of the Protection of Women from

Domestic Violence Act, 2005, and sought for reliefs under

Sections 17, 18, 19 and 20. The learned Magistrate passed

an order restraining the revision petitioner from making

any kind of obstruction to the peaceful living of the 1st

respondent and her children in the shared household

mentioned in the petition and also from committing any

kind of domestic violence towards the 1st respondent.

Further, the revision petitioner is directed to pay

maintenance allowance at the rate of Rs.2,000/- to the 1st

respondent and Rs.1,500/- each to her two children, per

Crl.R.P.1881/12                    :2:



month from the date of the order. He was restrained from

alienating or encumbering the property wherein the shared

household is situated, without the leave of the court. This

order is under challenge in this Revision Petition.

      2.     It is the case of the 1st respondent that she is the

legally wedded wife of the revision petitioner and they have

got two children in the wed-lock and they are aged 17 and

14 years respectively. At the time of marriage, she was

given 15 sovereigns of gold and Rs.35,000/- in cash by her

parents. In addition to that, the revision petitioner was

given Rs.1,50,000/- by the father of the 1st respondent for

his job in Gulf. The revision petitioner used to harass and

manhandle the 1st respondent demanding more money

towards dowry. Being fed up with the cruel treatment of

the revision petitioner, the 1st respondent and her two

children took refuge in her parental home.             She had

preferred a complaint before the Magistrate Court alleging

the offences punishable under Sections 498A and 406 of

the Indian Penal Code. But, at last, the entire disputes

were settled in Adalath under which the revision petitioner

Crl.R.P.1881/12                 :3:



agreed to pay maintenance to the children at the rate of

Rs.500/- each per month.          But, thereafter, the 1st

respondent was again subjected to cruelty and she was not

provided with sufficient means to maintain herself and her

children. According to the 1st respondent, she has no job or

income and she is unable to maintain herself and her two

children, who are now residing in the parental house. Now

she is depending upon her aged parents and close

relatives. The revision petitioner is having an intention to

marry another lady of better financial background after

deserting the 1st respondent and her children.       The 1st

respondent and the two children do not have any place of

abode other than the shared household and they are also

running short of sufficient means to meet their day today

requirements.

      3.     The revision petitioner   filed  an   objection

admitting the marriage as well as the paternity, but

denying the allegations of cruelty levelled against him. He

denied the averments regarding the money and the gold

ornaments, which are allegedly given to the 1st respondent

Crl.R.P.1881/12                   :4:



and the revision petitioner at the time of marriage. The

revision petitioner also admitted that the disputes were

settled in Adalath.       But the 1st respondent was not

amenable to the settlement. According to him, he never

attempted to oust the 1st respondent and her children from

the house. He had not committed any cruelty towards the

1st respondent.      The learned counsel for the revision

petitioner advanced arguments challenging the impugned

order.

      4.     Per contra, the learned counsel for the 1st

respondent advanced arguments to justify the impugned

order.       I heard the learned counsel for the revision

petitioner as well as the learned counsel for the 1st

respondent.

      5.     In view of the rival contentions, the question to

be considered is, whether there is any illegality or

impropriety in the impugned order under challenge?

      6.     The learned counsel for the revision petitioner

mainly canvassed the point that now the 1st respondent is a

divorced wife only. In support of his argument, he has

Crl.R.P.1881/12                   :5:



produced the common judgment passed in O.P.(H.M.) No.

387/2009 and O.P.(OS) No.851/2010 of the Family Court,

Alappuzha. The judgment was pronounced on 18.4.2012

and no appeal had been filed by the 1st respondent

challenging the above judgment.            Thus, the above

judgment has attained finality. So, in view of the above

judgment, he pointed out that a divorced wife has no right

to reside in the shared household.

      7.     Per contra, the learned counsel for the 1st

respondent submits that even after the divorce, the wife

has a right to reside in the shared household, if she had

resided in that house for any point of time before divorce.

According to him, admittedly, she had resided in the

shared household. Therefore, that right will continue even

after the divorce, in view of the right provided under the

D.V.Act.

      8.     In view of the above submission made at the Bar,

the question to be considered is, whether the divorced wife

has a right to claim the right of residence in the shared

household after the divorce?

Crl.R.P.1881/12                 :6:



      9.     The learned counsel drew my attention to the

decision of this Court reported in Moideenkutty Vs.

Nabeesa [2011(3) KHC 164].            Going by the said

decision, it could be seen that the said decision was held

under Section 3 of the Muslim Women (Protection of Rights

on Divorce) Act, 1986.       The learned counsel for the

revision petitioner submits that though the above decision

was held in the Act referred above, the same proposition is

applicable to Protection of Women from Domestic Violence

Act, 2005 also. Going by Section 2(a) of the D.V. Act, it

could be seen that an "aggrieved person" means a woman

who is, or has been, in a domestic relationship with

respondent and who alleges to have been subjected to any

act of domestic violence by the respondent.      Similarly,

Section 2(f) of the said Act defines domestic relationship.

"Domestic relationship" means a relationship between two

persons who live or have, at any point of time, lived

together in a shared household, when they are related by

consanguinity, marriage, or through a relationship in the

nature of marriage, adoption or are family members living

Crl.R.P.1881/12                  :7:



together as a joint family. On a close dissection of the

above definition, it could be seen that the second limb of

the definition of domestic relationship assumes much

significance. The second limb of the definition specifically

signifies that the first limb attracts when they are related

by consanguinity, marriage or through a relationship in the

nature of marriage, adoption or are family members living

together as a joint family. Unless the claimant seeking

residence order comes under any of the said relationship,

she cannot claim a right to reside in the shared household.

In short, the second limb is a condition requisite to make

the first limb qualified. In the instant case, admittedly, the

marriage was broken and severance of relationship was

effected forever by the divorce decree obtained from the

competent court.        Therefore, the status of the 1st

respondent is nothing other than a divorced wife.

Consequently, in the absence of domestic relationship, the

divorced wife would not come under the aggrieved person

also.    Needless to say, after the divorce, a wife cannot

claim right under the marriage, except the right to

Crl.R.P.1881/12                 :8:



maintenance provided under Section 125 of the Code of

Criminal Procedure. Therefore, I find that, a divorced wife

does not satisfy the second limb of the definition of the

domestic relationship. It can be held that a divorced wife

is not entitled to get any of the reliefs under Section 19 of

the D.V. Act. Consequently, I am inclined to set aside the

reliefs provided under Section 19 of the D.V. Act in the

instant case and I do so.

      10. Coming to the maintenance portion of the

impugned order, the      learned counsel for the revision

petitioner submits that the children are major and they

have attained majority after the pronouncement of the

order under challenge. So, they are not entitled to get

maintenance after attaining majority. The learned counsel

for the 1st respondent also agrees with the said submission

that     now   they  have   attained    majority  after  the

pronouncement of the impugned order and they are not

claiming maintenance for a period after attaining majority.

Therefore, I find that the children have no right to get

maintenance allowance after attaining majority.         But,

Crl.R.P.1881/12                   :9:



regarding the right of the 1st respondent, I find that there is

no reason to interfere with the said finding. The direction

to pay Rs.2,000/- per month is just and proper when

considering the standard of life and cost of living of a

person. Therefore, the said direction does not call for any

interference.

      11. The learned counsel for the 1st respondent points

out that the 1st respondent has a claim over the property,

as the property was purchased using her money also. So, I

make it clear that this order will not stand in the way of

resorting to her remedies, if any, before the competent civil

court.

      The Revision Petition is allowed in part.




                                               Sd/-
                                        (K.HARILAL, JUDGE)

okb.



