
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                  PRESENT:

                          THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE P.BHAVADASAN

               SATURDAY, THE 5TH DAY OF OCTOBER 2013/13TH ASWINA, 1935

                                          CRL.A.No. 477 of 2005
                                          -------------------------------
          [AGAINST THE JUDGMENT DTD. 25/03/03 IN S.C. NO.101/2000 OF THE
           3RD ADDL. SESSIONS JUDGE (ADHOC) FAST TRACK COURT-NO.I, THRISSUR]
                                                ............

APPELLANT/COMPLAINANT:
-----------------------------------------


            STATE OF KERALA,
            REPRESENTED BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR,
            HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM.


            BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SRI. DHANESH MATHEW MANJOORAN.


RESPONDENTS/ACCUSED:
---------------------------------------


        1. ABDUL MAJEED, S/O.PALLITHAL,
            MEERANCHI RAWTHER, PUTHUSSERY,LAKSHAMVEEDU COLONY,
            CHERUTHURUTHY VILLAGE, THALAPPILLY TALUK.

        2. LATHA, W/O.PALLITHAN MEERANCHIL RAVUTHAR,
            PUTHUSSERY LAKSHAMVEEDU COLONY,
            CHERUTHURUTHY VILLAGE, THALAPPILLY TALUK.

        3. RAMLA, W/O.YOUSUF,PALLITHAL MEERANCHI RAVUTHAR,
             PUTHUSSERY LAKSHAMVEEDU COLONY,
            CHERUTHURUTHY VILLAGE, THALAPPILLY TALUK.


            R1 TO R3 BY ADV. SRI.SOJAN MICHAEL.


            THIS CRIMINAL APPEAL HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD
            ON 05-10-2013, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY DELIVERED
            THE FOLLOWING:




Prv.


                       P. BHAVADASAN, J.
                 -Crl.Appeal.- No. - - - - - - - -
                   - - - - -   - -
                                   477 of 2005
            Dated-this the 5th day of October, 2013.
                   - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -


                           JUDGMENT


          Three persons were prosecuted for the          offences

punishable under Sections 498A and 304B read with Section

34 of Indian Penal Code. They were found not guilty and

acquitted of all charges. The State has come up in appeal.

During the pendency of the appeal, the second accused died

and the charge against her stands abated.

          2.   The marital life of the victim with the first

accused was short lived. It lasted for barely 17 days. The

prosecution allegation is that the victim was driven to commit

suicide due to the cruelty and harassment meted out to her by

the accused persons.

          3. The marriage between the victim and the first

accused was solemnized on 15.1.1995.             On 1.2.1995, the

Crl.Appeal.477/2005.
                                 2

victim committed suicide. Ext.P5 first information statement

was laid by the brother of the victim and it was recorded by

P.W.12, who registered crime as per Ext.P5(a) FIR for unnatural

death.       During investigation, according the prosecution

allegation, it was revealed that the victim was subjected to

cruelty and harassment and that had resulted in her

committing suicide and therefore, the offences under Sections

498A and 304B were incorporated.           The witnesses were

questioned,       materials were   seized,   investigation  was

completed and charge was laid.

             4.   The court, before which final report was laid,

took cognizance of the offences.      Finding that the offences

are exclusively triable by a court of Sessions, the said court

committed the case to Sessions Court, Thrissur.         The said

court made over the case to IIIrd    Additional Sessions Court

(Adhoc) Fast Track-I, Thrissur for trial and disposal.

Crl.Appeal.477/2005.
                                 3




             5. The latter court, on receipt of records and on

appearance of the accused, framed charge for the offences

punishable under Sections 498A and 304B read with Section

34 of I.P.C. To the charge, the accused pleaded not guilty and

claimed to be tried. The prosecution, therefore, had P.Ws.1 to

17 examined and had Exts.P1 to P8 marked. The defence had

marked Exts.D1 and D2, the contradictory portions of the

prosecution evidence.       After the close of the prosecution

evidence, the accused was questioned under Section 313

Cr.P.C. He denied all the incriminating circumstances brought

out in evidence against them and maintained that they are

innocent.      Finding that they could not be  acquitted under

Section 232 Cr.P.C., they were asked to enter on their defence.

They chose to adduce no evidence.

             6. The court below on an analysis of the evidence,

especially the evidence of P.Ws.1 to 4, on whom the

Crl.Appeal.477/2005.
                               4

prosecution placed considerable reliance, found that the

evidence regarding the offence is wanting, and came to the

conclusion that the offences have not been made out.

Accordingly, the accused were acquitted.

             7. The learned Public Prosecutor appearing for the

State contended that the court below was not justified in

acquitting the accused especially in the light of the evidence of

P.W.1 to 4 which would show that the victim was subjected to

harassment and ill-treatment at the house of the accused

persons.      The evidence of P.W.2, the sister of the victim,

according to the learned Public Prosecutor, is sufficient to

show that the victim was ill-treated in the house of the

accused persons. It was also pointed out that the victim had

to cook food separately and also that she was asked to hand

over the gold chain to the neighbour and when she refused,

the second accused got wild and she is alleged to have

informed the inmates of the house of the victim that if victim

Crl.Appeal.477/2005.
                                5

is not willing to obey her orders, she need not reside in her

matrimonial house. P.Ws.3 and 4, who are neighbours of the

victim would say that the victim was found gloomy after the

incident and was not energetic as before.       Learned Public

Prosecutor pointed out that it is inconceivable that a lady of

the nature of the victim, who was bold enough to disobey the

orders of the second respondent and who had started to look

after herself, would venture to commit suicide and something

else might have happened in the house which prompted her to

commit suicide, otherwise she would not have committed

suicide at all. At any rate, according to the learned Public

Prosecutor, it is very evident that on the date of the incident,

something must have happened in the house of the accused

which must have driven the victim to commit suicide. It was

also contended that the first accused insisted for money to

purchase an autorickshaw and that shows that there was a

demand for dowry. These aspects have been overlooked by

Crl.Appeal.477/2005.
                                6

the court below and accordingly, it is contended that the

acquittal cannot stand.

             8.    Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the

accused       persons pointed out   that the court below has

meticulously analysed the evidence of witnesses and has come

to the conclusion that the evidence is not sufficient to attract

the offences alleged against the accused.     As regards the

evidence of P.W.2, it is contended that she is prone to

embellishments and        developments and that most of the

statements made by her before court are conspicuously absent

in her statement under Section 161 Cr.P.C. Learned counsel

went on to point out that at the time of marriage            15

sovereigns of gold and Rs.20,000/- were agreed to be paid

by P.W.1 to the bridegroom's family and there is nothing to

indicate that the accused had demanded more. Out of the 15

sovereigns promised, only 10 sovereigns were given and the

arrangement was that balance will be paid in cash so as to buy

Crl.Appeal.477/2005.
                               7

an     autorickshaw for the first accused as he was an

autorickshaw driver by profession. All that, according to the

learned counsel, that witness says is that      in lieu of five

sovereigns, the first accused preferred to have cash for buying

an autorickshaw and that he had given Rs.2000/- to the first

accused. In fact, according to the learned counsel, P.W.1 had

gone along with the first accused to see an autorickshaw for

purchasing the same for the first accused. There is absolutely

no evidence to show that there was any demand for dowry or

there was any harassment for that purpose. According to the

learned counsel, even going by the evidence adduced by the

prosecution, two days prior to the incident, the victim had

gone to the house of the accused persons and he returned

home without noticing any unhappiness in the house of the

accused persons. Learned counsel went on to point out that it

is not a matter for presumption and assumption that

something must have happened in the house of the accused

Crl.Appeal.477/2005.
                                  8

which must have driven the victim to commit suicide. Learned

counsel also pointed out that there is a suggestion from the

defence side that the victim was a timid person and also that

financially the victim's family was much better than that of the

accused persons and the victim might have                  felt the

circumstances in the matrimonial home intolerable and unable

to put up with the same, she might have committed suicide.

Whatever that be, according to the learned counsel, there is

nothing to show that it was due to any act on the part of the

accused persons that the victim had committed suicide.

             9.    The accused are alleged to have committed

offences punishable under Sections 498A, 304B of I.P.C..

Those provisions read as follows:

      "498A. Husband or relative of husband of a woman
      subjecting her to cruelty.- Whoever, being the husband
      or the relative of the husband of a woman, subjects such
      woman to cruelty shall be punished with imprisonment
      for a term which may extend to three years and shall
      also be liable to fine.

Crl.Appeal.477/2005.
                                   9



      Explanation.-For the purposes of this section, "cruelty"
      means-


      (a) any wilful conduct which is of such a nature as is
      likely to drive the woman to commit suicide or to cause
      grave injury or danger to life, limb or health (whether
      mental or physical) of the woman; or


      (b) harassment of the woman where such harassment is
      with a view to coercing her or any person related to her
      to meet any unlawful demand for any property or
      valuable security or is on account of failure by her or any
      person related to her to meet such demand."


      "304B. Dowry death.- (1) Where the death of a woman is
      caused by any burns or bodily injury or occurs otherwise
      than under normal circumstances within seven years of
      her marriage and it is shown that soon before her death
      she was subjected to cruelty or harassment by her
      husband or any relative of her husband for, or in
      connection with, any demand for dowry, such death shall
      be called "dowry death", and such husband or relative
      shall be deemed to have caused her death.

Crl.Appeal.477/2005.
                                 10



      Explanation.-For the purposes of this sub-section,
      "dowry" shall have the same meaning as in section 2 of
      the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961 (28 of 1961).


      (2) Whoever commits dowry death shall be punished with
      imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than
      seven years but which may extend to imprisonment for
      life."

             10. Section 498A of I.P.C. deals with cruelty to a

woman. It may be cruelty meted out by the husband or the

relative of the husband of a woman. Cruelty means (a) any

wilful conduct which is of such a nature as is likely to drive the

woman to commit suicide or to cause grave injury or danger to

life and (b) harassment of woman is with a view to coercing

her or any person related to her to meet the unlawful demand

for property. In the case on hand, probably, the prosecution

relies on the latter portion, i.e. Clause (b) of Explanation to

Section 498A of I.P.C. to contend for the position that offence

under Section 498A is attracted. As far as Section 304B is

Crl.Appeal.477/2005.
                                11

concerned, there the prosecution will have to show that the

death of the woman was caused by burns or bodily injuries or

otherwise than under normal circumstances within seven years

of marriage and it is shown that before her death, she was

subjected to cruelty or harassment either by her husband or

any relative of her husband demanding for dowry. It may be

remembered here that the marriage was on 15.1.1995 and

the death was on 1.2.1995.

             11. The prosecution also takes aid of Section 113B

of the Evidence Act which reads as follows:



      "113B. Presumption as to dowry death.- When the
      question is whether a person has committed the dowry
      death of a woman and it is shown that soon before her
      death such woman had been subjected by such person
      to cruelty or harassment for, or in connection with any
      demand for dowry, the court shall presume that such
      person had caused the dowry death.

Crl.Appeal.477/2005.
                                  12

      Explanation.-For the purposes of this section, "dowry
      death" shall have the same meaning as in Section 304B
      of the Indian Penal Code.]




In order to apply Section 113B of the Evidence Act,         it has

necessarily to be shown that the person concerned has been

subjected to cruelty or harassment just before her death. An

attempt shall be now made to ascertain whether the essential

ingredients to attract offence under Section 498A are available

in the case on hand.

             12. It is not in dispute that at the time of marriage,

a sum of Rs.20,000/- and 15 sovereigns were offered to the

bridegroom.         There is nothing to show that they had

demanded money from the victim's family. Out of the            said

promise, at the time of marriage, the agreed amount and 10

sovereigns of gold ornaments were given and 5 sovereigns

were    reserved     for  purchasing   an   autorickshaw.      The

prosecution mainly relies on the evidence of P.W.2 to establish

Crl.Appeal.477/2005.
                               13

the case against the accused persons. P.W.2 is the younger

brother of the victim. She would say that her sister had told

her that accused Nos. 1 to 3 had treated her sister cruelly and

she had to cook food separately. It is also claimed by P.W.2

that she was told by her sister that the first accused used to

take food from outside. She would assert that her sister told

her that she was asked to return to the matrimonial house

only with the balance dowry amount.       She would also say

about the non-giving of gold chain owned by the victim to the

neighbour as demanded by the second accused and the

consequent act of the second accused.

             13. But a reading of the evidence of P.W.2 would

show that most of the statements given by her did not reflect

in her statement under Section 161 Cr.P.C. to the police and

she had to confess at the time of cross-examination that she

had told many things to the police. It is true that she had

developed the case. It must be borne in mind that the case

Crl.Appeal.477/2005.
                                  14

has been investigated by several officers and the claim of the

learned counsel for the accused that the case has been

developed by stage to stage cannot be easily brushed aside.

             14. It is significant to notice that most of what is

stated by P.W.2 did not get support from P.W.1 also. P.W.1

has no case that his daughter had ever told that she was ever

assaulted or harassed by the accused persons.        He too would

say that the second accused came home and told the victim

that if she did not obey her orders, she could not reside in the

matrimonial home. A reading of the evidence of P.W.1 would

show that two days prior to the incident the brother of the

victim had gone to the matrimonial house and he returned

happy and there is no case for the prosecution that he had

conveyed any bad news either to P.W.1 or P.W.2 regarding the

life of the victim in the matrimonial home.

             15.    It is also significant to notice that the first

information statement was laid by none other than the brother

Crl.Appeal.477/2005.
                                15

of the victim and there is no whisper in Ext.P5 that Suhara had

committed suicide due to any of the acts committed by the

accused persons.

             16. As far as P.Ws.3 and 4 are concerned, who are

neighbours, their evidence is to the effect that after marriage

Suhara was found gloomy and she was not as happy as before

the marriage. Their evidence therefore takes the prosecution

nowhere.

             17.    What would be evident from the evidence of

P.Ws.1 and 2 is that at best the first accused had indicated

that instead of 5 sovereigns of gold which was promised to

him, he might have indicated that he would like to have cash

for buying an autorickshaw.        But there is absolutely no

evidence to show that the accused persons had demanded any

more dowry or that they heckled the victim asking her to bring

more dowry from her house. The evidence of P.W.2 can be

taken only with a pinch of salt. The father of the victim, P.W.1,

Crl.Appeal.477/2005.
                               16

has no such case at all. Even assuming that the first accused

had indicated that he would like to have the money to

purchase an autorickshaw instead of 5 sovereigns of gold, one

must remember that was promised to be paid by P.W.1 at the

time of marriage, and there was no demand for dowry. At the

risk of repetition, there is no evidence at all in this case to

show that there is any demand for dowry as such.

             18.    What stands out at best is the victim had

refused to give her gold chain to a neighbour of accused No.2

and accused No.2 scolded her for that. Even assuming that

the second accused had gone to the house of the victim and

indicated that if the victim not willing to obey her, she could

not have returned to the matrimonial house. It is doubtful

whether that act can amount to cruelty contemplated under

Section 498A of I.P.C.

             19.    It is also significant to notice that the

matrimonial life exists only 17 days and in those 17 days

Crl.Appeal.477/2005.
                                  17

itself, on three occasions, the victim had come to her own

house and the evidence would show that in most of the time

she was residing in her own house. It is also significant to

notice that even after the so-called act said to have been

committed by the second accused in taking objection to the

conduct of the victim, the victim did go along with the first

accused and stayed in the matrimonial house.

             20.     Learned Public Prosecutor pointed out that

some untoward incident might have happened in the house of

the accused and that had driven the victim to commit suicide.

It is significant to notice, according to the learned Public

Prosecutor, that kerosene was bought from the ration shop of

P.W.9 on the date of incident itself.

             21.      It is not a matter for presumption and

assumption as to what might have happened on the date of

the incident.       It is for the prosecution to prove the actual

incident which led to the suicide by the victim. The mere fact

Crl.Appeal.477/2005.
                                  18

that kerosene might have been purchased on the date of the

incident, as long as there is no mention that it was purchased

by the accused for some other reason, it has no relevance at

all. As to what happened on the date of the incident is still a

mystery.      It is significant to notice that no neighbours of

accused Nos. 1 to 3 were examined to show that there were

quarrel between the victim and the inmates of the house of the

accused. The mere statement of P.Ws.3 and 4 that she was

found gloomy and moody after marriage is not a ground to

hold that the accused had treated the victim cruelly.

             22. Even assuming that the first accused used to

come home late in the night and he might have taken food

from outside cannot be treated as cruel acts though it is not

inconceivable that the bridegroom would take food from

outside leaving the bride to cook food on her own.

             23. One cannot omit to note that the first accused

is an autorickshaw driver by profession.          Probably his

Crl.Appeal.477/2005.
                                   19

profession was such that he might have had to take food from

outside. Even assuming that the victim had to cook food on

her own cannot be a ground to come to the conclusion that

she was treated cruelly or she was driven to commit suicide by

the act committed by the accused persons.

             24. It is also significant to notice that at the time of

incident only the third accused was in the house. The first

accused had gone to see movie and the second accused had

gone to Ernakulam.        It is true that according to the evidence

of P.W.1 they were told by the persons who had come to their

house that his daughter was suffering from abdominal pain

and in the hospital. But there is nothing to show that this was

as   directed by the accused persons, for,         neither the first

accused nor the second accused was there at the relevant

place at the relevant time. It is significant to notice that there

is no suggestion to either P.W.3 or P.W.4, who are neighbours

of the accused persons, that there was any quarrel or any act

Crl.Appeal.477/2005.
                               20

of violence on the part of the accused persons towards the

victim.

             25. Merely because matrimonial life was short lived

and there might have been some unpleasant talks or incidents,

that by themselves cannot attract Sections 498A and 304B of

I.P.C. All that the evidence in the case presents is an usual

unpleasant situation in a house and nothing more than that.

There is nothing to show that the victim was either ill-treated

or she was sent back to her house demanding more dowry. As

already stated, the first accused pointed out that he would like

to have the money in cash to purchase an autorickshaw

instead of five sovereigns of gold. But one should remember

that that was the gold promised by P.W.1 at the time of

marriage. There is no demand for more dowry nor there any

evidence in that regard.

             26.    The court below was perfectly justified in

coming to the conclusion that the prosecution has not

Crl.Appeal.477/2005.
                                  21

succeeded in        establishing that the accused had committed

offences punishable under Sections 498A and 304B of I.P.C.

This appeal is devoid of merits and it is only to be dismissed.

I do so confirming the order of acquittal passed by the court

below.




                                              P. BHAVADASAN,
                                                   JUDGE

sb.



