
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                     PRESENT:

                          THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE P.BHAVADASAN

               TUESDAY,THE 22ND DAY OF OCTOBER 2013/30TH ASWINA, 1935

                                            CRL.A.No. 1513 of 2003
                                            ---------------------------------
          [AGAINST THE CONVICTION AND SENTENCE IN S.C.NO.35/2001
           OF THE ADDITIONAL DISTRICT AND SESSIONS COURT (ADHOC)-I,
           KOTTAYAM DATED 28-08-2003]
                                                      ................

APPELLANT/ACCUSED:
----------------------------------


                     PONNAPPAN @ JOSE, S/O. KARUNAKARAN,
                     PARICKAL VEEDU, POONIKKAVU BHAGOM,
                     ERTHUVADAKARA KARA, VELLAVOOR VILLAGE.


                     BY ADV. SRI.P.RAVINDRA BABU.


RESPONDENT/COMPLAINANT:
--------------------------------------------


                     STATE OF KERALA,
                     REPRESENTED BY C.I. OF POLICE,
                     MANIMALA, REPRESENTED BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR,
                     HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM.


                     BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SRI. DHANESH MATHEW MANJOORAN.




                     THIS CRIMINAL APPEAL HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD
                     ON 22-10-2013, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY DELIVERED
                     THE FOLLOWING:




Prv.


                       P. BHAVADASAN, J.
                 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                 Crl.Appeal. No. 1513 of 2003
            Dated-this the 22nd day of October, 2013.
                    - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -


                            JUDGMENT


           The accused was prosecuted for the offences

punishable under Sections       498A and 306 of Indian Penal

Code.    He was acquitted of the charge under Section 306

I.P.C., but was found guilty of the offence under Section 498A

I.P.C. He was, therefore, convicted and sentenced to undergo

rigorous imprisonment for two years for the said offence.

           2.  The deceased got married to the accused on

30.5.1985. The couple had two children in the wedlock.     On

12.6.1999, as per the allegations the accused came home in

the evening drunk and scolded his daughter and slapped her.

Seeing that when his wife intervened, she was also given a

thrashing.   The allegation is that she went to the kitchen,

poured kerosene on her body and set herself on fire. She was

taken to the hospital. P.W.5, the brother of the victim, on

Crl.Appeal.1513/2003.
                                2

coming to know of the mishap to his sister, went to the

hospital and later on 13.6.1999 laid Ext.P4 First Information

Statement. That was recorded by P.W.4, who registered crime

as per Ext.P5 FIR. Investigation was taken over by P.W.12.

While undergoing treatment in the hospital, the victim

breathed her last. Inquest was conducted and autopsy was

also done. P.W.12, the Investigating Officer, prepared Ext.P20

scene mahazar and articles seized at the place of incident.

The accused was arrested on 1.7.1999 and he recorded the

statements of witnesses. He completed the investigation and

laid charge before court.

             3. The court, before which final report was laid,

took cognizance of the offences.      Finding that the offences

are exclusively triable by a court of Sessions, the said court

committed the case to Sessions Court, Kottayam under Section

209 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. The said court made

over the case to Additional District and Sessions Court

(Adhoc) I, Kottayam for trial and disposal.

Crl.Appeal.1513/2003.
                                 3

             4. The latter court, on receipt of records and on

appearance of the accused framed charge for the offences

punishable under Sections 498A and 306 of I.P.C. To the

charge, the accused pleaded not guilty and claimed to be tried.

The prosecution, therefore, had P.Ws.1 to 12 examined and

had Exts.P1 to 22 marked. M.Os. 1 to 3 were identified and

marked.        After the close of the prosecution evidence, the

accused was questioned under Section 313 Cr.P.C. He denied

all the incriminating circumstances brought out in evidence

against him and maintained that he is innocent. He also

stated that he believes in Hindu religion and he is a mahout

by profession. He was leading a happy life and maintaining his

family with whatever earnings he could make.          With the

meager income out of the employment, they were leading a

calm life. He pleaded ignorance as to why his wife set herself

on fire. Finding that he could not be acquitted under Section

232 Cr.P.C., he was asked to enter on his defence. He chose

to adduce no evidence.

Crl.Appeal.1513/2003.
                                 4

             5.     Presumably on the basis of the evidence

furnished by P.Ws. 5 and 6 and also Ext.P4 first information

statement, the court below came to the conclusion that the

accused had been ill-treating the victim which led her to

commit suicide.        Accordingly, he was found guilty of the

offence under Section 498A of I.P.C. The said conviction and

sentence are assailed in this appeal.

             6.    Learned counsel appearing for the appellant

contended that the court below has erred both on facts and in

law in coming to the conclusion that the offence under Section

498A of I.P.C. has been made out. All that the prosecution

has, is the interested testimony of P.Ws.5 and 6 and there is

no independent witness examined to prove that the accused

had been ill-treating his wife.     As  far as the evidence of

P.Ws.5 and 6 are concerned, it is pointed out that the

statements made by them in the chief-examination were seen

to have been omitted to be stated by them to the police when

questioned under Section 161 Cr.P.C.        The omissions are

Crl.Appeal.1513/2003.
                                  5

glaring and amounts to contradiction, and that makes their

evidence in court extremely vulnerable.        If the evidence of

P.Ws.5 and 6 are eschewed, then, there is no evidence to show

that the accused had ill-treated the victim. Learned counsel

also pointed out that even P.Ws.5 and 6 would admit that the

accused with his income was properly maintaining his family.

Though P.Ws.5 and 6 speak about certain cruel acts said to

have been committed by the accused in their presence, those

instances are conspicuously absent in the statement given to

the police which shows that the statements made in court are

clear embellishments and developments stated in court only

for the purpose of the case. No reliance could be placed on

those statements.      The evidence of P.Ws.7 and 8, the two

children of the couple clearly show that except for the fact

that the accused used to drink as spoken to by P.W.7, there is

no evidence to show that he had ever treated his wife cruelly.

It is significant to notice, according to the learned counsel that

the two children continued to stay with their father and he is

Crl.Appeal.1513/2003.
                                6

looking after them.     Drawing attention to Ext.P1 statement

taken by the learned Magistrate from the hospital where the

victim was undergoing treatment, it was pointed out that the

victim had no complaints against her husband except that he

often used to scold her. Accordingly, it is contended that the

court below was not justified in blindly accepting the evidence

of P.Ws.5 and 6 and jumping into a conclusion that the offence

has been made out.

             7. The learned Public Prosecutor on the other hand

contended that there is no justification to disbelieve P.Ws.5

and 6 who are the brother and mother respectively and they

are the best persons to speak about the ill-treatment meted

out to the victim. There is no ill-motive or oblique reason

attributed to them as to why they should falsely implicate the

accused. Their evidence stands scrutiny and the court below

has chosen to accept their evidence. Further, it is pointed out

that in Ext.P4 first information statement, there is a clear

statement by P.W.5 that the victim was being ill-treated. The

Crl.Appeal.1513/2003.
                                 7

court below has chosen to accept the evidence of P.Ws.5 and 6

and there is no reason for this Court to take a different view.

Accordingly, it is contended that conviction and sentence will

have to be sustained.

             8.    Though the accused was prosecuted for the

offence punishable under Sections 306 and 498A of I.P.C., he

was found guilty of the offence under Section 498A of I.P.C.

only. There is no allegation that the accused had ill-treated

the victim demanding more dowry. The prosecution allegation

seems to be that he used to come home drunk and pick up

quarrel with his wife and beat her up. He also suspected her

chastity and on that count also he used to ill-treat her.

             9.    In order to prove the ill-treatment and the

cruelty meted out o the victim, the prosecution mainly relies

on the evidence of P.Ws.5 and 6 and Ext.P4. P.W.5 is none

other than the brother of the victim and P.W.6 is her mother.

They do speak about the harassment meted out to the victim

and P.Ws.5 and 6 would go to the extent of saying that the

Crl.Appeal.1513/2003.
                                 8

victim was so fed up with the accused that she used to say

that she will kill herself.    On the date of the incident, the

evidence would show that the accused had come home drunk

in the evening and had scolded his daughter and had slapped

her. When the mother, the victim, intervened, she was also

beaten up. The further story is that the mother went inside

the kitchen and set herself on fire.

             10. The question is whether the evidence of P.Ws.5

and 6 can be         accepted. As already stated, they do speak

about the ill-treatment meted out to the victim and also speak

about one of the two incidents where she was brutally

manhandled.           According to the learned counsel for the

appellant, these statements of ill-treatment spoken to P.Ws. 5

and 6 are conspicuously absent in their previous statement

given to the police.        This is confirmed by P.W.12, the

Investigating Officer, who had occasion to question those

witnesses. These omissions cannot be taken as trifle. The

omissions are on material aspects. In fact P.Ws.5 and 6 would

Crl.Appeal.1513/2003.
                                9

say that they are speaking about the ill-treatment for the first

time in court.        When viewed in the light of the above

circumstances, the contention of the learned counsel for the

appellant that the story of ill-treatment was developed much

later cannot be brushed aside.       There is  no mention of

ill-treatment in Ext.P4 FIS said to have been given by P.W.5.

But one cannot omit to notice the evidence of P.Ws.7 and 8,

the children of the accused, though they have turned hostile to

the prosecution. P.W.7 would say that her father used to come

home drunk, but she denied that he used to manhandle her

mother. P.W.8 pleads total ignorance.

             11.     One cannot omit to note the statement in

Ext.P1, that is statement of the victim said to have     been

recorded by P.W.1, the JFCM, while she was labouring in the

hospital. In Ext.P1 the learned Magistrate has noticed that the

victim had no complaint about her husband except that he

occasionally used to scold her.

Crl.Appeal.1513/2003.
                                10

             12.    Even P.Ws.5 and 6 admitted that it was the

accused who was looking after the family and there is no case

for them that at any point of time they have to render financial

help or other help to the victim. At the risk of repetition, one

may notice that the children are staying with their father.

When viewed in the light of the above circumstances, a

reasonable doubt is created regarding the statements

furnished by P.Ws.5 and 6 as to the ill-treatment meted out to

the victim by the accused. At any rate, one cannot ignore the

statement of the victim herself that she had no complaint of

ill-treatment by her husband. If one is to believe the evidence

of P.Ws. 5 and 6 that the accused used to ill-treat the victim

and that she told them that she would kill herself, that would

have found expression in Ext.P4 FIS.

             13. For the above reasons, this Court is unable to

accept the finding of the court below that the ingredients

to attract the offence under Section 498A I.P.C. is attracted to

the facts of the case.

Crl.Appeal.1513/2003.
                                  11

             In the result, this appeal is allowed, the conviction

of the accused for the offence under Section 498A of I.P.C. and

the sentence imposed on him are set aside and the accused

shall stand acquitted of the said charge. His bail bond shall

stand cancelled and he is set at liberty.




                                               P. BHAVADASAN,
                                                    JUDGE

sb.



