
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                      PRESENT:

                          THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE P.BHAVADASAN

         WEDNESDAY, THE 13TH DAY OF NOVEMBER 2013/22ND KARTHIKA, 1935

                                           CRL.A.No. 1720 of 2005 ( )
                                                ---------------------------
              SC 364/2003 of ADDITIONAL DISTRICT COURT (ADHOC), MANJERI

                                   CP 61/2003 of J.M.F.C.,MALAPPURAM

APPELLANT/ACCUSED:
------------------------------------

            MOHAMMED ALI
            POOZHIKUNNATHU HOUSE, ILLIKKAD, VENGAD
            MOORKKANAD AMSOM.

            BY ADVS.SRI.V.V.RAJA


RESPONDENT(S)/COMPLAINANT:
-------------------------------------------------

            STATE OF KERALA
            THE PUBLIC PROSECUTOR, HIGH COURT OF KERALA
            ERNAKULAM.

            BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SMT. P. MAYA

            THIS CRIMINAL APPEAL HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD ON 13-11-2013, THE
COURT ON THE SAME DAY DELIVERED THE FOLLOWING:


                     P.BHAVADASAN, J.
              ---------------------------------------
                Crl. Appeal No.1720 OF 2005
              ---------------------------------------
         Dated this the 13th day of November, 2013.


                        J U D G M E N T


     The accused was prosecuted for the offences punishable

under Sections 498A and 306 of Indian Penal Code.        He was

found guilty on both counts. He was therefore convicted and

sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for a period of one

year and to pay a fine of Rs.1,000/- under Section 498A IPC and

also to undergo rigorous imprisonment for a period of three years

and to pay a fine of Rs.1,000/- under Section 306 IPC. In default

of payment of fine, he was sentenced to undergo simple

imprisonment for one month each under each Sections.         The

substantive sentences were directed to run concurrently. Set off

as per law was allowed.

     2. The prosecution story is that the victim while studying

for her Degree course, used to travel in a bus in which the

accused was a conductor. They gained acquaintance with each

other which blossomed into love and later ended in their

Crl. Appeal No.1720/2005              2


marriage. The prosecution allegation is that for about one year

of marriage, everything was pleasant and went on well and

thereafter things became bad. The accused is alleged to have

started ill-treating his wife and it is alleged that food was also

denied to her. On a particular day, when she brought tea to the

accused, he found a fly in the tea and that made him furious. He

is alleged to have ill-treated her on that day.         That was on

07.06.2002, according to PW6, the mother of the victim. The

allegation is that unable to bear the torture any more, the victim

telephoned to nearby house and had the information passed on

to PW6. PW6 sent PW2 who found the victim in shabby clothes

and when questioned, she stated that all her clothes have been

put under lock and key by the accused.              According to the

prosecution allegation, the victim was brought back home in an

autorickshaw.           Further allegation is that though the victim

obtained admission for the B.Ed course, she was not permitted to

join the course. Whenever the victim expressed her inclination to

join the course, he was harsh and he said that she should avoid

all her relatives and should act as he dictated. The allegation is

Crl. Appeal No.1720/2005          3


that he had an agreement sent through a person to be signed by

the victim wherein the victim was shown to be inclined to have a

divorce. On the day previous to the mishap, i.e. on 10.02.2003,

as per the prosecution allegation, the victim received a letter

alleged to have been written by the accused which made her

depressed and sad. On 10.02.2003, she committed suicide by

hanging.

       3.      PW1, the brother of the victim, laid Ext.P1 First

Information Statement.        Ext.P3 is the inquest report. PW7

conducted autopsy and provided Ext.P5 report. PW9 recorded

the statement furnished by PW1 and registered a crime as per

Ext.P7 First Information Report. Investigation was taken over by

PW10.        He prepared Ext.P4 mahazar and had the site plan

obtained. He seized the articles found at the place of incident,

recorded the statement of witnesses, completed the investigation

and laid charge before court.

       4.      The court before which final report was laid took

cognizance of the offence and on finding that the offences are

exclusively triable by a Court of Sessions, the case was

Crl. Appeal No.1720/2005          4


committed to Sessions Court, Manjeri under Section 209 Cr.P.C.

The said court made over the case to Additional Sessions Court

Fast Track-I (Adhoc), Manjeri for trial and disposal. The latter

court, on receipt of records and on appearance of the accused,

framed charges for the offences punishable under Sections 498A

and 306 IPC. To the charge, the accused pleaded not guilty and

claimed to be tried. The prosecution therefore had PWs 1 to 10

examined and Exts.P1 to P10 marked. M.O.1 was got identified

and marked.

       5. After the close of the prosecution evidence, the accused

was questioned under Section 313 Cr.P.C.        He denied all the

incriminating circumstances brought out in evidence against him

and maintained that he is innocent.         He denied of having

committed any act as alleged and stated that when he went to

see his wife, he was not allowed to do so and notice he had sent

was returned unclaimed.

       6. On finding that the accused could not be acquitted under

Section 232 Cr.P.C, he was asked to enter on his defence. He

examined himself as DW1 and Exts.D1 to D8 were marked.

Crl. Appeal No.1720/2005          5


       7. The court below presumably impressed by the evidence

of PWs 1, 2 and 6 and also relying on certain portions of the

evidence furnished by DW1, came to the conclusion that the

offences had been made out. The conviction and sentence as

already mentioned followed.

       8. Learned counsel appearing for the appellant assailed the

conviction and sentence on various grounds. According to the

learned counsel, the evidence furnished by PWs 1, 2 and 6 are

purely hearsay in nature and no reliance can be placed on their

evidence. Apart from the above fact, it is also pointed out that

PWs 1 and 2 were the brothers of the victim and PW6 was her

mother. The evidence would clearly show that the family of the

victim was financially much better and that they did not like the

alliance between the victim and the accused. According to the

learned counsel, even after coming to know that the victim was

ill-treated in the house of the accused, it is surprising to note that

PWs 1, 2 or 6 did not take any steps in that regard. Instead they

let her continue residence with the accused and learned counsel

pointed out that for eight months prior to the date of the

Crl. Appeal No.1720/2005           6


incident, the victim had been residing with her mother and

brothers and her father is doing business outside.        Learned

counsel went on to point out that going by the evidence of PWs 1,

2 and 6, it was a telephone call which was made by the victim to

a neighbour which propelled the mother to send PW2 to bring the

victim back. Learned counsel pointed out that the accused had a

case that the victim had voluntarily left his house to go home.

According to the learned counsel, it is significant to notice that

the prosecution felt shy to examine the person in whose house

the call had come for PW6 for the obvious reason that there was

no such call at all. Learned counsel went on to point out that

there is no allegation that the accused had demanded more

dowry or that he had expressed his dissatisfaction about the

dowry given to him.        In fact, the evidence says that he had

returned the entire gold ornaments received by him at the time

of marriage.

       9. Learned counsel appearing for the appellant pointed out

that even going by the evidence of PWs 1, 2 and 6, there was a

mediation between the parties and they would say that due to

Crl. Appeal No.1720/2005          7


the adamant attitude of the accused, it did not materialise.

Learned counsel further pointed out that it is surprising to note

that none of the mediators have been examined by the

prosecution to prove the said fact. If any one of the mediators

have been examined, that would have exposed the truth. The

non examination of the mediators is deliberate, according to the

learned counsel, to see that truth may not come out. Learned

counsel further pointed out that the grievance of the accused that

the letters that he used to send to the victim were never handed

over to the victim was fortified by the fact that the registered

notice sent by him calling the victim to come back and reside

with him was returned unaccepted even without the victim

receiving the same and the explanation offered is that they

thought that it was a notice for divorce.

       10.      Relying on Ext.D6, it is contended by the learned

counsel for the appellant that if, as a matter of fact, the accused

was so cruel to the victim such a letter would not have been

written by the victim.      Learned counsel pointed out that the

starting point of rift is the non reading of letters written by the

Crl. Appeal No.1720/2005        8


father of the victim and his reluctance to attend the phone calls

made by the father to the victim. The best person who could

have spoken to about these matters is the father.        For the

reasons best known to the prosecution, he was also withheld.

Even assuming that there was any ill-treatment as alleged by the

prosecution, that was eight months ago and during the eight

months of her stay in her own house, there was no act

committed by the accused which would have driven her to

commit suicide. There is absolutely no evidence, according to the

learned counsel, to show that offences under Sections 306 and

498A IPC are attracted. Accordingly, it is contended that the

conviction and sentence cannot stand.

       11. Learned Public Prosecutor, on the other hand,

contended that the evidence of PW6 is sufficient to show the

attitude of the accused towards the victim. She had no reason to

speak falsehood especially since she was dealing with the life of

her daughter. She gets ample support from PWs 1 and 2 also.

All of them say that it was on a phone call made by the victim

that she was brought back home. They also speak about the ill-

Crl. Appeal No.1720/2005         9


treatment meted out by the accused to the victim.         Learned

Public Prosecutor also pointed out that as per the evidence, the

accused had sent a person with an agreement which would

appear that it was at the behest of the victim that divorce was

being sought. However, the victim had refused to sign the same.

That shows the attitude of the accused. It is also pointed out

that there is nothing to show that the accused, after the victim

had left his house in July 2002, had ever gone to meet his wife.

True, there is no allegation of physical harassment or torture at

all. But, the mental cruelty that was meted out was so severe

that the victim was almost convinced that the accused was

disinclined to continue the martial life with her and that had

driven her to commit suicide.     At any rate, according to the

learned Public Prosecutor, the lower court has chosen to accept

the evidence of PWs 1, 2 and 6 and there is no reason to take a

different view. Accordingly, it is contended that no grounds are

made out to interfere with the conviction and sentence.

       12. Though the case of the accused is that the victim while

studying for B.Sc course had fallen in love with him and much

Crl. Appeal No.1720/2005           10


against the wish of the family of the victim, they had got

married.        The prosecution would say that it was an arranged

marriage between the two families. The marriage was admittedly

on 27.07.2000.           The mishap occurred on 10.02.2003.        The

prosecution allegation is that initially the marital life of the victim

was pleasant for about one year and thereafter it took a bad

turn. The accused used to find fault with her on the slightest

pretext and the prosecution goes on to say that she was even

assaulted.

       13. The prosecution mainly relies on the evidence of PWs 1,

2 and 6. Among them, PWs 1 and 2 are the brothers of the

victim and PW6 is her mother.           PW1 had laid Ext.P1 First

Information Statement. It is true that in Ext.P1, it is stated that

due to the ill-treatment both physical and mental meted out by

the accused and unable to bear the same, on the telephone call

made by the victim, she was brought home. The accused used to

find fault with her and also used to ill-treat her on the slightest

pretext. Ext.P1 also says that there was a mediation talk but the

accused was not amenable for a compromise. But, Ext.P1 goes

Crl. Appeal No.1720/2005         11


to the extent of saying that the accused threatened the victim

that if she returned to the matrimonial house, she would be even

more badly ill-treated. Unable to bear the trauma, as per Ext.P1,

she committed suicide.

       14. It is true that PWs 1 and 2 say about the ill-treatment

alleged to have been meted out by the accused. According to

PWs 1, 2 and 6, for an year after marriage, the couple lived very

happily and comfortably.       As per the evidence of PW1, on

06.07.2002, the victim made a phone call to the neighbouring

house and it was attended to by PW6. The evidence of PW6 is to

the effect that the phone call was on 07.06.2002. PW6 would say

that she had sent PW2 to fetch the victim from the matrimonial

house when she narrated the agony undergone by her in that

house. PW1 would also say that PW2 had gone and brought her

back. All the three witnesses are uniform in the statement that

at the time when PW2 met the victim, she was found in shabby

clothes and when asked for the reason, she replied that the

accused had kept her clothes under lock and key.           Further

evidence says that she was brought back home in an

Crl. Appeal No.1720/2005             12


autorickshaw.          They also speak about the incident which took

place on the day on which she was brought back home.

According to these witnesses, the accused used to pick up

quarrels with the victim on the slightest pretext and for no

reason, mentally harassed her. Even though there is a vague

allegation that she was physically assaulted, these witnesses do

not say of any specific instance of physical assault. PWs 1, 2 and

6 do say that even though the victim secured admission for the

B.Ed course, she was not allowed to join the course. All the three

witnesses also say that there was mediation to patch up the

differences between the couple.          But, due to the adamant

attitude adopted by the accused, it did not materialise. PWs 1, 2

and 6 also say about the victim having received a letter on the

previous day of the incident which, according to them, made the

victim looked depressed.

       15. If the evidence of PWs 1, 2 and 6 is accepted, there is

sufficient evidence to show the conduct of the accused towards

the victim. But, one has to look at the defence version also. The

accused has a case that due to the financial inequality between

Crl. Appeal No.1720/2005        13


the two families, the family of the victim was not interested in

their relationship and they have made all efforts to see that the

victim does not come into contact with the accused. There is

some substance in the contention that there is no evidence to

show that the claim made by PWs 1, 2 and 6 that the victim was

brought back home either on 06.07.2002 or 07.06.2002 as a

result of the phone call made by the victim to the neighbourhood

is true. The phone call was to the house of one Vasantha. The

said Vasantha has not been examined. The accused had a case

that the victim had left the house on her own. It would have

been better if the prosecution has taken steps to examine the

said Vasantha.

       16. One has to notice that the trouble, according to PWs 1,

2 and 6, started when the accused refused to read the letters

sent by the father of the victim and also refused to attend the

phone calls made by him.        One would have expected the

prosecution to examine the father. There was no such attempt

also on the side of the prosecution. Even assuming that there

were quarrels and squabbles between the couple, that admittedly

Crl. Appeal No.1720/2005          14


were eight months prior to the date of the incident.

       17. It is not in dispute that for eight months prior to the

date of the incident, the victim has been staying with PWs 1, 2

and 6. PWs 1, 2 and 6 had to admit that the accused had sent a

registered notice which was not accepted by the victim. They say

that they thought that it was a notice of divorce. The said letter

is Ext.D5 marked by the accused. A perusal of Ext.D5 shows that

that was a letter calling upon the victim to come and reside with

him. The non acceptance of the letter by the victim, to some

extent, fortifies the contention taken by the accused that the

family members of the victim were careful enough to see that the

letters sent by the accused never reached the victim. According

to the defence, Ext.D6 is a letter alleged to have been written by

the victim.

       18. It is significant to notice, as rightly pointed out by the

learned counsel for the appellant, that it is not in dispute that

Ext.D6 is not in the handwriting of the victim. Of course, there is

mention in Ext.D6 that the accused may address letters to her in

the name of one Naseema. The court below was not inclined to

Crl. Appeal No.1720/2005         15


accept it as a genuine letter and was of the opinion that it was a

cooked up one by the accused. It is significant to notice that the

accused had produced the cover in which he received the letter

namely, Ext.D6 also. The court below was not therefore justified

in coming to the conclusion that it was a cooked up material by

the accused. The court below found fault with the accused for

having insisted for a receipt at the time of returning gold

ornaments. The court below felt that that is an indication that

even at that point of time the accused had an intention to snap

the martial relationship. One can only say that the conclusion is

is far fetched since the letters namely, Exts.D5 and D6 come

much thereafter. Probably, knowing the intention of the family

members of the victim, the accused might have thought it safe to

insist for a receipt. But that cannot be taken as a ground to hold

that the accused had no intention to continue the relationship

with the victim. PWs 1, 2 and 6 do say that there were mediation

talks between the two families. According to them, mediation

failed due to the adamant attitude adopted by the accused. PW2

would say that the accused stated that he is amenable for a talk

Crl. Appeal No.1720/2005        16


only after his Eleppa returns. But, all the three witnesses say

that the mediation talk failed due to the adamant attitude

displayed by the accused.

       19. One fails to understand as to why the prosecution was

shy to examine anyone of the mediators. If, as a matter of fact,

mediation talk had failed due to the attitude of the accused, the

mediators would have been the best persons to speak about the

same.        Regarding the mediation talks, we have only the

interested testimony of PWs 1, 2 and 6. One must remember

here that all what is spoken to by PWs 1, 2 and 6 are based on

what they were told by the victim.         They have no direct

knowledge about the so called ill-treatment said to have been

meted out by the accused. PW6 would say that when they asked

the victim of her opinion about mediation, the victim told her that

since the accused had told her that if she returned, she would

have to face more severe ill-treatment, she is disinterested in

mediation, which does not get support from PWs 1 and 2. Even

going by the evidence of PW6, mediation did take place. But

what had transpired in the mediation, we have no evidence as

Crl. Appeal No.1720/2005           17


the prosecution has not examined anyone of the mediators. It is

thus therefore follows that except for the versions given by

PWs 1, 2 and 6, there is no independent evidence at all to show

that the claim of ill-treatment and harassment alleged against the

accused is established.       Even assuming that there has been

family quarrels and squabbles between the couple, that were

eight months ago and what had transpired during the eight

months period, there is no evidence at all. Even assuming what

the prosecution says is true, all the allegations are true.

       20. The question is whether the offences under Section 306

and 498A IPC are attracted. It is significant to notice that the

allegations are mostly of mental harassment and not of physical

harassment at all even though there is a mention by PW1 that

the victim was physically assaulted. But, that, at any rate, was

eight months ago.         Regarding what had transpired during the

eight months period when the victim was residing in her paternal

house, there was no convincing evidence. Ext.D5 would show

that the claim made by PWs 1, 2 and 6 that the accused had no

intention to continue the martial relationship cannot be true. The

Crl. Appeal No.1720/2005         18


non examination of the mediators makes the versions given by

PWs 1, 2 and 6 that it was due to the attitude displayed by the

accused that the mediation talks failed is open to serious doubt.

Even assuming that the accused had indicated that if the victim

wanted to live with him, she had to leave her family members

and had to lead a life as dictated by him, it is extremely doubtful

whether that can amount to cruelty under Section 498A IPC. Of

course, cruelty contemplated under Section 498A IPC need not be

physical cruelty. It can as well be mental. PWs 1, 2 and 6 only

made general statements regarding the cruelty.

       21. Coming to the offence under Section 306 IPC, it is by

now well settled that the instigation contemplated under the said

Section is the intention on the part of the accused that the victim

should commit suicide as a result of the act committed by him or

that he should create such a situation where the victim has no

choice but to commit suicide. Of course, PWs 1, 2 and 6 do say

about the letter which was received by the victim on the previous

day. But, that letter, according to them, was burnt by the victim.

One fails to understand whether it was due to the disinclination

Crl. Appeal No.1720/2005          19


on the part of the accused or due to the act of PWs 1, 2 and 6 on

the near date or on the date of the incident, the victim had done

so. The allegation that mediation failed due to the attitude of the

accused, as already noticed, is open to serious doubt. There is

nothing to show that there was any instigation on the part of the

accused so as to drive the victim to commit suicide.

       22. This Court is unable to accept the finding of the court

below that the offences under Sections 306 and 498A IPC have

been established against the accused.

       In the result, this appeal is allowed. The conviction and

sentence passed by the court below for the offences punishable

under Sections 306 and 498A IPC are set aside and it is held that

the prosecution has not succeeded in establishing its case beyond

reasonable doubt.         The accused is acquitted of the charges

levelled against him. His bail bond shall stand cancelled and he is

set at liberty. If he has paid the fine amount, the same shall be

refunded.

                                              Sd/-

                                        P.BHAVADASAN
                                            JUDGE
smp



