
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                           PRESENT:

           THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE P.BHAVADASAN

  TUESDAY, THE 12TH DAY OF NOVEMBER 2013/21ST KARTHIKA, 1935

                 CRL.A.No. 1849 of 2005 ( )
                 ---------------------------
  AGAINST THE JUDGMENT IN SC 713/2004 of ADDITIONAL SESSIONS
           COURT (ADHOC), THRISSUR DATED 21-10-2005
                            -----
    APPELLANTS/ACCUSED :
    ------------------

  1. SURESH, SON OF VELAYUDHAN,
      CHIRATTAPURAKKAL, EMMAD DESOM, PAPPINIVATTOM.

  2. MADHAVI, AGED 68 YEARS,
      WIFE OF VELAYUDHAN, CHIRATTAPURAKKAL,
      EMMAD DESOM, PAPPINIVATTOM.

      BY ADVS.SRI.S.M.PREM
              SMT.K.P.SANTHI
              SMT.ANALAKHUSI BHASKAR

    RESPONDENTS :
    -----------

      STATE OF KERALA,
      REPRESENTED BY THE PUBLIC PROSECUTOR
      HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM.

      BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SRI.DHANESH MATHEW MANJOORAN

      THIS CRIMINAL APPEAL  HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD
      ON 12-11-2013, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY DELIVERED
      THE FOLLOWING:
BP


                       P.BHAVADASAN, J.
               - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                     Crl.A. No. 1849 of 2005
               - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
         Dated this the 12th day of November, 2013


                         J U D G M E N T

      Three members of a family namely son, mother and the

daughter were prosecuted for the offences punishable under

Sections 498A and 306 read with Section 34 of the Indian

Penal Code. Among them, the third accused was acquitted

of all charges. The first and the second accused were found

guilty on both counts and they were convicted and

sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for two years

and to pay a fine of  10,000/- each for the offence

punishable under Section 498A read with Section 34 of IPC

with a default clause of simple imprisonment for four

months.     They were also sentenced to suffer rigorous

imprisonment for five years and to pay a fine of 15,000/-

each    with  a   default       clause       of    six     months simple

imprisonment for the offence punishable under Section 306

of IPC.   It is also directed that if the fine amount was

Crl.A. No.1849/2005
                             -2-



realized, 75% of the said amount shall be paid to the father

of the victim as compensation.     Set off as per law was

allowed. The substantive sentences were directed to run

concurrently.

      2.   Praseetha, the daughter of PW2 had a love affair

with the first accused.   As is the usual, that ended in a

physical relationship.     According to the prosecution

allegation, no sooner than the desire was achieved, it is

alleged that the first accused sought to withdraw from the

relationship and that caused the intervention of the two

families who decided to conduct the marriage between the

victim and the first accused. A ceremony was conducted in

a temple on 21.06.2002. The prosecution allegation is that

soon thereafter, the demand for dowry was made by the

accused persons and after much deliberations,  25,000/-

and 10 sovereigns of gold were given as dowry. The case

appears to be that, the first accused was not keen in

continuing the relationship and the second and the third

Crl.A. No.1849/2005
                              -3-



accused were deadly against the continuance of the marital

relationship. The prosecution would allege that they began

to ill-treat the victim and ultimately that led to her

committing suicide on 24.09.2002.

      3.   PW2, the father of the victim laid Ext.P2, First

Information Statement.     That was recorded by PW8, who

registered crime as per Ext.P2(a), FIR. He prepared Ext.P6

scene mahazar.      He seized several articles found at the

place of incident.       PW9 took over investigation on

26.09.2002.     He filed Ext.P7, report incorporating Section

498A read with Section 34 of IPC. The first accused was

arrested on 26.09.2002. The subsequent investigation was

carried on by PW10, the Circle Inspector of Police in

pursuance to the order of Crime Branch S.P..           PW10

collected various records namely the registers related to

marriage etc. and prepared the necessary mahazars. In the

meanwhile, inquest was conducted on the body of the

deceased and autopsy was also conducted. Autopsy was

Crl.A. No.1849/2005
                             -4-



conducted by CW49 who prepared Ext.P13 post-mortem

certificate. After completing investigation, final report was

laid before court.

      4.   The court before which the final report was laid,

took cognizance of the offences.      On finding that the

offences are exclusively triable by a Court of Sessions, the

case was committed to the Sessions Court, Thrissur. The

said court made over the case to Third Additional Sessions

Court (Adhoc) Fast Track Court-I, Thrissur for trial and

disposal.

      5.   The latter court, on receipt of records, framed

charges for the offences punishable under Sections 498(A)

and 306 read with Section 34 of IPC. To the charge, the

accused pleaded not guilty and claimed to be tried. The

prosecution therefore had PWs 1 to 18 examined and had

Exts. P1 to P15 marked. MOs 1 to 22 were got identified and

marked.

Crl.A. No.1849/2005
                              -5-



      6.   After the close of the prosecution evidence, the

accused were questioned under Section 313 Cr.P.C. They

denied all the incriminating circumstances brought out in

evidence against them and maintained that they were

innocent.     The first accused stated that he has not

committed any act which would constitute an offence and

that he has neither ill-treated or harassed Praseetha, the

victim. He denied having married Praseetha. However, he

admitted that the two families were related to each other.

He would further go on and say that Praseetha was brought

to his house by the members of his family and that he had

never fallen in love with her. He has not done any act which

had driven Praseetha to commit suicide and he would also

say that she had a suicidal tendency.

      7.   Finding that the accused could not be acquitted

under Section 232 Cr.P.C., they were asked to enter on their

defence. They chose to adduce no evidence.

Crl.A. No.1849/2005
                              -6-



      8.   The court below greatly impressed by the

testimony of PWs 2, 5, 6, 12, 13, 14 and 15 came to the

conclusion that the offences have been established and

accordingly conviction and sentence followed as already

mentioned.

      9.   The learned counsel appearing for the appellants

contended that the conviction and sentence on both counts

are clearly unsustainable both on facts and in law. Referring

to Ext.P2, the First Information Statement said to have been

furnished by PW2, the father of the victim, the learned

counsel pointed out that there is no whisper in that

document regarding any ill-treatment meted out by the

accused persons which would have driven the victim to

commit suicide. All that is stated in the document is that the

third accused had threatened that she would not let their

relationship continue.    It is pointed out by the learned

counsel that true, there was a demand for dowry and that

was satisfied by the members of the victim's family by

Crl.A. No.1849/2005
                               -7-



providing  25,000/- and ten sovereigns of gold though the

demand was for  35,000/- and 25 sovereigns of gold.

However, the learned counsel pointed out that after 

25,000/- and ten sovereigns of gold were given, there was

absolutely no evidence to show that there was further

demand for dowry and also that the accused had in any way

ill-treated the victim for that purpose. The learned counsel

went on to point out that it is true that PWs 13, 14 and 15

say that the victim was unhappy in the matrimonial house

and that the accused used to ill-treat her. But no specific

instance or details of the ill-treatment are spoken to by any

of these witnesses.     As far as PWs 13, 14 and 15 are

concerned, the crucial statements made by them in court

are conspicuously absent in their previous statement to the

Police and that makes their evidence extremely vulnerable.

The court below has simply accepted the evidence without

looking into these aspects and has jumped to the conclusion

that the offences have been made out.      It is significant to

Crl.A. No.1849/2005
                              -8-



notice according to the learned counsel that PW2, the father

had a case that his daughter was ill-treated demanding

more dowry or that his daughter had never complained to

him that the life in the matrimonial house was miserable.

The lower court has accepted the evidence of PWs 12 to 15

without taking note of the fact that they are prone to

embellishments, developments and exaggerations. It is not

as if that the exaggerations and embellishments are       of

insignificant in nature but they are all material aspects of

the case.       These material omissions in Section 161

statement to the Police makes their evidence in court open

to serious doubt.    If their evidence is eschewed, there is

hardly any material to show that the accused had ill-treated

the victim. He therefore contended that the conviction and

sentence cannot stand.

      10. The learned Public Prosecutor on the other hand

pointed out that the sequence of events would clearly show

the life of the victim was made miserable by the accused

Crl.A. No.1849/2005
                             -9-



persons and that finally led to the suicide of the victim. It

would appear according to the learned Public Prosecutor

that the marriage was conducted under the pretext that the

victim had conceived as a result of the physical relationship

with the first accused. When that proved to be wrong, the

second and the third accused might have become furious

and they might have taken steps against the victim. There

is nothing to show according to the learned Public

Prosecutor that the amount of  25,000/- and 10 sovereigns

of gold given as dowry was to the satisfaction of the accused

persons. If one goes by the evidence of PWs 13 and 14, it

would be clear that even thereafter, the victim was being ill-

treated and she was denied food.        There is no oblique

motive suggested to these witnesses as to why they should

speak against the accused persons. The court below has

analyzed their evidence in considerable detail and has found

them to be acceptable.       There is no reason to hold

otherwise. If the evidence of these witnesses are accepted,

Crl.A. No.1849/2005
                            -10-



then there is clinching materials to show that the victim was

driven to commit suicide due to the ill-treatment meted out

by the accused persons. In short, the contention is that no

grounds are made out to interfere with the findings of the

court below.

      11. The court below, mainly relied on the evidence of

PWs 2, 6, 12, 13, 14 and 15 has come to the conclusion that

the victim was driven to commit suicide due to the ill-

treatment meted out by the accused persons. It is true that

there was an attempt from the side of the first accused to

deny the marriage itself and it would appear that his case

was that the victim was brought to his house and left there.

The said stand of the first accused does not appear to be

quite correct. The evidence is overwhelming that there was

a ceremony of marriage conducted in a temple as well as in

the house of PW2 as well.

      12. That there was a demand for dowry also is quite

evident from the evidence of the witnesses made mention of

Crl.A. No.1849/2005
                               -11-



especially PW15, the President of Kodungallur Taluk

Committee of Kerala State Vettuva Maha Sabha, the

community to which the parties belong. He speaks about

three complaints received by him namely Exts. P3, P4 and

P10 out of which Exts.P3 and P4 are by PW2 and Ext.P10 is

by the brother of the first accused.

      13. The materials on record do indicate that there was

a demand for  35,000/- and 25 sovereigns of gold and

ultimately after mediation, the demand was settled at 15

sovereigns and cash to the tune of  25,000/-. The evidence

also discloses that initially, 10 sovereigns were given and a

cheque for  25,000/- was handed over to A1 which he

refused insisting for cash. PW2 has categorically stated that

later on,  25,000/- was entrusted to the brother of the first

accused.

      14. PW2 is the father of the victim. He speaks about

the various matters which took place before the marriage

and after the marriage and his only grievance is that after

Crl.A. No.1849/2005
                              -12-



the ceremony in the house, when the victim was being taken

to the matrimonial house, the third accused stated that the

victim will not continue her marital life with the first accused

for more than a week. He has no grievance that any further

demand for dowry was made or that his daughter had

complained to him about the ill-treatment. Of course, he

has got a grievance that his daughter was promised to be

brought back home on the next day which did not happen.

He then went to the matrimonial house of his daughter and

he was told that the first accused and his daughter could not

come to his home because there was paucity of time for

them. They promised to come on the next day. The next

day, he would say that a Police man came and told him that

his daughter was struggling for life in the hospital.

According to him, when he reached the hospital, his

daughter told him that two persons were responsible for the

state of affairs in which she was placed. He then speaks

about having gone to the Police Station and being detained

Crl.A. No.1849/2005
                             -13-



there the Police Officer asking him to return when if the

victim survives. Later, he goes on to say that when the

victim died, he went to the Police Station and laid the First

Information Statement.

      15. PW5 is the neighbour to whom the parties are very

familiar.   His role is only that on instruction by the first

accused, he took Praseetha to her house. When she was

brought back, the second accused is alleged to have asked

him why was she brought back. He does not speak about

any ill-treatment or any other aspects as projected by the

prosecution.

      16. PW6 is the paternal aunt of the victim. She says

that when she learned about the mishap that had happened

to Praseetha, she went to the hospital and when she asked

what had happened, the victim told her not to ask anything

more. The victim is said to have told her that two persons

were responsible for the state of affairs. Then she asked

water from her father. PW6 would say that she asked the

Crl.A. No.1849/2005
                             -14-



victim whether she wanted to see the first accused who had

come to the hospital. According to PW6, the victim did not

reply and fear appeared on her face. PW6 would also say

that Praseetha, the victim had told her that the life was

miserable in the matrimonial house and she would not be

allowed to live.

      17. PW12 is a neighbour of the first accused and is a

close friend of the first accused. He had helped to remove

Praseetha to the hospital.      According to him, the first

accused had married the victim under the bona fide belief

that she had conceived from the first accused. When he

came to know that it is not so, this witness would say that

the first accused told him that he would sever the

relationship with the victim. But in cross examination, it was

brought out that he was an active member of action council

constituted for the purpose of agitating the cause of death of

the victim.

Crl.A. No.1849/2005
                             -15-



      18. PW13 is the neighbour of PW2. She is also an

active member of an organization. As per her evidence, the

victim had told her about the relationship she had with the

first accused i.e., after the physical relationship, the

reluctance on the part of the first accused to marry her. She

claims to have taken part in the marriage between the first

accused and the victim. She claims that two days after the

marriage, she met the victim when the victim told her that

the second accused had told her that she would never be

accepted as daughter-in-law by her. She would also say that

the first accused had physically assaulted her and the third

accused had taunted her. She also speaks about the talks in

which the dowry was settled. When the first accused took

the victim to his house, she says that she heard the third

accused proclaiming that the relationship will not last for

more than a week. She then goes on to say that when she

later met Praseetha, the victim, she told her that the

accused were ill-treating her for inadequate dowry she

Crl.A. No.1849/2005
                            -16-



brought. She goes further and says that the first accused

even told her that she may go and die.              In cross

examination, she had to admit that most of the statements

made by her are conspicuously absent in her Section 161

statement to the Police. She admitted that she had not told

the Police about the inadequate dowry or the complaint

made by Praseetha.

      19. PW14 is the second wife of PW2. She would say

about the physical relationship between the victim and the

first accused and the reluctance on the part of the first

accused later to marry the victim. Finally, as a result of the

mediation between the two families, she would say that on

19.06.2002, the first accused took the victim to his house

and that the marriage ceremony was conducted on

21.06.2002. A week thereafter, as per her evidence, the

victim phoned from a nearby house and informed PW2 that

the accused were insisting for dowry. They demanded 

35,000/- and 25 sovereigns of gold. This witness would say

Crl.A. No.1849/2005
                            -17-



that they agreed to pay  25,000/- and 10 sovereigns of

gold. She too would say that at the time of taking the victim

to the house after receiving the cash and gold ornaments,

the third accused proclaimed that the relationship will not

last for more than a week. The couple had come to there

house to stay for a week on their invitation, according to this

witness. But on the next day, according to this witness, the

first accused returned to his house along with the victim.

The brother of the first accused and his brother-in-law had

come to take them. She too would say that when the first

accused learned that the victim had not conceived, the first

accused ill-treated her and also told her that she may go

anywhere and die. In cross examination, she had to admit

that the claim made by her in chief examination that the

victim was not being properly fed and also that she was

being ill-treated for the inadequate dowry have not been

told by her to the Police.

Crl.A. No.1849/2005
                            -18-



      20. PW15 is the President of Kodungallur Taluk

Committee of Kerala State Vettuva Maha Sabha. He speaks

about having received Exts.P3, P4 and P10 complaints. He

also speaks about the talk regarding the dowry and

ultimately, settling it for  25,000/- and 10 sovereigns of

gold. After the marriage, according to PW15, PW2 had

complained to him and he had visited the house of the

accused. When he met the victim in the matrimonial house,

she complained about the circumstances there and told him

that she was finding it difficult to carry on in that house.

One may at once notice here that PW2 has no case that he

had complained to PW15 and PW15 was asked to go and

visit the victim. PW15 has also noticed that after having

visited the matrimonial house of the victim, he had returned

and told PW2 about the fate of the victim in the matrimonial

house.

      21. If one has to simply accept the versions given by

these witnesses in chief examination, probably, the court

Crl.A. No.1849/2005
                             -19-



below was justified in coming to the conclusion that the

offences are made out. But when a critical analysis is made

especially, with reference to the previous statements, it can

be seen that most of the crucial statements made by PWs 13

and 14 regarding the ill-treatment and the inadequate food

given to the victim is open to serious doubt.

      22. The veracity or the acceptability of the evidence

furnished by these witnesses is tested in cross examination

as well as with reference to the previous statements of the

witnesses.         Slight  inconsistencies,   contradictions,

embellishments, exaggerations, developments are always

possible and probable. But when there is considerable

deviation from what is stated to the Police and there are

significant omissions between the statement to the Police

and the evidence in court, then the evidence of the

witnesses will have to be viewed with suspicion. If that test

is applied, the evidence of PWs 13 and 14 are open to

serious doubt.

Crl.A. No.1849/2005
                              -20-



      23. What is significant is that if PW15 was able to

gather that the life of the victim in the matrimonial house

was miserable or unbearable, as already noticed, he would

have certainly conveyed that to PW2, in which case PW2,

would have surely mentioned it at the time of giving Ext.P2,

the First Information Statement. PW2 in his evidence has no

case that either his daughter had told him or PW14 had told

him or that PW15 had informed him that the victim had told

them that her life in the matrimonial house was far from

pleasant and happy and she was being ill-treated in the

matrimonial house.

      24. It can thus be seen that PWs 13 and 14 are prone

to embellishments and exaggerations which make their

evidence vulnerable.

      25. It is also significant to notice that apart from

saying that the victim's life was miserable and that she was

ill-treated, they do not speak about any specific instance of

ill-treatment or manner of ill-treatment meted out by the

Crl.A. No.1849/2005
                              -21-



accused persons to the victim. Of course, PWs 13 and 14 do

say that the victim had told them that the first and the

second accused had told her that she could go and die. But

those statements made by them in court are conspicuously

absent in their previous statements.

      26. One must remember that PW14 is the wife of PW2.

If there was any such precarious condition in which the

victim was placed, surely and certainly, PW2 would have

conveyed the information to PW14. So is the case of PW13

also. None of these witnesses say that they had conveyed

the information they had gathered to PW2 and PW2 also has

no case that they told him about the pitiful state of affairs in

which the victim was placed in the matrimonial house.

      27. Under these circumstances, it becomes extremely

difficult to place reliance on the evidence of these witnesses

to come to the conclusion that the victim was driven to

commit suicide due to the ill-treatment meted out by the

first and the second accused. It is not as if that the evidence

Crl.A. No.1849/2005
                               -22-



of PWs 6, 13, 14, and 15 can be readily accepted.         The

infirmities in their evidence have already been pointed out.

      28. True, the life of an young girl have been snuffed

out. Her matrimonial life did not last for a long. But that is

not a ground to mulct liability on the accused persons. The

prosecution is bound to prove the case against the accused

persons beyond reasonable doubt.          At best, what the

prosecution has succeeded is in showing that there might

have been some disharmony in the matrimonial family and

probably, the first accused was not interested in continuing

the marital life with the victim. But there is nothing beyond

that. To attract Sections 498(A) and 306 of IPC, much more

evidence is required. To attract Section 306 of IPC, it has to

be shown that the accused concerned had intended that the

victim should commit suicide or that they had created such

a situation that the victim was left no option but to commit

suicide. There is no evidence regarding these aspects at all.

Crl.A. No.1849/2005
                              -23-



      29. As far as the offence under Section 498(A) of IPC is

concerned, except for the vague statements of the

witnesses that there was ill-treatment, there is nothing to

show that what sort of ill-treatment were meted out by the

accused persons and that the life of the victim was

miserable in the matrimonial house.

      30. For the above reasons, this Court is unable to

accept the findings of the court below that the offences have

been made out against the first and the second accused.

      This appeal is allowed. Conviction and sentence for the

offences under Sections 498(A) and 306 of IPC are set aside

and it is held that the first and the second accused are not

guilty of the offences.     They are acquitted of the said

offences. Their bail bond shall stand cancelled and they are

set at liberty. If they have paid any fine amount, it shall be

refunded to them.


                                           P.BHAVADASAN
                                                 JUDGE
ds



