
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                      PRESENT:

                          THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE P.BHAVADASAN

            MONDAY,THE 18TH DAY OF NOVEMBER 2013/27TH KARTHIKA, 1935

                                            CRL.A.No. 2243 of 2005
                                             ---------------------------------
          [AGAINST THE JUDGMENT IN S.C. NO.496/2005 OF THE ADDL. DISTRICT
           AND SESSIONS COURT, FAST TRACK (ADHOC-I),KOZHIKODE DTD. 30/11/2005]
                                                    ..............


APPELLANT/ACCUSED:
----------------------------------


            MOIDI, S/O.IBRAYI,
            MADRASSA TEACHER,
            CHERUVANNUR.


            BY ADV. SRI.P.V.KUNHIKRISHNAN.


RESPONDENT/COMPLAINANT & STATE:
---------------------------------------------------------


            STATE OF KERALA,
            REP. BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR,
            HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM.


            BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SRI. DHANESH MATHEW MANJOORAN.




            THIS CRIMINAL APPEAL HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD
            ON 18-11-2013, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY DELIVERED
            THE FOLLOWING:




Prv.


                      P.BHAVADASAN, J.
              - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                    Crl.A. No. 2243 of 2005
              - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
        Dated this the 18th day of November, 2013


                        J U D G M E N T

     The   accused      was      prosecuted           for    the offences

punishable under Sections 498(A) and 436 of IPC. He was

found guilty of the offence punishable under Section 436 of

IPC alone.   He was convicted for the said offence and

sentenced to suffer rigorous imprisonment for three years

and to pay a fine of  3,000/- with a default clause of six

months simple imprisonment.                Set off as per law was

allowed.

     2.  The accused got married to PW5 on 30.10.1985.

The couple had four children in their wedlock.                    At the

relevant time, PW5, PW6, her daughter and other children

were residing in the house which was put up in the property

given to PW5.      It is alleged that the accused used to

manhandle and ill-treat the victim pointing out the

inadequacy of dowry brought by her and demanding more.

Crl.A. No. 2243/2005
                             -2-



Unable to bear the torture any more, the matter was

brought to the Mahal Committee who intervened and

pacified both sides and PW5 took up residence with the

accused.     For a short while, everything went well.  Then

again things returned to the prior state. That left PW5 with

no choice but to leave the company of the accused and take

up residence elsewhere. Thereafter, the accused used to

visit PW5 and for a short while thereafter also, everything

was alright. But then the accused entertained the idea that

he should get the assignment of ten cents of property which

belonged to PW5 and began to press her for the same. PW5

was not amenable to such a course. On 27.01.2005, it is

alleged that the accused came to the house where PW5 was

residing, picked up a quarrel with her, ill-treated her,

thrashed her and thereafter set fire to the house. PW5 laid

Ext.P4, First Information Statement. That was recorded by

PW7     who    registered crime   as   per  Ext.P4(a),  FIR.

Investigation was taken over by PW8. He prepared Ext.P2

Crl.A. No. 2243/2005
                               -3-



scene mahazar and collected various charred articles found

at the site and prepared Ext.P5 property list and had the

accused arrested. Relevant documents were drawn up. He

recorded statement of witnesses, completed investigation

and laid charge before court.

      3.    The court before which the final report was laid,

took cognizance of the offences. Finding that the offences

are exclusively triable by a Court of Sessions, committed the

case to Sessions Court, Kozhikode. That court made over

the case to Additional District and Sessions Court, Fast Track

(Adhoc-I), Kozhikode for trial and disposal.

      4.    The latter court, on receipt of records and on

appearance of the accused, framed charges for the offences

punishable under Sections 498(A) and 436 of IPC. To the

charge, the accused pleaded not guilty and claimed to be

tried. The prosecution therefore had PWs 1 to 8 examined

and had Exts. P1 to P7 marked.

Crl.A. No. 2243/2005
                              -4-



      5.    After the close of prosecution evidence, the

accused was questioned under Section 313 Cr.P.C.         He

denied all the incriminating circumstances brought out in

evidence against him and maintained that he is innocent.

According to him, he was falsely implicated by PW2 who had

an axe to grind against him.

      6.    Finding that the accused could not be acquitted

under Section 232 Cr.P.C., he was asked to enter on his

defence. He chose to adduce no evidence. The court below

presumably impressed by the evidence of PWs 2, 5 and 6

who testified before the court below that they had occasion

to see the accused setting fire to the house, found the

accused guilty.      Conviction and sentence as already

mentioned followed.

      7.    The learned counsel appearing for the appellant

assailed the conviction and sentence. It was pointed out by

the    learned    counsel  that  there  are  contradictions,

inconsistencies and falsehood in the evidence of PWs 2, 5

Crl.A. No. 2243/2005
                              -5-



and 6. It was not proper on the part of the court below to

have placed reliance on their evidence. A reading of the

evidence of PW6 would show that she could not have seen

the accused setting fire to the house. While PW6 would say

that at the relevant time, when the house was set on fire,

PW2 was in his house, the version given by PW2 is that

hearing the cries of PW5 and her children, he came out of

house and then he saw the house being set on fire. The

learned counsel drew attention of this Court to certain

omissions in the evidence of PW6 which amounts to

contradiction and that makes her evidence unacceptable. It

was also pointed out that it is significant to notice that PW5

had a definite case that she was being constantly

manhandled and ill-treated for which there is no evidence.

The wild allegations regarding the treatment shows the

length to which PW5 can go to see that the accused is put

behind the bars. A careful reading of the evidence of PWs 2,

5 and 6 would clearly show that the incident has not

Crl.A. No. 2243/2005
                              -6-



occurred as alleged by the prosecution and the court below

erred in finding that the accused had set fire to the house.

      8.    The learned Public Prosecutor on the other hand

contended that there is nothing to disbelieve PWs 2, 5 and 6

and they say that each of them had occasion to see that the

house being set on fire by the accused. His presence at the

place spoken to by these three witnesses is not seriously

challenged, though the act of setting fire is put in dispute by

the defence. Even though, the accused had a case that PW2

had an axe to grind against the accused, there is no

suggestion to that effect and there is nothing to show that

there was any oblique motive on the part of PW2 in

testifying before court that he had occasion to see the house

being set on fire by the accused.        The learned Public

Prosecutor pointed out that it cannot be disputed that the

PW2 is a close neighbour of PW5 and he is the natural

witness. Of course, there is some inconsistency regarding

what happened after the house was set on fire.            Even

Crl.A. No. 2243/2005
                               -7-



though, PW6 may say that they had initially gone to the

house of Mammu Master that is PW2, PW5 denies the same.

These inconsistencies and contradictions are of minor in

nature and are only natural in the course of events and do

not affect the core of prosecution case. The learned Public

Prosecutor also pointed out that the investigation done by

PW8 had occasion to collect various charred articles from

the place of occurrence and the suggestion thrown at the

prosecution witness that accidentally the house got fire from

the kitchen is only to be rejected. There is no reason as to

why the evidence of PWs 2, 5 and 6 should be discarded.

The learned Public Prosecutor went on to point out that at

any rate, the view taken by the court below is a possible,

reasonable and just view, then there are no grounds made

out to interfere with the findings.

      9.    The marriage between PW5 and the accused took

place on 30.10.1985. PW5 would say that at the time of

marriage, she was given 15 sovereigns of gold and 

Crl.A. No. 2243/2005
                             -8-



10,000/- cash.     Going by her evidence, the accused was

thoroughly dissatisfied with the said quantity of dowry and

soon after the marriage, he began to ill-treat the victim

demanding more dowry. Even though PW5 through out her

testimony in several place says about the manhandling by

the accused, she conceded that at no point of time she had

taken treatment for the same or there were any visible

marks on any part of her body. That probably is the reason

which persuaded the court below not to accept the

grievance of PW5 regarding the offence under Section 498A

of IPC.

      10. The mere fact that PW5 was unable to establish

the ill-treatment does not lead to the conclusion that her

claim that the house was set on fire by the accused is also

false.   May be she was unable to produce documents or

another evidence to show the ill-treatment. But, there is

evidence of PWs 2, 5 and 6 which amply support the claim

made by PW5 that it was the accused who set fire to the

Crl.A. No. 2243/2005
                             -9-



house.

      11. That there was some problems in the family life of

PW5 and the accused is spoken to by PW2 also. He also

speaks about the intervention of Mahal Committee in the

disputes between the two.      It is true that going by the

evidence of PWs 5 and 6, the house of the accused was very

small and all of them could not reside together. However,

the claim of PW5 is that unable to bear the ill-treatment and

finally, she left the house and took residence in her

Tharavadu house. PW5 has also stated that the accused had

occasion to come there and create problems in the

Tharavadu house. Later on, 10 cents of property were given

to her and she put up a small hut in the said property and

she was residing there at the relevant time.

      12. On 27.01.2005, going by the evidence of PWs 2, 5

and 6, the accused had occasion to come to the place. PWs

5 and 6 would say that as soon as the accused came to the

spot, he began to manhandle his wife that is PW5 and

Crl.A. No. 2243/2005
                                -10-



hearing the cries of PW5 and her children, the neighbours

came out of their house.         The accused left the place to

return in fact, to set fire to the house.

      13. It is true that PW2 in his evidence has stated that

he had no occasion to see any ill-treatment by the accused

on the date of incident. It is also true that the evidence of

PW6 shows that she had not seen PW2 coming out of his

house at the relevant time.         These inconsistencies and

contradictions are pointed out to make their version

vulnerable.

      14. It is also true that it was brought out in the cross

examination of PW6 that she denied of having stated to the

Police that she and her mother cried aloud and went to the

house of Mammu Master.            Of course, contradiction was

brought in her cross examination that while PW5 would say

that they have not gone to the house of Mammu Master,

PW6 would say otherwise.

Crl.A. No. 2243/2005
                            -11-



      15. As rightly pointed out by the learned Public

Prosecutor     that these  omissions,   contradictions   and

inconsistencies do not affect the core of prosecution

evidence at all. The presence of PWs 2, 5 and 6 is not seen

challenged.     The fact remains that the house has been

burned down.

      16. They are bound to be inconsistencies and

contradictions in the evidence of witnesses and that is only

natural. But the court has to see is that if there was any

contradictions regarding the material aspects which affect

the prosecution case. Considering the fact that the degree

of reception, retention and reproduction varies from person

to person and it is unwise to insist for mathematical

precision in evidence. As already noticed, PWs 5 and 6 do

say that the accused came to the house and began to

manhandle PW5. Even if that portion is disbelieved, their

version that they had occasion to see the accused setting

fire to the house, need not be disbelieved especially in view

Crl.A. No. 2243/2005
                               -12-



of the evidence furnished by PW2.

      17. Even though, at the time of questioning under

Section 313 Cr.P.C., the accused had a case that PW2 had

nursed a grudge against him and there is nothing to show

that there is any truth in it. Ext.P2 scene mahazar shows the

state of affair of the place of incident.

      18. A contention was raised by the learned counsel

appearing for the appellant that going by the version given

by PWs 5 and 6, the accused was taken from the spot on the

very same day itself by the Police. However, referring to the

evidence of PWs 7 and 8, it is pointed out that the First

Information Statement was lodged only on the next day and

as per the evidence of PW8, he was nabbed by the Police on

28.01.2005. Even assuming that there is discrepancy in this

regard, one fails to understand how it can affect the

prosecution case of the accused having set fire to the house.

As already noticed, there is no suggestion to PWs 2, 5 and 6

that the accused had never come to the place on the date of

Crl.A. No. 2243/2005
                              -13-



incident. His version that the house could have caught fire

from the kitchen cannot be accepted.           All the three

witnesses namely PWs 2, 5 and 6 say that after picking up

quarrel with PW5, he went away and he suddenly returned

and set fire to the house. As far as the act of setting fire to

the house is concerned, the evidence of PWs 2, 5 and 6 are

uniform and consistent.

      19. It must be noticed that the court below which had

the occasion to watch the demeanour of witnesses has

chosen to accept the version given by PWs 2, 5 and 6. The

view taken by the court below appears to be reasonable.

Even assuming that a different view is possible, it is not a

ground to interfere with in appeal. Further, it could not be

said that the finding of the court below is either perverse or

is contrary to the evidence on record.

      20. If that be so, the finding of the court below that it

was the accused who had set fire to the house cannot be

interfered with.

Crl.A. No. 2243/2005
                           -14-



      21. Faced with the above situation, the learned

counsel appearing for the appellant pointed out that the

sentence imposed is on the high side and considering the

passage of time and the age of the accused etc., some

leniency may be shown.

      22. Even though the accused is a teacher in the

Madrasa and better conduct was expected of him and even

if the act of the accused cannot be appreciated in any

manner and has to be viewed seriously, the fact remains

that the sentence imposed seems to be slightly on the high

side.

      23. It must be remembered that the matrimonial

relationship between the accused and PW5 still subsists and

the harsh sentence may further endanger the relationship.

      Considering the above facts, while confirming the

conviction of the accused for the offence punishable under

Section 436 of IPC, the sentence awarded is set aside and

instead he is sentenced to suffer rigorous imprisonment for

Crl.A. No. 2243/2005
                            -15-



two years and to pay a fine of  5,000/- with a default clause

of three months. Set off as per law is allowed.




                                           P.BHAVADASAN
                                                JUDGE
ds



