
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                      PRESENT:

                          THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE P.BHAVADASAN

           WEDNESDAY, THE 30TH DAY OF OCTOBER 2013/8TH KARTHIKA, 1935

                                           CRL.A.No. 208 of 2005 ( )
                                                --------------------------
                     SC.NO. 87/1999 OF SESSIONS COURT, THALASSERY
                                          -------------------------------

APPELLANT/COMPLAINANT:-
--------------------------------------------------

            STATE OF KERALA,
            REPRESENTED BY THE PUBLIC PROSECUTOR,
            HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM.

             BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SMT. P.MAYA

RESPONDENT(S)/ACCUSED:-
----------------------------------------------

        1. EDACLAVAN PUTHIYA VEETTIL RAVEENDRAN,
            S/O.CHATHUKUTTY, AGED 33 YEARS, CHUZHALI AMSOM DESOM.

        2. EDACLAVAN PARVATHI, W/O.CHATHUKUTTY,
            AGED 66 YEARS, CHUZHALI AMSOM DESOM.

        3. EDACLAVAN VIDYAVATHI, W/O.PRABHAKARAN,
            AGED 27 YEARS, CHUZHALI AMSOM DESOM.

                BY ADV. SRI.M.SASINDRAN

            THIS CRIMINAL APPEAL HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD
            ON 30-10-2013, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY DELIVERED
            THE FOLLOWING:




sts


                      P.BHAVADASAN, J.
               ---------------------------------------
                  Crl. Appeal No.208 OF 2005
               ---------------------------------------
           Dated this the 30th day of October, 2013.


                         J U D G M E N T


      The husband of the victim, her mother-in-law and sister-in-

law were put in the dock and tried for the offences punishable

under Sections 498A and 306 read with Section 34 of Indian

Penal Code. After trial, they were found not guilty and acquitted

of all the charges. The State has come up in appeal against the

said acquittal.

      2. The marriage between the victim and the 1st accused

was solemnised on 13.01.1995. PWs 3, 4, 5 who are the mother,

sister and the brother of the victim speak about the gold

ornaments given at the time of marriage. The allegation is that

Omana, the victim, was being ill-treated and harassed for the

inadequate dowry she brought at the time of marriage and also

due to her inability to bring further gold and money from her

house.    There is an allegation of physical assault also.    On

10.11.1996, it appears that Omana consumed poison and she

Crl. Appeal No.208/2005            2


breathed her last. Initially crime was registered for unnatural

offence as per the statement furnished by PW10 and Ext.P6 is the

corresponding First Information Report.

       3.     Investigation was taken over by PW11.  He had the

inquest conducted over the body and obtained Ext.P5 inquest

report. He had sent the body for autopsy and obtained Ext.P1

postmortem certificate. The postmortem certificate showed that

poison was detected in the viscera and the cause of death is

determined as consumption of poison.         During investigation,

according to PW12, he came to understand that the deceased

Omana was driven to take the extreme steps as a result of the

cruelty meted out by the accused persons and therefore, he filed

Ext.P8 report to incorporate the offences under Sections 306 and

498A IPC to show the accused persons in the party array. He

seized various articles under Ext.P9 mahazar, recorded the

statement of witnesses, completed the investigation and laid

charge before court.

       4. The court before which charge was laid took cognizance

of the offence and on finding that the offences are exclusively

Crl. Appeal No.208/2005           3


triable by a Court of Sessions, the case was committed to

Sessions Court, Thalassery. The said court made over the case

to Assistant Sessions Court, Thalassery for trial and disposal.

The latter court, on receipt of records and on appearance of the

accused, framed charges for the offences punishable under

Sections 306 and 498A IPC. To the charge, the accused pleaded

not guilty and claimed to be tried. The prosecution therefore had

PWs 1 to 12 examined and Exts.P1 to P9 marked. M.O.s 1 to 3

were got identified and marked.

       5. After the close of the prosecution evidence, the accused

were questioned under Section 313 Cr.P.C. They denied all the

incriminating circumstances brought out in evidence against them

and maintained that they were innocent. On finding that the

accused could not be acquitted under Section 232 Cr.P.C, they

were asked to enter on their defence. They examined DWs 1 to 5

and had Exts.D1 to D6 marked so also Ext.X1.

       6. On appreciation of the evidence in the case, the trial

court came to the conclusion that the evidence was far from

satisfactory to come to the conclusion that the offences had been

Crl. Appeal No.208/2005           4


made out and accordingly, the accused were acquitted.

       7.      Learned Public Prosecutor assailed the acquittal on

several grounds. According to the learned Public Prosecutor, the

evidence furnished by PWs 3, 4 and 5 who are the mother, sister

and brother respectively of the deceased established beyond

doubt that the victim was subjected to cruelty demanding more

dowry and she was ill-treated at the matrimonial house. The

reasons given by the lower court to discard their evidence,

according to the learned Public Prosecutor, are not justifiable in

law. PW3, the mother of the deceased, speaks about the incident

when she had occasion to go to the matrimonial house where she

was treated badly. She also speaks about the complaint by her

daughter about the physical assault as well as the taunting by the

accused persons.

       8. It is true, according to the learned Public Prosecutor,

that there are some contradictions and omissions in the evidence

of PWs 3 to 5. But they are not so glaring, according to the

learned Public Prosecutor, so as to discard the evidence of PWs 3

to 5. There is consistent statement by these three witnesses

Crl. Appeal No.208/2005           5


regarding certain aspects which should not have been omitted to

be noticed by the lower court. Learned Public Prosecutor pointed

out that it has come out in evidence that there was demand for

Rs.50,000/- and that can only be at the instance of the 1st

accused. The evidence also disclose, according to the learned

Public Prosecutor, that the grandfather of the victim, since the

father was not more, had managed to gather Rs.5,000/- which

was given to the victim. She, however, did not take it to the

matrimonial house because if she went to the matrimonial house

without Rs.50,000/-, she would be thrashed.        This aspect is

consistently spoken to by PWs 3 to 5. It is also pointed out that

the victim had conveyed PW4 about the ill-treatment by the 1st

accused.          According to the learned Public Prosecutor, no

suggestion is made to these witnesses as to why they should

falsely implicate the accused.         Learned Public Prosecutor,

therefore, contended that the acquittal cannot stand.

       9. Learned counsel appearing for the respondents, on the

other hand, contended that it is true that PWs 3, 4 and 5 do

speak about the ill-treatment alleged to have been committed by

Crl. Appeal No.208/2005          6


the accused persons. But, these aspects of cruelty are spoken to

by them when they appeared for the first time before court and

are conspicuously absent in their statements under Section 161

Cr.P.C to the Police.     This glaring omission, according to the

learned counsel, would clearly show that the cruelty now spoken

to by these witnesses are clear afterthoughts and made for the

purpose of the case. It is significant to notice, according to the

learned counsel, that no action was taken by any of these

witnesses against the so called ill-treatment by the members of

the family of the 1st accused. Further, it is pointed out that even

going by the evidence, it is seen that the affairs of the family of

the victim is being looked after by the husband of PW4.

Surprisingly enough, according to the learned counsel, he is not

seen examined and he would have been the best person to speak

about the ill-treatment meted out to the victim.         It is also

significant to notice, according to the learned counsel, that the

grandfather of the victim who is alleged to have arranged

Rs.5,000/- and tried to persuade the victim to take the money to

the matrimonial house was also not examined.          There is no

Crl. Appeal No.208/2005          7


reason as to why these material witnesses were not examined by

the prosecution.

       10. Drawing attention to Ext.P5 inquest report, it is pointed

out by the learned counsel for the respondents that there is no

complaint at the time of inquest when the close relatives of the

victim were examined by the officer conducting inquest regarding

any ill-treatment meted out to the victim. It was these factors

which made the court below to suspect the testimony given by

PWs 3, 4 and 5 regarding the ill-treatment.       Learned counsel

went on to point out that the court below has chosen to

appreciate the evidence of PWs 3, 4 and 5 and has come to the

conclusion that they are not beyond doubt. It could not be said

that the finding of the court below is contrary to the evidence on

record. May be that, a different view may be possible. But that

is not a ground to interfere for the appellate court in the

appellate jurisdiction.   Accordingly, it is contended that the

appeal is only to be dismissed.

       11. The marriage between the victim and the 1st accused

had taken place on 13.01.1995. It is not in dispute that the

Crl. Appeal No.208/2005         8


couple were living in the matrimonial house. It is also not in

dispute that the couple did not have any children. It is also not

in dispute that the victim was being treated by the doctor for the

same. The prosecution allegation is that right from the day of

marriage, the accused persons were taunting, ill-treating and

assaulting the victim complaining about inadequate dowry and

also demanding more money and dowry.

       12. In order to establish the case of prosecution, the

prosecution relies on the evidence of PWs 3, 4 and 5. Among

them, PW3 is the mother.       PWs 3 to 5 do speak about the

ornaments given to the victim at the time of marriage. After

marriage, when the first visit was made to the house of the

victim, according to PW3, she complained about the ill-treatment

in the matrimonial house. She had initially refused to go along

with her husband and later after three or four days, her husband

came and took her along with him.       According to this witness,

after it was decided to put up a house by the accused, the victim

was asked to get Rs.50,000/- immediately from her house.

PWs 3 to 5 would say that they were not in a position to arrange

Crl. Appeal No.208/2005              9


such a huge amount. However, the grandfather of PWs 4 and 5

managed to gather Rs.5,000/- and handed it over to the victim.

But the victim was extremely reluctant to go to the matrimonial

house with the said Rs.5,000/- as she feared of thrashing at the

hands of the accused for not brining the entire amount of

Rs.50,000/-.         This witness also says that several trees in the

property were cut and removed and taken to the house of the

accused to put up a house. It is also stated by this witness that

the victim was made to do the entire household work and the

accused persons used to find fault on her even going to the

extent of saying that she was not given adequate food also. PW3

says that on 10.11.1996 in the morning, she had gone to the

house of the victim.          She had taken vegetables as well as

buttermilk with her.          When she reached the house of her

daughter, she found her to be in a pensive mood. Even though

the 1st accused saw PW3, he did not make any enquiries with her.

She would also say that her daughter had told her that on the

previous day, she was brutally assaulted by the 1st accused. She

concludes by saying that her daughter was driven to commit

Crl. Appeal No.208/2005          10


suicide only due to the ill-treatment of the accused persons.

       13. Of course, PW3, to a considerable extent, gets support

from the evidence of PWs 4 and 5. The question is whether their

evidence can be accepted. As rightly pointed out by the learned

counsel for the respondents, most of the aspects spoken to by

PWs 3 to 5 regarding the ill-treatment meted out to the victim by

the 1st accused and others are stated for the first time when they

appeared in court. Those crucial statements now made by them

are conspicuously absent in Section 161 Cr.P.C statement given

to the Police. There is no explanation for the omission. These

omissions cannot be treated as minor and they are material

omissions which amount to contradictions.

       14. It is here one has to take notice of the submission of

the learned counsel for the respondents that even though the

close relatives of the victim were examined at the time of

inquest, they had no complaint of ill-treatment by the accused

persons on the victim. The defence had also adduced evidence to

show that the claim made by PWs 3 to 5 that the trees were cut

and removed recently cannot be true because the certificate

Crl. Appeal No.208/2005             11


issued by the Village Officer concerned shows that the trees were

cut and removed long prior to the date of death. Merely because

PWs 3 to 5 say about the ill-treatment, it may not be possible to

readily      accept    their version  especially when they have

considerably developed their stories at a later stage.

       15. It is here one has to notice that non examination of the

grandfather of the victim and the husband of PW4 assume

significance. Even as spoken to by the prosecution witnesses,

the affairs of the house of PWs 3 to 5 were being looked after by

the husband of PW4. Strangely enough, the prosecution did not

examine that witness.         He would have been able to throw

considerable light on the issue. If he was actually in charge of

the affairs of the house, obviously cutting of trees could not have

been made without his permission and he would have been able

to say under what circumstance the trees were cut and whether it

was on demand by the 1st accused or not.

       16. One cannot omit to note that it was brought out from

the evidence of PW4 that while she was constructing a house of

her own, trees were cut and removed from the property and

Crl. Appeal No.208/2005              12


given to her.          The prosecution also felt shy to examine the

grandfather of the victim. He is the person who is alleged to

have with considerable difficulty managed to gather Rs.5,000/-

and handed it over to the victim. But the victim did not take it to

the matrimonial house for fear of ill-treatment for not bringing

the demanded amount of Rs.50,000/-.             Obviously, if the ill-

treatment spoken to by PWs 3 to 5 are true, it is difficult to

believe that it would not have come to the notice and the

knowledge of the husband of PW4 and also the grandfather of the

victim.

       17. It was the above facts and circumstances which made

the court below to suspect the evidence of PWs 3 to 5.            Of

course, minor contradictions, inconsistencies, embellishments and

developments may not affect the testimony of witnesses. But

when they give a totally different version in box than the one

given to the Police and develop a new story, it has to be viewed

with suspicion. The only guarantee which the accused has is the

previous statement given to the authority who is competent to

take the statement of the witnesses. The inconsistency in the

Crl. Appeal No.208/2005          13


statement of the witnesses, absence of mention of any cruel acts

at the time of inquest and non examination of the husband of

PW4 and the grandfather of victim loom at large. Of course, this

Court is not forgetting the fact that PWs 3 to 5 have given a

parrotlike version about the incident alleged to have happened in

the house of the accused. True, the defence had attempted to

show that since the couple did not have children, the victim was

depressed and was undergoing treatment. The fact that she was

undergoing treatment cannot be disputed in view of the evidence

adduced by the defence. There may be want of evidence to show

that she was depressed but that cannot lead to come to the

conclusion that the suicide committed by the wife of the 1st

accused was as a result of the cruelty meted out to her by the

accused persons. At best, one could say that strong doubt is

created against the accused persons. It is well settled that doubt

cannot take place of proof. Viewed from that angle, it could not

be said that the court below was not justified in holding that the

evidence adduced does not support the case that the offences

have been made out.        As rightly pointed out by the learned

Crl. Appeal No.208/2005            14


counsel for the respondents, even assuming a different view is

possible, unless it is shown that the view taken by the court

below is so perverse or is contrary to the evidence on record,

interference at the appellate stage cannot be justified.

       In the result, this appeal is without merits and it is liable to

be dismissed. I do so.




                                         P.BHAVADASAN
                                             JUDGE




smp



