
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                  PRESENT:

                          THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE P.BHAVADASAN

          TUESDAY, THE 3RD DAY OF DECEMBER 2013/12TH AGRAHAYANA, 1935

                                           CRL.A.No. 613 of 2004 (C)
                                             --------------------------
         CC.NO. 696/2001 OF JUDICIAL FIRST CLASS MAGISTRATE COURT NO. II,
                                  SULTHANBATHERY DATED 27-09-2003
                                                 ------------------

APPELLANT/COMPLAINANT :
-------------------------------------------

            ROSA @ SILVI, D/O. MATHEW,
            MUTHIRAKKALAYIL HOUSE, SEETHAMOUNT,
            PULPALLY.

            BY ADV. SRI. ESM. KABEER

RESPONDENTS/ACCUSED :
-----------------------------------------

        1. THE STATE OF KERALA,
            REPRESENTED BY THE PUBLIC PROSECUTOR,
            HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM

        2. JOSE, S/O. MATHEW, AGED 36,
            KOIKKAL VEEDU, KOLAKAM, THALASSERY
            KANNUR DISTRICT.

        3. MATHEW, S/O. JOSEPH, AGED 64,
            KOIKKAL VEEDU, KOLAKAM, THALASSERY
            KANNUR DIST.

        4. MARIAKUTTY,W/O. MATHEW, AGED 55,
            KOIKKAL VEEDU, KOLAKAM, THALASSERY
            KANNUR DIST.


            R1 BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SRI. DHANESH MATHEW MANJOORAN
            R2 TO R4 BY ADV. SRI.P.NARAYANAN


            THIS CRIMINAL APPEAL HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD ON 03-12-2013,
            THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY DELIVERED THE FOLLOWING:




Mn


                      P.BHAVADASAN, J.
              - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                     Crl.A. No. 613 of 2004
              - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
         Dated this the 03rd day of December, 2013


                        J U D G M E N T

     This appeal is directed against the order or acquittal

dated 27.09.2003 in C.C. 696 of 2001. By the said order,

three accused persons who were the husband and the in-

laws of the complainant were prosecuted for the offence

punishable under Section 498(A) read with Section 34 of IPC.

The court, after appreciating the evidence, found the

evidence insufficient to arrive at a finding that the offence

had been made out and accordingly acquitted the accused.

     2.  The marriage between the complainant before the

court below and the first accused took place on 18.05.1992.

The couple took up residence in the matrimonial house. It is

alleged that at the time of marriage, the complainant was

given  82,000/- and some gold ornaments.                      As per the

complaint, during the first 15 days of marriage everything

was pleasant and then the behaviour or the accused

Crl.A. No. 613/2004
                               -2-



changed and they began to ill-treat the complainant

demanding more dowry. It is further alleged that the first

accused was in the habit of consuming alcohol and he used

to come home drunk and assault the complainant.           It is

further alleged that the first accused used to say that he was

not interested in continuing the relationship and he had

developed an intimacy with another lady. It is stated that all

the three accused persons used to ill-treat the complainant

demanding more dowry which she was incapable of

providing since her family could not afford the same. On

15.11.1997, it is alleged that the parents of the complainant

came to the house of the accused and there was a

mediation and discussion with the accused persons and they

agreed that no further untoward incident would take place

and the complainant will have a calm and peaceful life in the

matrimonial house. But the assurance did not last long. It is

claimed that the complainant was brutally attacked on

16.11.1997. On sending a letter about the incident to her

Crl.A. No. 613/2004
                              -3-



father, the father of the complainant is stated to have come

to Pulpally and taken her along with him and admitted in the

Hospital on 21.11.1997.      There was mediation talk even

thereafter and the complainant resided along with them.

Things did not change even thereafter. On 23.03.1998, it is

alleged that the first accused left the complainant in her

house and thereafter never cared for her.      Therefore the

complaint was laid.

      3.    After  following   the  necessary     procedures,

summons was issued to the accused. After appearance of

the accused, procedure under Section 244 of Cr.P.C. was

complied with and on finding that the accused could not be

discharged, charge was framed.

      4.    To the charge, the accused pleaded not guilty and

claim to be tried. They exercised their right under Section

246 of Cr.P.C. of cross examination of the witnesses and

therefore that was permitted.

Crl.A. No. 613/2004
                             -4-



      5.    The evidence consist of the testimony of PWs 1 to

3 and Exhibits marked as Ext.P1 to P4. The defence seems

to have examined DW1 and marked Ext.D1.

      6.    On an appreciation of the materials before it, the

trial court came to the conclusion that the materials are

insufficient to come to the conclusion that the cruelty as

alleged has been made out and there is no evidence at all of

any involvement of accused Nos. 2 and 3               at all.

Accordingly, they were acquitted.

      7.    The    learned  counsel    appearing    for    the

appellant/complainant pointed out that the court below was

not justified in ignoring the evidence adduced before it. It

would clearly show that the complainant was badly

assaulted by the first accused and she had undergone

treatment for the injuries inflicted by him as could be

evidenced from Ext.P1 and from the evidence of PW3, the

doctor who treated her. It is also pointed out that Exts. P2,

P3 and P4 letters sent by the complainant to her father

Crl.A. No. 613/2004
                               -5-



would clearly reveal the torture by the accused persons in

the matrimonial house which made her life miserable and it

is also clear from the evidence that there were at least two

mediation talks in which the accused persons undertook in

which they assured that they will not harass the complainant

any more. Even though the complainant resided with her

husband on the basis of those assurances, things did not

improve and she was again assaulted badly. Ultimately, the

first accused left her in her house. These facts are spoken to

by PW1 and there was no reason to disbelieve her. Her

evidence gets corroboration at the hands of PW2, the father

of the complainant.      The court below was not therefore

justified in coming to the conclusion that there is no

convincing evidence as to the cruelty attributed to the

accused persons.       Accordingly, it is contended that the

acquittal is unjustifiable.

      8.    The learned counsel appearing for the respondents

on the other hand contended that the court below has

Crl.A. No. 613/2004
                               -6-



considered the evidence in considerable detail and has come

to the conclusion that there are no sufficient materials to

warrant a conclusion that the allegation of cruelty is made

out. The court has discussed the letters and found them to

be wanting in particulars regarding the cruelty. It is also

pointed out that there is no specific incident or allegations

regarding the cruelty and the allegations are general and

vague in nature.     These findings of the court below are

based on materials on record and there is no reason to

discard the evidence. The learned counsel also reminded

this Court that this Court is sitting in appeal against an order

of acquittal and unless it is shown that the findings of the

court below are perverse or contrary to the evidence on

record, even if a different view is possible, this Court will not

be justified in interfering with the findings of the court

below.

      9.    The proceedings originated under the private

complaint filed by PW1 who is the wife of the first accused.

Crl.A. No. 613/2004
                            -7-



The allegation seems to be that initially for the first 15 days

of marriage, the life was pleasant and thereafter, the

accused persons began to treat her cruelly demanding more

and more dowry. The complaint makes mention of physical

harassment etc.

      10. The complainant was examined as PW1.             She

narrates the incidents which took place in the matrimonial

house. She would say that she was subjected to constant

torture and ill-treatment by the first accused and he had

ample support from the second and the third accused in that

regard. She makes mention of the physical assault inflicted

on her.      She would say that he used to demand the

complainant to bring more money from her house. She, in

her evidence, also says that the accused used to come

drunk heavily late in the night and used to pick up quarrel

with her. Unable to bear the cruel treatment meted out in

the matrimonial house, PW1 says that she had written letter

to her father and on one occasion, her father came there

Crl.A. No. 613/2004
                               -8-



and took her to her house and later to the hospital for

treatment of injuries inflicted by the first accused.

      11. PW2 is none other than the father of the

complainant. He also speaks about the ill-treatment alleged

to have been done by the accused persons.            He speaks

about having received letters from his daughter and having

brought back his daughter as claimed by PW1.           He also

speaks about the mediation talk in which the first accused

assured that no further untoward incident would take place,

but that was not complied with and the ill-treatment

continued.     His evidence also discloses that the accused

persons demanded more dowry.

      12. PW3 is the doctor who is alleged to have treated

the complainant.     Ext.P1 is the wound certificate said to

have been issued by him. It makes mention of the contusion

etc., and complaint of back pain.

      13. This is all the evidence in the case.      The court

below has noticed that there is no specific allegation as

Crl.A. No. 613/2004
                               -9-



against accused Nos. 2 and 3 and they are unnecessarily

implicated without any justification.     As far as the first

accused is concerned, the court below found that the

allegations are vague and general in nature and there is no

specific allegation of any incident or any specific demand for

dowry. All that the complaint as well as the evidence of PWs

1 and 2 would show is that more dowry was demanded

without specifying what are the demands and also specifying

the acts committed by the accused with particulars thereof.

      14. On going through the complaint, it was found

wanting in many respects which also lacks reference to a

specific incident and also regards the particulars of exact

dowry demanded.

      15. It is true that there is some evidence to show that

PW1 was treated by a doctor as could be evident from the

evidence of PW3. But that aspect, as already noticed by the

lower court, does not advance the case of the complainant

much.

Crl.A. No. 613/2004
                              -10-



      16. The evidence of PW2 is to the effect that on

getting telegram, he went to the matrimonial house of the

complainant and there was a discussion with the first

accused who assured that there will be no ill-treatment. The

lower court has considered various letters namely Exts. P2

to P4 in considerable detail and has come to the conclusion

that the allegations of cruelty and ill-treatment are general

in nature and there too also, there is no specific mention of

any demand made for dowry.

      17. The evidence of DW1 shows that the couple parted

ways due to incompatibility and Ext.D1 agreement speaks

for itself. Ext.D1 is an agreement dated 06.05.1996 and it is

an admitted document by PW1. The evidence would show

that subsequently, they decided to reside together and

complaint is that even thereafter, she was ill-treated. The

complainant as well as the father of the complainant, PW2

speaks about the intervention of several persons to bring

about the settlement between the parties. As rightly noticed

Crl.A. No. 613/2004
                              -11-



by the lower court, none of them have been examined and

the evidence is found wanting in that regard.

      18. On an independent consideration of the evidence,

it could not be said that the finding of the court below that

the evidence is found wanting is either perverse or it is

contrary to the materials on record. It is a possible finding.

As rightly pointed out by the learned counsel for the

respondent that this Court is sitting an appeal against an

order of acquittal and unless it is shown that the findings are

perverse or it is contrary to the materials on record,

interference may not be justified even assuming a different

view is possible.

      This appeal is without merits and is accordingly

dismissed.


                                                    Sd/-
                                        P.BHAVADASAN
                                                 JUDGE
ds
                          //True Copy//

                          P.A. To Judge



