
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                    PRESENT:

                       THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE P.BHAVADASAN

              FRIDAY, THE 16TH DAY OF AUGUST 2013/25TH SRAVANA, 1935

                                    Crl.Rev.Pet.No. 2707 of 2006 (C)
                                           ---------------------------------
       CRL.A. NO.147/2005 OF ADDITIONAL SESSIONS FAST TRACK COURT-II,
                                                  ALAPPUZHA
   SC. NO.104/2003 OF PRINCIPAL ASSISTANT SESSIONS COURT,ALAPPUZHA.
                                                      ............

PETITIONER/APPELLANT/ACCUSED:
------------------------------------------------------

           SASI, S/O.VASUDEVAN,
           KOTTOOR VADAKKETHIL VEEDU,
           PATHIYOOR MURI, PATHIYOOR VILLAGE,
           KAYAMKULAM.

           BY ADVS.SRI.B.RAMAN PILLAI,
                         SRI.GEORGE PHILIP,
                         SRI.R.ANIL,
                         SRI.RAJU RADHAKRISHNAN.

RESPONDENT/RESPONDENT/COMPLAINANT:
--------------------------------------------------------------------

           STATE OF KERALA,
           REPRESENTED BY THE PUBLIC PROSECUTOR,
           HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM.


           BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR MR.ROY THOMAS.


           THIS CRIMINAL REVISION PETITION HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD
           ON 29-07-2013, THE COURT ON 16-08-2013 PASSED THE FOLLOWING:

rs.


                - - - -P.-BHAVADASAN, -J.- - - -
                  Crl.R.P.-No. 2707 of 2006
                            - - - - - - -

           Dated-this the 16th day of August, 2013.
                  - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -


                             ORDER


          Undaunted by the concurrent findings against him

of having committed offences punishable under Sections 376

and 450 of Indian Penal Code and having suffered conviction

and sentence for the said offences, the accused in S.C. 104 of

2003 before the Principal Assistant Sessions Court, Alappuzha

has come up in revision.

          2.  P.W.1 is the prosecutrix in this case.    She is

married and has a child. Her husband is working abroad. The

accused is her neighbour. It so happened that P.W.1 had gone

to the house of P.W.6 where her child fell ill.     She needed

money. She asked the accused if he could lend Rs.500/- to

her. The accused replied that he was not in his house and the

money may be collected from his brother-in-law's house at

Chettikulangara. P.W.1 reached the said house and found the

accused and a lady there. The allegation is that under the

Crl.R.P.2707/2006.
                                 2

pretext of showing the house which was a newly constructed

one, P.W.1 was taken to a room at the first floor and as soon

as she entered the room, the door was closed. Thereafter the

accused snatched the child from her, threatened her with dire

consequences if she did not pose nude for him to take

photographs.       Left with no choice, she had to relent and her

nude photographs were drawn by the accused.            Thereafter

using those photographs, on a subsequent date, it is alleged

that the accused went to the house of the victim and ravished

her. The accused did not stop at that. He then wanted the

victim to play in blue films and also to submit herself to the

persons whom the accused indicated. She was unwilling to do

either of these.     Out of fear of humiliation and the threat

meted out by the accused, the victim kept silent.         But her

patience reached its       nadir   when the accused instigated

her to poison her husband. That paved the way for P.W.1 to

Crl.R.P.2707/2006.
                                3

confess to her husband of what had transpired. She then laid

Ext.P1 private complaint before the court concerned.

             3. The private complaint laid by the prosecutrix was

forwarded for investigation under Section 156(3) of the Code

of Criminal Procedure. P.W.11, the Sub Inspector of Police,

Mavelikkara, who received the complaint, on the basis of

Ext.P1 complaint, registered Crime No. 53 of 2001 as per

Ext.P14 FIR. He then found that the incident had occurred

within the jurisdiction of the Kayamkulam Police Station and

therefore, he forwarded Ext.P14 FIR with relevant documents

to that Police Station.       The Sub Inspector of Police,

Kayamkulam Police Station, namely, P.W.12, on receipt of

Ext.P14 re-registered crime as per Ext.P15 FIR. P.W.15 took

over investigation. He prepared Ext.P12 scene mahazar and

recovered the dress handed over by P.W.1 as per Ext.P21

mahazar. He conducted a search of the house of the accused

after following the necessary procedures and          seized the

Crl.R.P.2707/2006.
                                 4

negatives of the photographs. The bill book containing the

counter foil of the bill issued to the petitioner from Challenger

Colour Lab was seized as per Ext.P24 mahazar. The bill book

was later returned on kychit. On surrender by the accused

before P.W.15, he was subjected to potency test.             The

Investigating Officer recorded the statements of witnesses,

completed investigation and laid charge before court.

             4. The court, before which charge was laid, took

cognizance of the offences.        Finding that the offences are

exclusively triable by a court of Sessions committed the case

to Sessions Court, Alappuzha as per Section 209 Cr.P.C. The

Sessions Court, Alappuzha made over the case to Principal

Assistant Sessions Court, Alappuzha for trial and disposal.

The latter court, on receipt of records and on appearance of

the accused, framed charge for the offences punishable under

Sections 342, 376, 384, 385, 450 and 506 of Indian Penal

Code. The accused pleaded not guilty and claimed to be tried.

Crl.R.P.2707/2006.
                               5

The prosecution therefore had P.Ws. 1 to 16 examined and

had Exts.P1 to P29 marked.    M.Os. 1 to 5 were got identified

and marked. After the close of the prosecution evidence, the

accused was questioned under Section 313 Cr.P.C. He denied

all the incriminating circumstances brought out in evidence

against him and maintained that he is innocent.     He denied

having committed any act which would constitute offences and

he came forward with an explanation that it was his

brother-in-law, Soman, with whom his relationship was far

from pleasant, who had manipulated things to falsely implicate

him. Finding that the accused could not be acquitted under

Section 232 Cr.P.C., he was asked to enter on his defence. He

examined D.Ws.1 to 4 and had Exts.D1 to D9 marked. On a

consideration of the materials before it, the trial court came

to the conclusion that the accused had committed the offences

punishable under Sections 376, 342, 384, 385, 450 and 506

of I.P.C.      The conviction and sentence for the offences

Crl.R.P.2707/2006.
                               6

followed. It was also directed that if the fine amount imposed

was realised, it shall be paid to P.W.1 as compensation.

Substantive sentences were directed to run concurrently and

set off as per law was allowed.

             5. The disappointed accused carried the matter in

appeal as Crl.Appeal No.147 of 2005 before the Additional

Sessions Court, Fast Track -II, Alappuzha.       The said court,

after an independent evaluation of the evidence, found no

grounds to interfere with the finding of the court below and

confirmed the same.

             6. The learned counsel appearing for the revision

petitioner contended that both the courts below have acted in

a mechanical manner and had not cared to critically analyse

the evidence of P.W.1, the prosecutrix, in this case. Learned

counsel appearing for the revision petitioner contended that

he had no quarrel with the proposition that if the evidence of

the prosecutrix is found cogent, convincing and creditworthy,

Crl.R.P.2707/2006.
                                7

a conviction can be certainly based on that. But in the case on

hand, it is far from so.     The evidence of P.W.1 is open to

serious      doubt   as  it  is replete   with   contradictions,

inconsistencies, embellishments and developments. A reading

of the evidence of P.W.1, taken along with Exts.P1 and P18,

shows that she has         no consistent case and a proper

appreciation of her evidence will bring out the inherent

improbabilities in the prosecution story.      The evidence of

P.W.1 is      destroyed by the evidence of P.W.6, who is none

other than the sister of P.W.1. Recalling the prosecution case,

learned counsel pointed out that P.W.1 is alleged to have gone

to the house of P.W.6 from where she requested the money

from the accused. Not only does P.W.6 denies the said fact,

P.W.15, the Investigating Officer, has categorically stated that

during investigation, it was not revealed that the child of P.W.1

had fallen ill.     A reading of the evidence of P.W.1, when

compared with Exts.P1 and P18, will show that there are

Crl.R.P.2707/2006.
                               8

material contradictions and inconsistencies in the material

aspects of the case. Apart from the evidence of P.W.1, there is

no material to prove the prosecution case.

             7.   Learned counsel pointed out that it is not

necessary in all cases that the evidence of the prosecutrix

should invariably be accepted. True, her position is that of an

injured witness. But, according to the learned counsel, that

does not mean that whatever she says is the gospel truth. For

the said proposition, learned counsel relied on the decision

reported in Rajoo and Others v. State of M.P. (AIR 2009 SC

858).

             9. According to the learned counsel appearing for

the revision petitioner, a reading of the evidence of P.W.1

along with Exts.P1 and P18 would show that the prosecution

has failed to prove the chain of events and that makes the

evidence of P.W.1 open to serious doubt. This infirmity in the

evidence of P.W.1 probabilises the defence version. For the

Crl.R.P.2707/2006.
                                  9

said proposition, learned counsel relied on the decision

reported in Rajesh Patel v. State of Jharkhand (2013Cri.L.J.

2062).

             10. Finally, it was contended that there is inordinate

delay in lodging the complaint. The incidents are said to have

occurred in the year 1999 and the complaint has been laid

only     two    years  thereafter,  for  which   no    satisfactory

explanation is offered. Both the courts below have brushed

aside the contentions on this behalf very lightly.         For the

proposition that delay in such cases is fatal, learned counsel

relied on the decision reported in          Ramdas v. State of

Maharashtra (2006(11) SCALE 340). According to the learned

counsel, the above aspects have not been considered by the

courts below and that vitiates the finding.

             11. Learned Public Prosecutor on the other hand

pointed out that this court may remind itself that it is

exercising the revisional jurisdiction which is considerably

Crl.R.P.2707/2006.
                                10

limited in its scope and power. It is infact, according to the

learned Public Prosecutor, a supervisory jurisdiction which is

to be exercised to ensure that the courts below have exercised

their jurisdiction properly.      It does not contemplate a

re-appreciation of the evidence to see whether the findings

of the courts below are justified.        Nor does it allow the

revisional court to reverse the finding merely because the

revisional court feels that a different view is possible.

According to the learned Public Prosecutor, unless and until it

is shown that the findings of the courts below suffer from

illegality, irregularity or impropriety, it will not be proper for

this court to interfere with the findings of the court below. It

is significant to notice, according to the learned Public

Prosecutor that both the courts below have independently

considered the evidence on record and have come to identical

conclusions that the offences are made out. It could not be

Crl.R.P.2707/2006.
                               11

said that the findings are either perverse or contrary to the

evidence of record.

             12. Learned Public Prosecutor pointed out that the

infirmities pointed out in the evidence of P.W.1 are without

basis. It is only natural that when the witness speaks after a

lapse of time, inconsistencies, contradictions, embellishments

and developments are bound to occur. Further, it is pointed

out that moral indignation of the prosecutrix will result in the

contribution to her approach. Merely because there may be

some inconsistencies or contradictions, the evidence of P.W.1

is not liable to be rejected. Read as a whole, it can be seen

that her evidence has a ring of truth and merely because P.W.6

has chosen to contradict P.W.1, and also that there is some

difference in the narration of the incident in Ext.P1 and

Ext.P18 will not be sufficient     to throw out the evidence

furnished by P.W.1. The suggestion put to P.W.1 that it was at

the behest of Soman, the brother-in-law of the accused, that

Crl.R.P.2707/2006.
                                12

the complaint was laid, the learned Public Prosecutor pointed

out that the defence put up is a cock and bull story and cannot

even stand.

             13. Learned Public Prosecutor further pointed out

that in such case, one has to depend to a great extent on the

evidence furnished by the prosecutrix. Unless it is shown that

her evidence suffers from inherent improbabilities or is

unacceptable when viewed in the light of the other evidence

adduced in the case, it will not be proper for the court to look

upon the evidence of P.W.1 with suspicion.       Learned Public

Prosecutor did not dispute the principle that in all cases, the

statement of the prosecutrixc cannot be treated as the gospel

truth.

             14. Learned Public Prosecutor also pointed out that

there is no merit in the contention based on delay. A reading

of the evidence of P.W.1 and also the various documents

produced by the prosecution will clearly show that she was

Crl.R.P.2707/2006.
                                 13

agitating her case, may be in the wrong forum.              She

approached the Women's Commission and they threw up their

hands in despair when the accused did not appear before

them. Reasonable explanation has been offered for the delay.

             15. Learned Public Prosecutor pointed out that both

the courts below considered the above aspects in considerable

detail and have come to identical conclusions. Under such

circumstances, it may not be proper for this court to interfere

with the finding of the court below on the mere ground that it

has no basis or foundation. In short, the contention is that no

grounds are made out to interfere with the finding of the court

below.

             16. True, the story may look improbable at the first

blush. P.W.1 is the victim and the prosecutrix. She as already

noticed, was married and had a child.        Her husband was

working abroad.     According to the evidence of P.W.1, it so

happened that she had to go to the house of P.W.6 where her

Crl.R.P.2707/2006.
                               14

child fell ill.    She needed money and she contacted the

accused who was her neighbour. P.W.1 would say that the

accused had asked her to go over to a house at

Chettikulangara which was under construction to receive the

amount. P.W.1 says that she bona fide believed the accused,

and at the time she entered the house, she found the accused

and a lady sitting on the varenda. P.W.1 would say that being

a newly constructed house, the accused offered her to take her

to the house. She went along with him. P.W.1 would then say

that they went to upstair portion and as soon as they entered

into an A.C. Room, the accused closed the door and snatched

the child from her.      Then, according to P.W.1, she was

threatened with the life of the child if she did not heed to the

demands of the accused. Having no other choice, P.W.1 would

say that she relented. Her statement is that compelling her to

undress, the accused captured her nude photographs.

Thereafter, she was taken to another house where she was

Crl.R.P.2707/2006.
                               15

threatened with dire consequences if she dared to reveal the

incident to anybody. The house where she was taken on the

second occasion was at Thattarambalam. As per the evidence

furnished by P.W.1, on 15.2.1999 at 2.30 p.m., the accused

came to her residence and threatening her with publication of

the nude photographs which he had drawn on the earlier

occasion, she was made to subject herself to his lust. The

accused initially had promised that if she heeded to his desire,

the photographs would be      returned to her.   Lured by the

offer, she succumbed. But, after the act was over, the accused

did not return the photographs.         Instead, going by the

evidence of P.W.1, he came forward with more demands like

acting in blue films and also compelling her to share bed with

persons whom the accused would indicate. P.W.1 would say

that she resisted these demands of the accused. That made

him to take a different approach. He then demanded money

from P.W.1 and she had to simply sign cheques in his favour.

Crl.R.P.2707/2006.
                                 16

She then speaks about the ultimate act which made her to file

the complaint.

             17. That she was taken on the first occasion to the

house where the accused had indicated is borne out from the

evidence of P.W.5, an autorickshaw driver. His evidence shows

that he had taken the lady to the house where the accused had

asked P.W.1 to come to receive money.

             18.   It is true that even though the prosecution

witness P.W.6, who is none other than the direct elder sister of

P.W.1, chose to betray the prosecution, she even went to the

extent of suggesting illicit relationship between P.W.1 and

Soman, who is none other than the brother-in-law of the

accused. She denied the statement given by her to the police

under Section 161 Cr.P.C. with absolute impunity. However, in

cross-examination, it was brought out that       a short period

before giving evidence, the relationship between P.W.1 and

P.W.6      had become extremely bitter. It was so bitter that

Crl.R.P.2707/2006.
                                 17

P.W.6 did not invite P.W.1 for the marriage of her own

daughter also.

             19. Relying on the evidence of P.W.6 and P.W.15, it

is contended that the version given by P.W.1 that she had

gone to the house of P.W.6 where her child fell ill and she

demanded money from the accused, it is contended that the

evidence of P.W.1 cannot be accepted. It is difficult to accept

the contention so raised by the learned counsel for the

revision petitioner. P.W.6 had her own reasons as could be

seen from her own testimony to speak against the victim.

Both the courts below have found that the evidence of P.W.6

cannot be accepted. Both the courts below found that she was

deliberately speaking falsehood to spike her vengeance

against P.W.1. The views so taken by the courts below are

possible views.

             20. In the decision reported in Rajoo and Others v.

State of M.P. (AIR 2009 SC 858) it was held as follows:

Crl.R.P.2707/2006.
                                 18

             "9. The aforesaid judgments lay down the basic
      principle    that  ordinarily  the   evidence   of   a
      prosecutrix should not be suspect and should be
      believed, the more so as her statement has to be
      evaluated at par with that of an injured witness and
      if the evidence is reliable, no corroboration is
      necessary. Undoubtedly, the aforesaid observations
      must carry the greatest weight and we respectfully
      agree with them, but at the same time they cannot
      be universally and mechanically applied to the facts
      of every case of sexual assault which comes before
      the Court. It cannot be lost sight of that rape causes
      the greatest distress and humiliation to the victim
      but at the same time a false allegation of rape can
      cause equal distress, humiliation and damage to the
      accused as well. The accused must also be
      protected against the possibility of false implication,
      particularly where a large number of accused are
      involved. It must, further, be borne in mind that the
      broad principle is that an injured witness was
      present at the time when the incident happened and
      that ordinarily such a witness would not tell a lie as
      to the actual assailants, but there is no presumption

Crl.R.P.2707/2006.
                               19

      or any basis for assuming that the statement of
      such a witness is always correct or without any
      embellishment or exaggeration. Reference has been
      made in Gurmit Singh's case to the amendments in
      1983 to Sections 375 and 376 of the Indian Penal
      Code making the penal provisions relating to rape
      more stringent, and also to Section 114-A of the
      Evidence Act with respect to a presumption to be
      raised with regard to allegations of consensual sex
      in a case of alleged rape. It is, however, significant
      that Sections 113-A and 113-B too were inserted in
      the Evidence Act by the same amendment by which
      certain presumptions in cases of abetment of
      suicide and dowry death have been raised against
      the accused. These two Sections, thus, raise a clear
      presumption in favour of the prosecution but no
      similar presumption with respect to rape is
      visualized as the presumption under Section 114-A
      is extremely restricted in its applicability.     This
      clearly shows that insofar as allegations of rape are
      concerned, the evidence of a prosecutrix must be
      examined as that of an injured witness whose
      presence at the spot is probable but it can never be

Crl.R.P.2707/2006.
                                  20

      presumed that her statement should, without
      exception, be taken as the gospel truth. Additionally
      her statement can, at best, be adjudged on the
      principle that ordinarily no injured witness would
      tell a lie or implicate a person falsely. We believe
      that it is under these principles that this case, and
      others such as this one, need to be examined."

             21.   When one goes through the decision, one

cannot omit to notice the facts of the said decision.         The

evidence adduced       in the said case created certain serious

doubts regarding the version given by the prosecutrix and her

conduct was also open to serious doubts. In that context, it

was held that merely because the prosecutrix says that she

was raped, that cannot be taken as gospel truth. The decision

should be confined to the facts of the said case.

             22. It is well settled by now that the prosecutrix in

an offence of rape is not an accomplice, but is in the position

of an injured witness.      One has also to remember that the

offence is one which is committed in secrecy and it will be

Crl.R.P.2707/2006.
                                21

imprudent on the part of the court to insist for corroborative

items of evidence except the medical evidence in certain

cases.      Of course, the court has to critically scrutinize the

evidence of the prosecutrix for the simple reason that most of

the findings will have to be rendered on the testimony of the

prosecutrix alone. Unless it is shown that there is ill-will on

the part of the victim, or that the victim, in order to escape

from unpleasant consequences, has foisted a case on the

accused, or until it is shown that there are compelling

circumstances to doubt the version given by the prosecutrix, it

will not be proper for the court to reject the evidence of the

prosecutrix for want of corroboration. One should remember

that it is seldom that a lady comes forward with an accusation

of rape. It brings her no credit. This aspect also have to be

borne in mind while appreciating the evidence in the case of

rape. The only suggestion to P.W.1 that it was at the behest

of the brother-in-law of the accused that the case has been

Crl.R.P.2707/2006.
                                 22

foisted on him which is denied by her. The inconsistencies

and contradictions pointed out in the evidence of P.W.1 taken

along with Exts.P1 and P18 do not materially affect her

testimony.      The inconsistencies and contradictions relate to

insignificant aspects and even assuming that there are some

areas of her evidence which cannot be believed, still it cannot

be said that her entire evidence has to be thrown out. She

might have exaggerated. She might have developed the story.

But if the substratum remains the same, there is no reason

why the court should refuse to accept the testimony of the

prosecutrix.

             23. In the decision reported in Rajesh Patel v. State

of Jharkhand (2013 Cri.L.J. 2062), on facts it was found that

the sequence of events spoken to by the prosecutrix was not

convincing enough and that created serious suspicion in the

mind of the court coupled with various other circumstances,

also the delay in lodging the FIR. The prosecution also had a

Crl.R.P.2707/2006.
                               23

case that the two persons who were in the know of things,

when they examined, did not support the prosecution. It is

also significant to notice that in the above case, neither the

doctor nor the investigating officer was also examined.

Further, the reason offered for the delay was not convincing

enough. Under those circumstances, it was held that since the

prosecutrix failed   to narrate the sequence of events, the

prosecution had to fail. The facts are narrated in detail in

paragraphs 12 and 13 of the decision.

             24. On facts, the principle laid down in the above

decision can have no application to the present case. The fact

that P.W.1 had gone to the house indicated by the accused to

receive a sum of Rs.500/- is borne out from the testimony of

P.W.5, the autorickshaw driver who dropped her in that house.

It was very vehemently contended before this court that it is

inconceivable that the accused would have held the child in

one hand and with the other hand he could have taken the

Crl.R.P.2707/2006.
                                 24

photographs. According to the learned counsel, it is highly

improbable and inconceivable that such a thing could have

happened.

             25. The evidence of P.W.1 shows that as soon as

she entered into the A.C. room on the first floor, the accused

closed the door and snatched the child from her.            The

evidence also shows that her dress was torn by the accused

and also that the child was kept between his knees when he

drew the nude photographs of P.W.1. Even though there is

slight inconsistency in the sequence of events given by her, it

is insufficient to reject her evidence in toto.

             26.   Both the courts below have considered the

evidence of P.W.1 in considerable detail and have come to the

conclusion that there is no justification or reason to doubt her

version.

             27. Coming to the question of delay, the contention

raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner has to fail as

Crl.R.P.2707/2006.
                                25

has been found by both the courts below.          True, the two

incidents complained of, namely, the drawing of nude

photographs and also the rape on P.W.1 were committed in

1999 and the private complaint was laid only in 2001. In the

decision reported in Ramdas v. State of Maharashtra (2006

(11) SCALE 340) relied on by the learned counsel for the

revision petitioner, the consequence of the delay in lodging

the FIR was considered in detail.      In the said case, it was

found that no reasonable explanation had been offered for the

delay and it was held that that should prove fatal to the

prosecution.

             28. However, in the above decision, it has also been

observed that mere delay in lodging the FIR is not necessarily

fatal to the case of the prosecution.    In no less terms, the

court has held that the said issue has to be considered in the

light of the facts and circumstances of each case. The said

decision does not lay down any universal principle.

Crl.R.P.2707/2006.
                                26

              29.  Coming back to the facts of the case, the

evidence of P.W.1 shows that after having committed sexual

assault on her, the accused made certain objectionable

demands from her, to which she did not relent. She has also

given evidence to the effect that utilizing the photographs

and also the pitiable state of affairs, the accused squeezed

money from her. That the accused had encashed cheques is

evident      from the testimony of P.W.13, the Manager of the

Indian Overseas Bank, Kayamkulam where P.W.1 maintained

her account.       Ext.P16 is the extract of the S.B. Account

maintained by P.W.1. Of course, the accused had a case that

being a friend of P.W.1, she used to ask him to encash

cheques for her. The explanation so offered is too weak to

accept.

              30. The further evidence of P.W.1 is to the effect

that later on when her husband returned in 1999 and

scrutinized the account, he found large sums of money

Crl.R.P.2707/2006.
                                27

missing from the account of P.W.1.       Unable to resist the

queries made by the husband, she had to disclose the incident

to him.       P.W.1 has also given evidence to the effect that

thereafter the accused even instigated her to poison her

husband which shocked P.W.1 and then she decided             to

complain. Ext.P18 is the complaint said to have been filed by

P.W.1 before the Women's Commission.       P.W.14, the Senior

Superintendent of Kerala State Women's Commission was

examined to prove that P.W.1 had infact filed a complaint. As

per her evidence, complaint was filed on 7.8.2000 and the

entire file relating to the said matter was produced before

court. The evidence shows that inspite of notice issued to the

accused, he did not turn up resulting in the Women's

Commission unable to take any effective steps in the matter

and the Commission was compelled to close the file with a

direction to P.W.1 to take such steps as are available to her in

law.

Crl.R.P.2707/2006.
                                 28

             31. It could therefore be seen that it is not as if the

victim, namely, P.W.1 had been kept silent till she laid Ext.P1

private complaint. She had been taking steps to redress her

grievances, but that yielded no result. Viewed in the context

of the case, and the facts and circumstances of the case

revealed through the evidence of P.W.1 and such other

evidence produced by the prosecution, it cannot be said that

there is deliberate delay in lodging the FIS. The accused was

unable to show that there was any ill-motive in delaying the

lodging of the FIS. But, on the other hand, a reading of the

evidence of P.W.1 taken along with the other evidence, namely,

bank accounts etc., and also the mediation talks in the

presence of the Circle Inspector of Police at one point of time

would show that P.W.1 was making every effort to extricate

herself from the clutches of the accused and to have her

grievances redressed.

Crl.R.P.2707/2006.
                                 29

             32.   As rightly pointed out by the learned Public

Prosecutor, the two courts have independently considered the

evidence on record and have come to the conclusion that there

is no reason to reject the evidence of P.W.1, the prosecutrix,

which stands scrutiny. Even though in revisional jurisdiction a

reappreaisal of the evidence is not normally permissible, in the

light of the vehemence with which the matter was argued

before this court and in the light of the complaint that the

courts below have not appreciated the evidence of P.W.1 in

the proper perspective, this court has also gone through the

evidence of P.W.1.     May be that there are some infirmities in

the evidence of P.W.1, but it could not be said that her story is

totally false or highly improbable. The attempt on the part of

the accused by adducing evidence to show that he is innocent

has not succeeded.

             33.   As rightly pointed out by the learned Public

Prosecutor, it may be possible to say that on a reappraisal of

Crl.R.P.2707/2006.
                                30

the evidence in the case, a different view is possible. But, two

courts, one of them is final court on facts, have chosen to

believe the version given by P.W.1 and have arrived at a

conclusion that offences have been made out. It could not be

said that the views so taken by both the courts below are

perverse or contrary to the evidence on record. The revision

petitioner was unable to establish any illegality, irregularity or

impropriety in the findings of the courts below.

             34. There was a frantic attempt then to contend for

the position that the sentence imposed for the offence under

Section 376 of I.P.C. is highly excessive and is not warranted

in the facts of the case.

             35. The contention is without basis. The trial court

has awarded only seven years' rigorous imprisonment, which

is the minimum period as per the statute. Of course, under

exceptional circumstances, the court concerned could reduce

the period of imprisonment. However, in the case on hand,

Crl.R.P.2707/2006.
                                31

the exception does not apply. If at all the court below has

erred in any manner, it has erred on the side of leniency.

             The result is that this revision petition is without

merits and it is liable to be dismissed. I do so, confirming the

conviction and sentence as confirmed by the appellate court.




                                             P. BHAVADASAN,
                                                    JUDGE

sb.



