
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                          PRESENT:

           THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE V.K.MOHANAN

    TUESDAY, THE 30TH DAY OF JULY 2013/8TH SRAVANA, 1935

                Crl.MC.No. 3177 of 2013 ()
                ---------------------------
    CRIME NO. 343/2013 OF BEKAL POLICE STATION, KASARGOD

    PETITIONERS/ACCUSED 1 TO 3:
    -------------------------

  1. ABOOBACKER SIDDIQUE, AGED 32 YEARS
      S/O MOIDEEN KUNHI, GURU TEMPLE ROAD,
      ADKATH BAYAL,KASARAGOD.

  2. MOIDEEN KUNHI,GURU TEMPLE ROAD,
      ADKATH BAYAL, KASARAGOD.

  3. AYSHA,W/O.MOIDEEN KUNHI,
      GURU TEMPLE ROAD, ADKATH BAYAL
      KASARAGOD.

      BY ADV. SRI.SURESH KUMAR KODOTH

    RESPONDENTS/STATE AND COMPLAINANT:
    ---------------------------------

   1. STATE OF KERALA,
      REPRESENTED BY THE PUBLIC PROSECUTOR
      HIGH COURT OF KERALA.

   2. RASHEEDA.K.A,D/O.KOLIYAD ABDULLA,
      RESIDING AT KALANAD, P.O.KALANAD
      KASARAGOD DISTRICT.

      R1 BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR  SMT.S. HYMA
      R2 BY ADV. SRI.BINU GEORGE


      THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE  HAVING COME UP FOR ADMISSION
      ON 30-07-2013, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE
      FOLLOWING:

BP

Crl.MC.No. 3177 of 2013 ()
---------------------------

                           APPENDIX

PETITIONER(S)' EXHIBITS
-----------------------

ANNEXURE-1 CERTIFIED COPY OF THE FIR IN CRIME 343/2013 0F
            BEKAL POLICE STATION

ANNEXURE-2 JUDGMENT IN CRL.A.228/2012 OF THE COURT OF
           SESSIONS,KASARAGOD

ANNEXURE-3 AGREEMENT OF SETTLEMENT DATED 22/6/2013 ENTERED
           BETWEEN FIRST PETITIONER AND SECOND RESPONDENT

ANNEXURE-4 AGREEMENT DATED 18/7/2013 BETWEEN FIRST PETITIONER
           AND SECOND RESPONDENT.


RESPONDENT(S)' EXHIBITS :           NIL.
--------------------------

                                          //TRUE COPY//


                                          P.A. TO JUDGE
BP


                    V.K.MOHANAN, J.
          ----------------------------------------
                Crl.M.C.No.3177 of 2013
          ----------------------------------------
         Dated this the 30th day of July, 2013

                          O R D E R

        The above petition is filed under Section 482 of the

Criminal Procedure Code (for short 'Cr.P.C.') at the instance of

the petitioners, who are accused in Crime No.343/2013 of

Bekal Police Station for the offences punishable under Sections

354, 498A, 506(ii)r/w Section 34 of I.P.C. with a prayer to

quash the proceedings in Crime No.343/2013 of Bekal Police

Station as the matter is settled out of court.

        2. The substance of the allegation is that the

complainant is the wife of the first accused, having legally

married on 15.05.2011 and while staying in the matrimonial

home she was subjected to matrimonial cruelty. At the time of

marriage, complainant's parents had given 45 sovereigns of

gold ornaments and 10 cents of land. Stating one or other

flimsy reasons accused misappropriated the gold ornaments.

On 23.08.2011 the accused left for Dubai. The second accused

outraged the modesty of the complainant, while first accused

her husband was away in gulf.        Accused 1, 3 and 4 have

abetted the first accused in committing the offence and all of

Crl.M.C.No.3177 of 2013
                               2

them indulged in harassing the complainant. They demanded

more dowry from the complainant and when this demand was

not met, complainant was subjected to cruelty both physical

and mental. Thus, according to the prosecution the above

petitioners who are accused Nos.1 to 3 have committed the

offences punishable under Sections 354, 498A, 506(ii) r/w

Section 34 of I.P.C. Now, the case of the petitioners is that the

matter is settled as per Annexure-4 agreement.

         3. Heard the learned counsel for the petitioners as

well as the second respondent. I have also heard the learned

Public Prosecutor.

         4. The learned counsel for the petitioners submitted

that during the pendency of the above case, the matter is

settled amicably between the parties to the dispute which is

the subject matter of the above case.           Therefore, the

continuation of the proceedings in the above case is abuse of

process of law and proceedings.

         5. The learned counsel for the second respondent who

on the basis of specific instruction received         from the

respondent submitted that the above respondent, who is the

de facto complainant does not intend to proceed any further

Crl.M.C.No.3177 of 2013
                                3

against the petitioners and she has no grievance against them.

         6. I have carefully considered the above submissions

of the respective counsel. I have verified the documents and

materials produced along with the above petition. In the given

facts and circumstances of the case and especially in the light

of the settlement arrived between the parties to the dispute,

the learned Public Prosecutor has also no objection in allowing

the above petition.

         7.   Having regard to the facts and circumstances

involved in the case, it can be seen that the offences involved

in the above case are only 354, 498A, 506(ii) r/w Section 34

of I.P.C. which are more or less personal in nature and no

public interest is involved. It is pertinent to note that though

such offences are involved, the real parties to the dispute

approached this Court after having amicably settled the

matter.    From the submission made by the counsel for the

second respondent, it appears to me that the de facto

complainant has no further grievance against the petitioners

accused in the light of the settlement arrived by them. In this

juncture, it is relevant to note the decisions of the Honourable

Apex Court reported in Gian Singh v. State of Punjab [2012

Crl.M.C.No.3177 of 2013
                                     4

(4) KLT 108(SC)] and Jitendra Raghuvanshi and Others v.

Babita Raghuvanshi and another [2013 (1) KLD 817 (SC)].

In Gian Singh's case, the Supreme Court has held as follows:-

                  "57. The position that emerges from the

         above discussion can be summarised thus:           the

         power of the High Court in quashing a criminal

         proceeding or FIR or complaint in exercise of its

         inherent jurisdiction is distinct and different from

         the power given to a criminal court for compounding

         the offences under S.320 of the Code.        Inherent

         power is of wide plenitude with no statutory

         limitation but it has to be exercised in accord with

         the guideline engrafted in such power viz;(i) to

         secure the ends of justice or (ii) to prevent abuse of

         the process of any Court. In what cases power to

         quash the criminal proceeding or complaint or F.I.R.

         may be exercised where the offender and victim

         have settled their dispute would depend on the facts

         and circumstances of each case and no category can

         be prescribed..



It is further held as follows:-


          ".........  But   the    criminal    cases    having

          overwhelmingly and pre-dominatingly civil flavour

          stand on different footing for the purposes of

          quashing, particularly the offences arising from

          commercial, financial,mercandile, civil, partnership

          or such like transactions or the offences arising out

          of matrimony relating to dowry etc. or the family

          disputes where the wrong is basically private or

Crl.M.C.No.3177 of 2013
                                     5

         personal in nature and the parties have resolved

         their entire dispute. In this category of cases, High

         Court may quash criminal proceedings if in its view,

         because of the compromise between the offender

         and victim, the possibility of conviction is remote

         and bleak and continuation of criminal case would

         put accused to great oppression and prejudice and

         extreme injustice would be caused to him by not

         quashing the criminal case despite          full and

         complete settlement and compromise with the

         victim........"



Further, in Jitendra Raghuvanshi's case, the Apex Court

has held as follows:-


                "7.    It is not in dispute that matrimonial

         disputes have been on considerable increase in

         recent times resulting in filing of complaints under

         Sections 498A and 406 of I.P.C. not only against

         the husband but also against the relatives of the

         husband. The question is when such matters are

         resolved either by the wife agreeing to rejoin the

         matrimonial home or by mutual settlement of other

         pending     disputes  for  which   both   the   sides

         approached the High Court and jointly prayed for

         quashing of the criminal proceedings or the FIR or

         complaint by the wife under Sections 498A and 406

         of I.P.C., whether the prayer can be declined on the

         sole ground that since the offences are non-

         compoundable under Section 320 of the Code, it

         would be impermissible for the court to quash the

         criminal proceedings or FIR or complaint.

Crl.M.C.No.3177 of 2013
                                    6

               8. It is not in dispute that in the case on

         hand subsequent to the filing of the criminal

         complaint under Sections 498A and 406 of IPC and

         Sections 3 and 4 of the Dowry Prohibition Act,

         1961, with the help and intervention of family

         members, friends and well-wishers, the parties

         concerned have amicably settled their differences

         and executed a compromise/settlement. Pursuant

         thereto, the appellants filed the said compromise

         before the Trial Court with a request to place the

         same   on   record   and    to  drop   the   criminal

         proceedings against the appellants herein.       It is

         also not in dispute that in additional to the mutual

         settlement arrived at by the parties, respondent/-

         wife has also filed an affidavit stating that she did

         not wish to pursue the criminal proceedings against

         the appellants and fully supported the contents of

         the settlement deed.     It is the grievance of the

         appellants that no only the Trial Court rejected such

         prayer of the parties but also the High Court failed

         toe exercise its jurisdiction under Section 482 of

         the Code only on the ground that the criminal

         proceedings relate to the offences punishable under

         Sections 498A and 406 of IPC which are non-

         compoundable in nature."

               "12. In our view, it is the duty of the Courts

         to encourage genuine settlements of matrimonial

         disputes, particularly, when the same are on

         considerable increase.    Even if the offences are

         non-compoundable, if they relate to matrimonial

         disputes and the Court is satisfied that the parties

         have settled the same amicably and without any

         pressure, we hold that for the purpose of securing

Crl.M.C.No.3177 of 2013
                                     7

         ends of justice, Section 320 of the Code would not

         be a bar to the exercise of power of quashing of

         FIR,   complaint    or   the   subsequent     criminal

         proceedings.

                13.     There has been an outburst of

         matrimonial    disputes   in  recent  times.      The

         institution of marriage occupies an important place

         and it has an important role to play in the society.

         Therefore, every effort should be made in the

         interest of the individuals in order to enable them

         to settle down in life and live peacefully.     If the

         parties ponder over their defaults and terminate

         their disputes amicably by mutual agreement

         instead of fighting it out in a Court of law, in order

         to do complete justice in the matrimonial matters,

         the Courts should be less hesitant in exercising its

         extraordinary jurisdiction. It is trite to state that

         the power under Section 482 should be exercised

         sparingly and with circumspection only when the

         Court is convinced, on the basis of material on

         record, that allowing the proceedings to continue

         would be an abuse of the process of the Court or

         that   the   ends   of   justice  require  that    the

         proceedings ought to be quashed."

Considering the particular facts and circumstances in this case,

it can be seen further that the criminal proceedings are

initiated consequent to the matrimonial dispute arose among

the parties and both the disputes are now amicably settled

between the parties. According to me, in the light of the facts

Crl.M.C.No.3177 of 2013
                                8

and    circumstances   involved   in  the   present   case    and

particularly in view of the settlement arrived in the present

case, the dictum laid in the above decisions will be squarely

applicable in the present case. According to me, as the parties

to the dispute settled the issues amicably, it is the duty of this

Court to promote such settlement, instead of compelling the

parties to go on with the dispute. It is pertinent to note that

since the matter is settled out of court, in the event of

proceeding with the trial, there would not have any fruitful

prosecution, resulting the conviction of the accused, rather the

net result would be sheer waste of judicial time and abuse of

process of the court and proceedings. Thus, according to me,

following the decisions cited supra, this Crl.M.C.can be allowed

granting the relief as sought for.

         In the result, this Crl.M.C. is allowed, quashing all

further proceedings pending against the petitioners in Crime

No. 343/2013 of Bekal Police Station and all further

proceedings thereto.

                                                   Sd/-

                                          V.K.MOHANAN,
                                                   JUDGE

AS



