
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                     PRESENT:

                          THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE P.BHAVADASAN

              TUESDAY, THE 29TH DAY OF OCTOBER 2013/7TH KARTHIKA, 1935

                                           CRL.A.No. 142 of 2005 (C)
                                           ------------------------------------
          [AGAINST THE JUDGMENT DATED 17-01-2005 IN S.C.NO.250/2000
           OF THE ADDITIONAL SESSIONS COURT, (ADHOC) KALPETTA]
                                                   ............

APPELLANT/1ST ACCUSED:
----------------------------------------


            IBRAHIMKUTTY, S/O.KUNJAMMED HAJI,
            PUZHAKKOOL, ECHO, ANJUKUNNU AMSOM,
            WYNAD TALUK, WYNAD.


            BY ADV. SRI.P.CHANDRASEKHAR.


RESPONDENT/COMPLAINANT:
--------------------------------------------


            THE STATE OF KERALA,
            REPRESENTED BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR,
            HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM.


            PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SMT. P.MAYA.


            THIS CRIMINAL APPEAL HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD
            ON 29-10-2013, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY DELIVERED
            THE FOLLOWING:




Prv.


                      P.BHAVADASAN, J.
              ---------------------------------------
                 Crl. Appeal No.142 OF 2005
              ---------------------------------------
          Dated this the 29th day of October, 2013.


                        J U D G M E N T


     Four persons faced prosecution for the offences punishable

under Sections 304B, 498A read with Section 34 of Indian Penal

Code. After trial, the accused Nos.2 to 4 were acquitted and the

1st accused was found guilty of the offences punishable under

Sections 498A, 306 and 201 IPC and he was sentenced to

undergo rigorous imprisonment for three years and to pay a fine

of Rs.30,000/- with default clause of simple imprisonment for six

months for the offence under Section 498A IPC and to undergo

rigorous imprisonment for seven years and to pay a fine of

Rs.75,000/- with default clause of simple imprisonment for two

years for the offence under Section 306 IPC and also to undergo

rigorous imprisonment for one year and to pay a fine of

Rs.10,000/- with default clause of simple imprisonment for six

months for the offence under Section 201 IPC. The sentences

were directed to run consecutively and set off as per law was

Crl.Appeal No.142/2005            2


allowed. It is also directed that if the fine amount is realised, the

same shall be paid to PWs 1 and 2 as compensation.

       2. The marriage between the 1st accused and the victim in

this case was solemnised on 28.05.1996 as per the religious

rites.     After marriage, the victim namely, Ramla took up

residence in the matrimonial house. The allegation is that at the

time of marriage, Ramla was given 20 sovereigns of gold and

Rs.20,000/- in cash.     Soon after the marriage, according to

prosecution, the accused persons began to torture Ramla

demanding more dowry. There is also an accusation that the 1st

accused tried to molest the younger sister of Ramla. Unable to

bear the torture, humiliation and cruelty from the side of the

accused persons, Ramla is alleged to have consumed poison

causing her death on 24.11.1998.

       3.      PW1, the father of the victim, laid Ext.P1 First

Information Statement. PW17 recorded the same and registered

a crime as per Ext.P1(a) First Information Report. The officer

who conducted the initial investigation of the case prepared

Ext.P17 scene mahazar and had Exts.P6 to P11 seized. He also

Crl.Appeal No.142/2005            3


seized Exts.P3 and P4 as per the relevant mahazar. He recorded

the statement of witnesses. The subsequent investigation was

conducted by PW19 who, after completing investigation, laid

charge before court.

       4.     The court before which final report was laid took

cognizance of the offences and on finding that the offences are

exclusively triable by a Court of Sessions, the case was

committed to Sessions Court, Wayanad. The said court made

over the case to Additional Sessions Court (Adhoc), Kalpetta for

trial and disposal. The latter court, on receipt of records and on

appearance of the accused, framed charges for the offences

punishable under Sections 304B, 498A read with Section 34 IPC.

To the charge, the accused pleaded not guilty and claimed to be

tried. The prosecution, therefore, had PWs 1 to 19 examined and

Exts.P1 to P25 marked.        M.O. 1 series to M.O.13 were got

identified and marked. From the side of the defence, Exts.D1 to

D3, which are the relevant portions of Section 161 Cr.P.C

statement of the respective witnesses, were marked.

       5. After the close of the prosecution evidence, the accused

Crl.Appeal No.142/2005          4


were questioned under Section 313 Cr.P.C. They denied all the

incriminating circumstances brought out in evidence against them

and maintained that they were innocent. On finding that the

accused could not be acquitted under Section 232 Cr.P.C, they

were asked to enter on their defence. But they chose to adduce

no evidence. Out of the four accused, accused Nos.2 to 4 were

acquitted and the 1st accused was found guilty of the offences

already made mention of. The conviction and sentence followed.

The said conviction and sentence are assailed in this appeal.

       6. Learned counsel appearing for the appellant contended

that the conviction under Sections 306 and 201 IPC cannot be

sustained in view of want of charge in that respect. It is also

contended that the reliance placed on the evidence of PWs 1, 2, 3

and 5 and the letters namely, Exts.P6 to P11 are not justified and

a careful reading of the letters would show that the cruelty

alleged is not proved. Referring to Ext.P1, it is contended that

the First Information Statement was given by PW1, the father of

the victim and therein there was no case of cruelty or torture. It

could thus be seen that it is a subsequent invention. It is also

Crl.Appeal No.142/2005           5


pointed out that except for general statements of cruelty and

harassment, there is no specific instance referred to by any of the

witnesses namely, PWs 1, 2, 3 and 5 to establish the factum of

cruelty and harassment at the hands of the accused. It is also

significant to notice, according to the learned counsel, that no

complaint whatsoever was preferred by anyone of the inmates of

the house regarding the ill-treatment meted out to the victim.

Further, it was contended that the court below has found that the

offence under Section 304B IPC is not attracted in which case,

the offence under Section 306 IPC also cannot be attracted.

Learned counsel, therefore, points out that the conviction and

sentence cannot stand.

       7. Learned Public Prosecutor, on the other hand, pointed

out that the evidence of PWs 1, 2, 3 and 5 are sufficient to show

that the victim was ill-treated by the members of the family of

the accused especially the 1st accused. Attention was drawn to

the fact that the 1st accused had an illicit relationship with yet

another lady and whenever the victim objected to the said

relationship, she was thrashed. Learned Public Prosecutor also

Crl.Appeal No.142/2005          6


drew the attention of this Court to the evidence to effect that on

three occasions, she was made to abort. PWs 1, 2, 3 and 5 too

speak about the demands for dowry made by the 1st accused and

others and there is no reason to disbelieve them.      The court

below has accepted their evidence and also the contents of the

letters namely, Exts.P6 to P11 which would clearly show that the

life of Ramla, the daughter of PW1, was not happy at the

matrimonial house. The lower court has chosen to accept the

evidence of PWs 1, 2, 3 and 5 and there is no reason as to why

their evidence should be discarded. Learned Public Prosecutor

went on to point out that there are no grounds made out to

interfere with the conviction and sentence passed by the court

below as against the 1st accused.

       8. That marriage between the 1st accused and the deceased

Ramla took place on 28.05.1996 is not in dispute so also the fact

that on 24.11.1998, she consumed poison and she breathed her

last. The prosecution allegation is that Ramla, the victim was

driven to take the extreme steps due to the ill-treatment and

harassment at the hands of the accused. It is specifically alleged

Crl.Appeal No.142/2005            7


that the accused persons ill-treated her demanding more dowry

and also insisted that she should go home and bring money

immediately. Apart from that, the prosecution case is that the 1st

accused was maintaining an illicit relationship with another lady

and when Ramla took objection to the said conduct, she was

physically assaulted. In order to prove the prosecution case, the

prosecution mainly relies on the evidence of PWs 1, 2, 3 and 5

who are the parents, brother and the sister of the victim.

       9.     PW1 is the father of the victim.  He says that the

marriage was on 28.05.1996.          The couple stayed in the

matrimonial house for 1- 1< years and thereafter for eight

months, the couple lived along with PW1.         According to his

evidence, one month prior to the date of incident, Ramla was

taken to the matrimonial house by the 1st accused. He says that

at the time of marriage, Ramla was given 20 sovereigns of gold

and Rs.20,000/- in cash.     He came to know soon thereafter that

Ramla was being ill-treated by the 1st accused and his relatives

demanding more dowry and money. On coming to know about

the death, when he went to the hospital, he did not find the 1st

Crl.Appeal No.142/2005            8


accused in the hospital and his parents were unable to say where

he was. He also speaks about the illicit relationship which the 1st

accused had with another lady and the objection taken to by his

daughter and the consequent ill-treatment meted out to her. It

is also pointed out that during the eight months period when

Ramla and the 1st accused stayed with PW1, he had occasion to

see the 1st accused beating Ramla.       He also says about the

contents of Ext.P2 letter.

       10. PW2, the mother of the victim, also gives a similar

version given by PW1. She also speaks about the ill-treatment at

the hands of the 1st accused while the couple were staying along

with them. She would also say that on two or three occasions,

Ramla had come home crying and complaining about the ill-

treatment which she received at the hands of the accused

persons.       According to her, they were too poor to meet the

immediate demands of the accused persons. She would also say

that money and gold given at the time of marriage were

misappropriated by the accused persons. She says that she had

occasion to ask her daughter why she had handed over the gold

Crl.Appeal No.142/2005             9


ornaments to the accused and Ramla replied that if she had not

done so, she would be thrashed. This witness also says about

the attempt made by the 1st accused to molest the younger sister

of Ramla while the couple were staying along with them. She

also speaks about that on three occasions, abortion was carried

out by the 1st accused. She further says that after the couple

returned to the matrimonial house, when her son went to meet

his sister, he was not let inside the house.

       11. PW3 is the brother of the victim. He also speaks about

the ill-treatment. He says about the false information given to

the members of the house about Ramla being admitted in the

hospital and when he along with his father reached the house of

the sister, they were told that none in the matrimonial house had

telephoned them.

       12. PW5 is the sister of the deceased Ramla. She also says

about her sister complaining about the ill-treatment meted out by

the 1st accused and other family members.        Further, in cross

examination, PW5 has stated that during the nine months period

when they resided with them, there was no discordant note

Crl.Appeal No.142/2005            10


between the couple. The lower court placed considerable reliance

on Exts.P6 to P11 writings alleged to have been recovered from

the box of Ramla. The court below was of the opinion that they

had given indication of the ill-treatment and that corroborates the

versions given by PWs 1, 2, 3 and 5. Relying on these items of

evidence, the court below reached a conclusion regarding the

offences already made mention of.

       13. It is true that PW1 had furnished Ext.P1 First

Information Statement.     There, as rightly pointed out by the

learned counsel for the appellant, there is no mention about

demand for dowry and ill-treatment meted out to Ramla by the

1st accused and his family members. All that is stated in Ext.P1

First Information Statement was that there was no harmony

between the couple. This aspect is highlighted by the learned

counsel for the appellant to contend for the position that the

story of ill-treatment and demand for more dowry have been

subsequently developed to fasten liability on the 1st accused and

others.

       14. One must at once remember that the First Information

Crl.Appeal No.142/2005             11


Statement is only intended to set the law in motion and it cannot

be said to be an encyclopedia of facts. One is also to remember

the circumstances in which Ext.P1 First Information Statement

was given by PW1. Whatever that be, there is clear indication in

Ext.P1 that the life of the couple was not happy.           There is

consistent version by PWs 1, 2, 3 and 5 regarding the ill-

treatment of Ramla by the 1st accused and others.          The acts

alleged against other accused persons need not detain this Court

for the simple reason that they stand acquitted and the State has

not filed any appeal.

       15. As far as the 1st accused is concerned, there is

overwhelming evidence regarding the ill-treatment of Ramla as

spoken to by PWs 1, 2, 3 and 5. It is significant to notice that he

is alleged to have illicit relationship with a lady and the evidence

of PW2 is to the effect that when she asked her daughter why she

had handed over the gold to the 1st accused, the daughter told

her that if she did not do so, she would be beaten up. PWs 1 and

2 also make mention of the illicit relationship which the 1st

accused had with another lady. They also say that when Ramla

Crl.Appeal No.142/2005           12


took objection to the said conduct, she used to be physically

assaulted. There is no reason to disbelieve her version in this

regard.

       16. As rightly noticed by the lower court, there are

indications in Exts.P6 to P11 of the demand for dowry at any rate

for more money. It is true that none of the witnesses namely,

PWs 1, 2, 3 and 5 have spoken about any definite instance or

incident of cruelty on Ramla. But one cannot forget the evidence

of PW2 to the effect that her daughter had come home on two or

three occasions crying and complaining to her about the ill-

treatment in the house of the 1st accused. Since most of the

incidents of torture and physical assault had taken place in the

matrimonial house, it may not be possible for PWs 1, 2, 3 and 5,

to speak about a specific incident as such, except to mention that

Ramla used to come home complaining about the same. The

contention that no complaint has been preferred before any

authority and that would show that the allegations are totally

false cannot be countenanced. In all probability, the members of

the family of Ramla thought that the ill-treatment would abate

Crl.Appeal No.142/2005           13


and at one point of time wisdom would dawn on the accused

persons.

       17. It must be remembered that at the time when the

mishap occurred, the marriage had lasted only for less than two

years.      The contention that immediately on coming to know

about the ill-treatment, PWs 1 and 2 did not file any complaint

before any authority cannot of much help to the defence.

       18. One significant aspect that needs to be noticed is that

the testimony given by PW1 to the effect that when he learned

about the death of his daughter and had gone to the hospital, the

1st accused was conspicuously absent in the hospital and when he

enquired with accused Nos.2 and 3 about the whereabouts of the

accused, they pleaded ignorance.      If the 1st accused was not

responsible for the ill-treatment, normally one would have

expected him to be present in the hospital where the dead body

of his wife was kept. This conduct of the 1st accused goes a long

way in supporting the case of the prosecution.

       19. That there was ill-treatment of Ramla in the house of

the accused is established by the evidence furnished by PWs 1, 2,

Crl.Appeal No.142/2005           14


3 and 5 and also Exts.P6 to P11.         What now remains to be

considered is what are the offences committed by the 1st accused.

       20. The court below strangely found the 1st accused guilty of

offence under Section 201 IPC also. Apart from the fact that

there was no charge, it is difficult to understand how the offence

under Section 201 IPC can be attracted. The conviction on that

count cannot stand.

       21. The court below has also found the 1st accused guilty of

offence under Section 306 IPC. In order to attract Section 306

IPC, certain conditions will have to be satisfied. It is no doubt

true that the death was within the seven years of marriage. But,

that by itself is not sufficient. In order to attract Section 306

IPC, it should be shown that there was instigation on the part of

the 1st accused driving the victim to commit suicide. There is no

specific instance or incident spoken to by anybody which the

accused committed either on the date of the incident or near to

that which might have driven the victim to commit suicide. The

role played by the 1st accused is not clear from the evidence on

record. Of course, as already stated, there are allegations of ill-

Crl.Appeal No.142/2005             15


treatment.         But the question as to whether there was any

instigation from the side of the accused is a different matter.

Merely because Ramla had committed suicide may be due to the

ill-treatment is not sufficient to attract Section 306 IPC. One is

said to be guilty of offence under Section 306 IPC when he

instigates the doing of a particular thing. There must be clear

evidence to show that the person who committed suicide was

driven to do so by the act of accused which amounts to

instigation. Even after a careful scanning of the evidence in the

case, there is want of materials to establish the instigation from

the side of the accused. Obviously, conviction under Section 306

IPC also cannot stand.

       22. However, the matter is different with regard to

Section 498A IPC.         Section 498A IPC consists of two parts.

Explanation (a) to Section 498A deals with wilful conduct of

husband or relative of husband of a woman which is likely to

drive the woman to commit suicide and Explanation (b) to

Section 498A deals with harassment of the woman with a view to

coercing her or any person related to her to meet any unlawful

Crl.Appeal No.142/2005            16


demand for any property. Here, the evidence of PWs 1, 2, 3 and

5 and also the contents of Exts.P6 to P11 letters clearly reveal

that there was harassment of the victim demanding more money

and dowry. The court below was therefore perfectly justified in

coming to the conclusion that offence under Section 498A IPC is

made out.

       23. Coming to the sentence awarded for the offence under

Section 498A IPC, considering the facts and circumstances of the

case, it is felt that the sentence awarded is reasonable and no

interference is called for.

       In the result, this appeal is partly allowed. The conviction

for the offences under Sections 201 and 306 IPC are set aside.

The 1st accused is held not guilty of the offences under the said

Sections.       However, the finding of the court below that the

accused is guilty of the offence under Section 498A IPC is

confirmed and it is held that the sentence awarded for the said

offence does not call for any interference.

                                                Sd/-

                                        P.BHAVADASAN
                                              JUDGE
smp



