
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                              PRESENT:

               THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE V.K.MOHANAN

         MONDAY, THE 1ST DAY OF JULY 2013/10TH ASHADHA, 1935

                     Crl.MC.No. 1935 of 2013 ()
                     ---------------------------
 CC NO.2518/2009 OF THE JUDICIAL FIRST CLASS MAGISTRATE COURT - II,
       KOLLAM IN CRIM NO.77/2009 OF ERAVIPURAM POLICE STATION



PETITIONER(S)/ACCUSED NOS.1 TO 3:
---------------------------------

    1.  BIJU, AGED 35 YEARS
       S/O.RAMAN PILLAI, MADATHIL VEEDU,
       CHOTTANIKKARA, ERNAKULAM.

    2.  RATNAMMA, AGED 62 YEARS
       W/O RAMAN PILLAI, MADATHIL VEEDU,
       CHOTTANIKKARA, ERNAKULAM.

    3.  BEENA SURESH, AGED 42 YEARS
       W/O.SURESH, PUTHEN VEEDU,
       CHOTTANIKKARA, ERNAKULAM.

       BY ADV. SRI.G.SANTHOSH KUMAR


RESPONDENT/COMPLAINANT(S) & STATE:
----------------------------------

     1. DHANYA, AGED 30 YEARS
       D/O.INDIRA, DHANYA BHAVAN, PUTHELATHAZHAM
       VADAKKEVILA, KOLLAM.

     2. STATE OF KERALA
       REPRESENTED BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR
       HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM.

       R1  BY ADV. SRI.YASH THOMAS MANNULLY
       R2 BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SRI.RAJESH VIJAYAN


       THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE  HAVING COME UP FOR ADMISSION  ON
       01-07-2013, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE FOLLOWING:

Crl.MC.No. 1935 of 2013 ()
--------------------------




                              APPENDIX



PETITIONER'(S) ANNEXURES:


ANNEXURE 1 COPY OF THE CHARGE SHEET IN IN CRIME NO.77/2009 OF
           ERAVIPURAM POLICE STATION.

ANNEXURE II COPY OF AFFIDAVIT DATED 27/4/2013 OF THE IST RESPONDENT.




RESPONDENT'(S) ANNEXURES: NIL




                                                     //TRUE COPY//



                                                     PA TO JUDGE

BKA


                      V.K.MOHANAN, J.
             ----------------------------------------
                  Crl.M.C.No.1935 of 2013
             ----------------------------------------
             Dated this the 1st day of July, 2013

                           O R D E R

        The above petition is filed under Section 482 of the

Criminal Procedure Code (for short 'Cr.P.C.') at the instance of

the petitioners, who are accused Nos.1 to 3 in C.C.No.2518 of

2009 of the Judicial First Class Magistrate Court-II, Kollam

which is a case instituted upon the police report [in Crime

No.77 of 2009 of Eravipuram Police Station] for the offences

punishable under Sections 498A and 34 of I.P.C. with a prayer

to quash all further proceedings against the petitioners in

C.C.No.2518 of 2009 of the Judicial First Class Magistrate

Court-II, Kollam as the matter is settled out of court.

        2. The allegation in the above case is that the first

accused married the de facto complainant in accordance with

the rites and ceremonies in Hindu religion on 7.9.2012 and

thereafter while she was residing along with the accused in the

matrimonial home, the de facto complainant was subjected to

harassment, after having misappropriating the properties

given as dowry, demanding more dowry. It is also alleged that

on compulsion of the de facto complainant, the property was

purchased in the name of the first accused and the de facto

Crl.M.C.No.1935 of 2013                 2

complainant and but demanding a balance amount of

Rs.1,00,000/-, the de facto complainant was again harassed

and kept her in the matrimonial home without giving proper

food and dress and thereby the accused have committed the

offences punishable under Section 498A read with Section 34

of I.P.C. Now the case of the petitioners is that the dispute

both matrimonial as well as criminal are settled and the

petitioner and the de facto complainant are residing together

for the last one year.

                   3. Heard the learned counsel for the petitioners as

well as the first respondent. I have also heard the learned

Public Prosecutor.

                   4. The learned counsel for the petitioners submitted

that during the pendency of the above case, the matter is

settled amicably between the parties to the dispute which is

the subject matter of the above case.                      Therefore, the

continuation of the proceedings in the above case is abuse of

process of law and proceedings.

                   5. The learned counsel for the first respondent who on

the basis of specific instruction received from the respondent

submitted that the above respondent, who is the de facto

Crl.M.C.No.1935 of 2013                  3

complainant does not intend to proceed any further against the

petitioners and she has no grievance against them.

                   6. I have carefully considered the above submissions

of the respective counsel. I have verified the documents and

materials produced along with the above petition. In the given

facts and circumstances of the case and especially in the light

of the settlement arrived between the parties to the dispute,

the learned Public Prosecutor has also no objection in allowing

the above petition.

                   7.   Having regard to the facts and circumstances

involved in the case, it can be seen that the offences involved

in the above case are only Section 498A and 34 of I.P.C which

are more or less personal in nature and no public interest is

involved. It is pertinent to note that though such offences are

involved, the real parties to the dispute approached this Court

after having amicably settled the matter. From the submission

made by the counsel for the first respondent, it appears to me

that the de facto complainant has no further grievance against

the petitioners accused in the light of the settlement arrived by

them.                In this juncture, it is relevant to note that the

Honourable Apex Court, in the decision reported in Jitendra

Crl.M.C.No.1935 of 2013                     4

Raghuvanshi and Others v. Babita Raghuvanshi and

another [2013 (1) KLD 817(SC)], has held as follows:-

                          "7.     It  is  not   in  dispute    that
                    matrimonial     disputes   have     been    on
                    considerable    increase   in  recent    times
                    resulting in filing of complaints under
                    Sections 498A and 406 of I.P.C. not only
                    against the husband but also against the
                    relatives of the husband. The question is
                    when such matters are resolved either by
                    the wife agreeing to rejoin the matrimonial
                    home or by mutual settlement of other
                    pending disputes for which both the sides
                    approached the High Court and jointly
                    prayed   for    quashing   of   the   criminal
                    proceedings or the FIR or complaint by the
                    wife under Sections 498A and 406 of I.P.C.,
                    whether the prayer can be declined on the
                    sole ground that since the offences are non-
                    compoundable under Section 320 of the
                    Code, it would be impermissible for the
                    court to quash the criminal proceedings or
                    FIR or complaint.
                          8. It is not in dispute that in the case
                    on hand subsequent to the filing of the
                    criminal complaint under Sections 498A and
                    406 of IPC and Sections 3 and 4 of the
                    Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961, with the help
                    and intervention of family members, friends
                    and well-wishers, the parties concerned
                    have amicably settled their differences and
                    executed       a     compromise/settlement.
                    Pursuant thereto, the appellants filed the
                    said compromise before the Trial Court with
                    a request to place the same on record and
                    to drop the criminal proceedings against the
                    appellants herein. It is also not in dispute
                    that in additional to the mutual settlement
                    arrived at by the parties, respondent/-wife
                    has also filed an affidavit stating that she

Crl.M.C.No.1935 of 2013                     5

                    did not wish to pursue the criminal
                    proceedings against the appellants and fully
                    supported the contents of the settlement
                    deed. It is the grievance of the appellants
                    that no only the Trial Court rejected such
                    prayer of the parties but also the High
                    Court failed toe exercise its jurisdiction
                    under Section 482 of the Code only on the
                    ground that the criminal proceedings relate
                    to the offences punishable under Sections
                    498A and 406 of IPC which are non-
                    compoundable in nature."
                          "12. In our view, it is the duty of the
                    Courts to    encourage genuine settlements
                    of matrimonial disputes, particularly, when
                    the same are on considerable increase.
                    Even if the offences are non-compoundable,
                    if they relate to matrimonial disputes and
                    the Court is satisfied that the parties have
                    settled the same amicably and without any
                    pressure, we hold that for the purpose of
                    securing ends of justice, Section 320 of the
                    Code would not be a bar to the exercise of
                    power of quashing of FIR, complaint or the
                    subsequent criminal proceedings.
                             13. There has been an outburst of
                    matrimonial disputes in recent times. The
                    institution   of   marriage    occupies    an
                    important place and it has an important
                    role to play in the society. Therefore, every
                    effort should be made in the interest of the
                    individuals in order to enable them to settle
                    down in life and live peacefully.      If the
                    parties ponder over their defaults and
                    terminate their disputes amicably by mutual
                    agreement instead of fighting it out in a
                    Court of law, in order to do complete justice
                    in the matrimonial matters, the Courts
                    should be less hesitant in exercising its
                    extraordinary jurisdiction.    It is trite to
                    state that the power under Section 482
                    should be exercised sparingly and with

Crl.M.C.No.1935 of 2013                  6

                    circumspection only when the Court is
                    convinced, on the basis of material on
                    record, that allowing the proceedings to
                    continue would be an abuse of the process
                    of the Court or that the ends of justice
                    require that the proceedings ought to be
                    quashed."

In the present case, the only offence involved is under Section

498A of I.P.C. The criminal proceedings for the said offence

originated from the matrimonial issues, which are now settled.

Consequently, the parties want a quietus to the criminal case

as well.

                   8. According to me, in the light of the facts and

circumstances involved in the present case and particularly in

view of the settlement arrived in the present case, the dictum

laid in the above decision will be squarely applicable in the

present case. According to me, as the parties to the dispute

settled the issues amicably, it is the duty of this Court to

promote such settlement, instead of compelling the parties to

go on with the dispute. It is pertinent to note that since the

matter is settled out of court, in the event of proceeding with

the trial, there would not have any fruitful prosecution

resulting the conviction of the accused, rather the net result

would be sheer waste of judicial time and abuse of process of

Crl.M.C.No.1935 of 2013                  7

the court and proceedings. Thus, according to me, following

the decisions cited supra, this Crl.M.C. can be allowed granting

the relief as sought for.

                   In the result, this Crl.M.C. is allowed, quashing all

further              proceedings pending   against   the  petitioners in

C.C.No.2518 of 2009 of the Judicial First Class Magistrate

Court-II, Kollam.




                                            V.K.MOHANAN
                                                 Judge

Mns/



