
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

PRESENT:

THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE S.S.SATHEESACHANDRAN

WEDNESDAY, THE 17TH DAY OF JULY 2013/26TH ASHADHA, 1935

Bail Appl..No. 4478 of 2013 ()
-------------------------------

CRIME NO. 153/2006 OF KOTTARAKKARA POLICE STATION , KOLLAM

ACCUSED(S)/PETITIONER/2ND ACCUSED:
------------------------------------------------------------------

       RAJAMAL, AGED 65 YEARS
       S/O.AMMALU AMMAL, RAJAM VILLA, KULAKKADA
       KALAYAPURAM, KOTTARAKKARA, KOLLAM DISTRICT

       BY ADV. SRI.DILEEP P.PILLAI

COMPLAINANT(S)/RESPONDENT/COMPLAINANT:
---------------------------------------------------------------------
-------

       STATE OF KERALA
       REP. BY THE PUBLIC PROSECUTOR, HIGH COURT OF KERALA
       ERNAKULAM.

       R BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR

       THIS BAIL APPLICATION  HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD  ON  15-07-
2013, THE COURT ON 17.7.2013 PASSED THE FOLLOWING:


            S.S.SATHEESACHANDRAN,J.
          ==========================
          B.A. No. 4478     of 2013
          ===========================
  Dated, this  this 17th day of July, 2013


                     ORDER


    Petitioner is the second accused in Crime

No.153/2006  of  Kottarakkara  Police  Station,

which   after   renumbered   as   CBCID   Crime

No.11/CR/KLM/08 is presently being investigated

by the Deputy Superintendent of Police, CBCID,

HHW-1, Kollam.

    2.  The above crime was registered over the

unnatural death of one Reshmi, aged 26 years,

wife of first accused, on 4.2.2006. Petitioner,

second  accused,    is  the  mother  of   first

accused.  Reshmi while studying for B.Ed course

stayed in the house of petitioner as a paying

guest, and, later, it is stated that she fell

in love with the first accused and married him

B.A.4478/2013               2

against the wishes of her family.      She gave birth

to two children in her wedlock with first accused.

In the early morning of 4.2.2006 Reshmi was rushed

to hospital in an unconscious condition by her

husband,     petitioner  and   some  other close   by

neighbours      and  the doctor on examination found

her dead.        The crime was registered over her

unnatural death on a complaint given by her uncle

under section 174 of Code of Criminal Procedure.

Later investigation continued deleting section 174

and adding 498A IPC, initially, naming the first

accused as the sole accused and, later, implicating

the petitioner as     second accused alleging both of

them     harassed  Reshmi    physically and  mentally

demanding     dowry  and  on   account  of    cruelty

inflicted by them        the victim met her death.

Presently, it is stated,        the investigation is

being       continued   incorporating   the   offence

punishable     under  section  302  IPC  against  the

accused, both of them, imputing that the victim

Reshmi was murdered by them.

B.A.4478/2013                3

      3.    Petitioner has filed the above application

seeking the discretionary relief of pre arrest bail

under      section  438   of  the  Code  of   Criminal

Procedure.

      4. Petitioner    is totally innocent and falsely

implicated in the case along with her son, and that

she      had    been   summoned  several   times   and

interrogated in detail from 2006 onwards, is her

case.        Since  the  first accused,  her  son,  is

proceeded in several crimes involving        financial

fraud, allegedly      committed by him in association

with     some   others,  and   that having  got   wide

publicity in the media, for that reason alone,

petitioner is also sought to be implicated in the

grave offence of murder        in the crime and also

arrested, is her further case.        Petitioner is a

retired Headmistress, aged 65 years, and     suffering

from      various   ailments  including  acute   heart

problem, is her case to urge for granting her the

relief of pre arrest bail.

      5.    I heard learned counsel for petitioner and

B.A.4478/2013                4

also learned Public Prosecutor.

      6.      Case   Diary  with  status  report    on

investigation done so far, has been produced for my

perusal.

      7.     Petitioner was interrogated several times

after registration of the crime and it is only

because of her son, first accused, getting involved

in   other     crimes  of  cheating  and those  crimes

gaining wide publicity, both in print and visual

media, she is sought to be implicated with him in

the    offence    of  murder   in  the  case,  is  the

submission of her counsel.      Petitioner is prepared

to abide by any condition imposed and also willing

to co-operate with the investigation of the crime,

is   the     further  submission  of  the counsel  for

granting her the discretionary relief canvassed of.

Petitioner suffers from various ailments and she is

a    retired      Headmistress   having  no   criminal

antecedents,       is the further submission of the

counsel to persuade me to grant her pre arrest

bail.

B.A.4478/2013               5

      8.     Opposing the application learned State

Public Prosecutor submitted that the investigation

has disclosed that the death of Reshmi was a murder

and that both her husband and          mother-in-law,

petitioner, are culpable for such murder.      Reshmi

was rushed to hospital in an unconscious condition

by    accused persons, petitioner and her son, with

some others, and, then, petitioner was concerned of

helping      her son to escape, and, later, after

reaching     hospital when the doctor after examining

the victim declared her dead petitioner and her

son, both of them,      escaped, is the submission of

the     Public Prosecutor.   Analysis over the blood

and    viscera   collected  from  the  victim  during

postmortem has disclosed excess quantity of ethyl

alcohol,     and,  at  this  stage, administering  of

liquor to the victim and then of smothering her to

death is strongly suspected of on the materials

collected in the investigation, is the further

submission      of    learned    Public   Prosecutor.

Petitioner      initially implicated for the offence

B.A.4478/2013               6

under section 498A IPC is now proceeded for the

offence      of  murder  along with  her   son,  first

accused, and a        report thereof has been filed

before      the  court,  is  the  further  submission.

Arrest and custodial interrogation of       petitioner

is essential for a fair investigation of the crime,

and she is not entitled to pre arrest bail, is the

submission of the learned Public Prosecutor.

      9.    I have perused the Case Diary and also the

status report of investigation.       After filing of

the present application, much later, it is seen,

the investigating agency has filed a report before

the magistrate that petitioner is proceeded for the

offence under section 302 IPC also,      which offence

was earlier proceeded against the first accused

alone.       Materials covered   by Case Diary would

reveal     that    investigation  was  carried  on  by

several police officers, and most of them have

interrogated      the   petitioner.      Circumstances

highlighted      by   learned  Public  Prosecutor   as

incriminatory     against  petitioner  may  have  some

B.A.4478/2013               7

significance over the        unnatural death of the

victim.      But having regard to the totality of the

facts presented in the case in the backdrop that

the    crime   was  registered  nine years  ago  with

investigation      continuing  and   petitioner   was

questioned several times, at this stage ,whether

she has to suffer the ignominy of         arrest and

detention for the reason the offence under section

302 IPC has now been      included against her has to

be examined.      Any overtact as such by petitioner

jointly      with her son, first accused,  or   alone

by    petitioner in causing   death of the victim has

not been imputed of, nor noticed as such on perusal

of the materials covered by the Case Diary. I

hasten to add that      the materials covered by the

Case Diary would of course give       room to suspect

complicity of petitioner in harassing and also ill-

treating the victim, much earlier to the date of

her death.       Whether the allegations thereto are

true, and if so        has    it got nexus with the

unnatural     death  of  the  victim is  a  different

B.A.4478/2013               8

matter.       Now,  on  the  facts and  circumstances

presented, the plea made by petitioner that she is

proceeded for the offence of murder with her son,

first accused solely for the reason that     her son

is involved in other crimes which has gained wide

publicity cannot be brushed aside as baseless.

Evidently her arrest was not contemplated at any

point of time during the last nine years during the

course of      investigation of the crime, and only

after     registration of some crimes against her son

she is sought to be proceeded with her son for the

offence of murder has    to be taken note of.  In the

given facts and circumstances of the case, I find

arrest and custodial interrogation of petitioner as

such may not be required for a fair investigation

of the crime.     The age of petitioner and that she

was a Headmistress with no criminal antecedents

also deserves consideration.      I do not find any

reason to doubt her case that she has some physical

ailments. In such circumstances having regard to

the    totality   of   the  facts and   circumstances

B.A.4478/2013                9

presented in the case, I find that she has       to be

granted      the  discretionary  relief  of  pre-arrest

bail.

      In the event of arrest of petitioner in the

crime by Police she is directed to be released on

bail on executing a bond for Rs.20,000/- with one

solvent      surety. She   has  to  report  before  the

investigating officer, so long as the investigation

continues, if her presence is demanded for its

smooth completion.      Petitioner shall not leave the

State     so   long  as  the   investigation  continues

without       getting  prior    permission  from    the

investigating officer, and she has to co-operate

with the investigation.

      Petition is allowed.



                                        Sd/-

                                   S.S.SATHEESACHANDRAN
                                           JUDGE

                    /true copy/

                   P.S to Judge

B.A.4478/2013    10

tpl/-

M.SASIDHARAN NAMBIAR, J.




   ---------------------
        W.P.(C).NO. /06
   ---------------------


           JUDGMENT




         SEPTEMBER,2006



