
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                      PRESENT:

                           THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE V.K.MOHANAN

            WEDNESDAY, THE 13TH DAY OF AUGUST 2014/22ND SRAVANA, 1936

                                            Crl.MC.No. 4408 of 2014
                                            ----------------------------------

      CC 934/2012 OF JUDICIAL FIRST CLASS MAGISTRATRE COURT-III, PUNALUR
                                                    -------------------


PETITIONER(S)/ACCUSED:
--------------------------------------

            NOUSHAD, AGED 40 YEARS,
            S/O.THANGAL KUNJU, CHITTEDATHU VEEDU,
            PATHANAPURAM TALUK, KOLLAM DISTRICT.

            BY ADV. SRI.SYAM J SAM


RESPONDENT(S)/STATE AND DEFACTO COMPLAINANT:
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

        1. NAJUMA, AGED 26 YEARS,
            D/O.REMLA, CHITTEDATHU VEEDU, AVANEESWARAM MURI
            VILAKKUDY VILLAGE, PATHANAPURAM TALUK,
            KOLLAM DISTRICT.

        2. STATE OF KERALA,
            REPRESENTED BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR,
            HIGH COURT OF KERALA.

            R1 BY ADV. SRI.JITHIN VARGHESE
            R2 BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SMT.BINDU GOPINATH


            THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE HAVING COME UP FOR ADMISSION
            ON 13-08-2014, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE FOLLOWING:


PJ

Crl.MC.No. 4408 of 2014
----------------------------------

                                             APPENDIX

PETITIONERS' ANNEXURES
---------------------------------------

ANNEXURE A1: THE CERTIFIED COPY OF THE CHARGE SHEET IN CC.NO.934/12 ON
                      THE FILE OF JFCM-III PUNALUR.

ANNEXURE A2: AN AFFIDAVIT SWORN BY THE 1ST RESPONDENT STATING THE
                      SETTLEMENT OF ALL THE DISPUTES.

RESPONDENTS' ANNEXURES
------------------------------------------

                       NIL.


                                                         / TRUE COPY /


                                                         P.S. TO JUDGE
PJ


                          V.K.MOHANAN, J.
                        -------------------------------
                       Crl.M.C.No.4408 of 2014
                        -------------------------------
                Dated this the 13th day of August, 2014.


                                O R D E R

            The above petition is filed under Section 482 of the

Criminal Procedure Code (for short 'Cr.P.C.') at the instance of the

petitioner, who is the accused in C.C.No.934/2012 of the Judicial

First Class Magistrate Court - III, Punalur for the offences punishable

under Section 498A of I.P.C. with a prayer to quash the entire

proceedings initiated against the petitioner in C.C No.934/2012 on the

files of Judicial First Class Magistrate Court - III, Punalur as the

matter is settled out of court.

         2.     The allegation in the above case is that 1st petitioner

married the 1st respondent according to the Muslim religious rites and

were living as husband and wife at the residence of the 1st petitioner

Cash and gold given to the 1st respondent by her family members at

the time of marriage are totally misappropriated by the petitioners and

they demanded more dowry from the 1st respondent and harassed her

Crl.M.C.No.4408 of 2014
                                     2



both physically and mentally and thus, the petitioners have

committed the aforesaid offence and now, the case of the petitioners

is that the matter is settled out of court.

          3. Heard the learned counsel for the petitioner as well as

the counsel for the 1st respondent. I have also heard the learned

Public Prosecutor.

          4. The learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that during

the pendency of the above case, the matter is settled amicably between

the parties to the dispute which is the subject matter of the above case.

Therefore, the continuation of the proceedings in the above case is abuse

of process of law and proceedings.

          5. The learned counsel for the 1st respondent, who on the basis

of specific instruction received from the respondent submitted that the

above respondent, who is the de facto complainant does not intend to

proceed any further against the petitioner and she has no grievance

against them.

          6. I have carefully considered the above submissions of the

respective counsel. I have verified the documents and materials produced

Crl.M.C.No.4408 of 2014
                                          3



along with the above petition. In the given facts and circumstances of the

case and especially in the light of the settlement arrived between the

parties to the dispute, the learned Public Prosecutor has also no objection

in allowing the above petition.

          7. Having regard to the facts and circumstances involved in the

case, it can be seen that the offence involved in the above case is only

under Section 498A, which is more or less personal in nature and no

public interest is involved.       It is pertinent to note that though such

offences are involved, the real parties to the dispute approached this

Court after having amicably settled the matter. From the submission

made by the counsel for the 1st respondent, it appears to me that the

de    facto   complainant      has    no     further     grievance        against  the

petitioner/accused in the light of the settlement arrived by them. In this

juncture, it is relevant to note that the Honourable Apex Court, in the

decision reported in Jitendra Raghuvanshi and Others v. Babita

Raghuvanshi and another [2013 (1) KLD 817(SC)],                            has held as

follows:-


                 "7. It is not in dispute that matrimonial disputes have
          been on considerable increase in recent times resulting in filing
          of complaints under Sections 498A and 406 of I.P.C. not only

Crl.M.C.No.4408 of 2014
                                             4



         against the husband but also against the relatives of the husband.
         The question is when such matters are resolved either by the wife
         agreeing to rejoin the matrimonial home or by mutual settlement
         of other pending disputes for which both the sides approached the
         High Court and jointly prayed for quashing of the criminal
         proceedings or the FIR or complaint by the wife under Sections
         498A and 406 of I.P.C., whether the prayer can be declined on the
         sole ground that since the offences are non-compoundable under
         Section 320 of the Code, it would be impermissible for the court
         to quash the criminal proceedings or FIR or complaint.
                 8. It is not in dispute that in the case on hand subsequent
         to the filing of the criminal complaint under Sections 498A and
         406 of IPC and Sections 3 and 4 of the Dowry Prohibition Act,
         1961, with the help and intervention of family members, friends
         and well-wishers, the parties concerned have amicably settled
         their  differences    and    executed    a   compromise/settlement.
         Pursuant thereto, the appellants filed the said compromise before
         the Trial Court with a request to place the same on record and to
         drop the criminal proceedings against the appellants herein. It is
         also not in dispute that in additional to the mutual settlement
         arrived at by the parties, respondent/-wife has also filed an
         affidavit stating that she did not wish to pursue the criminal
         proceedings against the appellants and fully supported the
         contents of the settlement deed.        It is the grievance of the
         appellants that no only the Trial Court rejected such prayer of the
         parties but also the High Court failed toe exercise its jurisdiction
         under Section 482 of the Code only on the ground that the
         criminal proceedings relate to the offences punishable under
         Sections 498A and 406 of IPC which are non-compoundable in
         nature."
                 "12.    In our view, it is the duty of the Courts to
         encourage     genuine    settlements    of   matrimonial   disputes,
         particularly, when the same are on considerable increase. Even
         if the offences are non-compoundable, if they relate to
         matrimonial disputes and the Court is satisfied that the parties
         have settled the same amicably and without any pressure, we
         hold that for the purpose of securing ends of justice, Section 320
         of the Code would not be a bar to the exercise of power of
         quashing of FIR, complaint or the subsequent criminal
         proceedings.
                      13.   There has been an outburst of matrimonial
         disputes in recent times. The institution of marriage occupies an
         important place and it has an important role to play in the
         society. Therefore, every effort should be made in the interest of
         the individuals in order to enable them to settle down in life and
         live peacefully.   If the parties ponder over their defaults and
         terminate their disputes amicably by mutual agreement instead of

Crl.M.C.No.4408 of 2014
                                              5



          fighting it out in a Court of law, in order to do complete justice in
          the matrimonial matters, the Courts should be less hesitant in
          exercising its extraordinary jurisdiction. It is trite to state that
          the power under Section 482 should be exercised sparingly and
          with circumspection only when the Court is convinced, on the
          basis of material on record, that allowing the proceedings to
          continue would be an abuse of the process of the Court or that the
          ends of justice require that the proceedings ought to be quashed."


In the present case, the only offence involved is under Section 498A of

I.P.C. The criminal proceedings for the said offence originated from the

matrimonial issues, which are now settled.                   Consequently, the parties

want a quietus to the criminal case as well.

          According to me, in the light of the facts and circumstances

involved in the present case and particularly in view of the settlement

arrived in the present case, the dictum laid in the above decision will be

squarely applicable in the present case. According to me, as the parties to

the dispute settled the issues amicably, it is the duty of this Court to

promote such settlement, instead of compelling the parties to go on with

the dispute. It is pertinent to note that since the matter is settled out of

court, in the event of proceeding with the trial, there would not have any

fruitful prosecution resulting the conviction of the accused, rather the net

result would be sheer waste of judicial time and abuse of process of the

court and proceedings. Thus, according to me, following the decisions

Crl.M.C.No.4408 of 2014
                                     6



cited supra, this Crl.M.C. can be allowed granting the relief as sought for.

      In the result, this Crl.M.C. is allowed, quashing all further

proceedings pending against the petitioner in C.C.No. 934/2012 of

the Judicial First Class Magistrate Court - III, Punalur.




                                           V.K.MOHANAN, JUDGE


vdv



