
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                      PRESENT:

                       THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE K.RAMAKRISHNAN

                   TUESDAY,THE 27TH DAY OF MAY 2014/6TH JYAISHTA, 1936

                                           Crl.MC.No. 2751 of 2014 ()
                                                ---------------------------
             SC.NO.678/2013 OF ASSISTANT SESSIONS COURT, PAYYANNUR
   CRIME NO. 436/2012 OF PAYYANNUR POLICE STATION , KANNUR DISTRICT
                                          ---------------------------

PETITIONER/ACCUSED :
-----------------------------------------

            BINOOJA K.V.,
            W/O. JAYAPRAKASH T.P.,AGED 23 YEARS,
            RESIDING AT PUTHUR,PERALAM VILLAGE,
            P.O.PUTHUR, KANNUR DISTRICT.

             BY ADV. SRI.MAHESH V RAMAKRISHNAN

RESPONDENT(S)/STATE & DEFACTO COMPLAINANT (INJURED):
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

        1. STATE OF KERALA,
            REPRESENTED BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR,
            HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM.

        2. JAYAPRAKASH T.P.,
            S/O. P.KELAPPAN ADIYODI, AGED 29 YEARS,
            RESIDING AT THALIYIL PODUVAL HOUSE, PUTHUR,
            PERALAM VILLAGE, P.O.PUTHUR, KANNUR DISTRICT-670 521.

             R1 BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SMT. P.MAYA
             R2 BY SMT.R.LEELA

            THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE HAVING COME UP FOR ADMISSION
            ON 27-05-2014, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE FOLLOWING:




sts

Crl.MC.No. 2751 of 2014 ()
--------------------------------------

                                                APPENDIX

PETITIONER(S)' ANNEXURES:
----------------------------------------------


ANNEX A1 :           COPY OF THE FIRST INFORMATION REPORT DTD. 12.4.2012 IN CRIME
                     NO.436/2012 OF THE PAYYANNUR POLICE STATION.

ANNEX A2 :           COPY OF THE CHARGE DATED NIL IN SC.NO.678 OF 2013.

ANNEX A3 :           THE AFFIDAVIT DTD. 30.4.2014 SWORN TO BY THE 2ND
                     RESPONDENT/DEFACTO COMPLAINANT.


RESPONDENT(S)' ANNEXURES:                            NIL




                                                         /TRUE COPY/


                                                         P.A.TO.JUDGE


sts


                     K. Ramakrishnan, J.
    ==============================
                  Crl.M.C.No.2751 of 2014
    ==============================
         Dated this, the 27th day of May, 2014.


                           O R D E R


      This is an application filed by the sole accused in

S.C.No.678/2013 pending before Assistant Sessions Court,

Payyanur, to quash the proceedings on the basis of the

settlement under Section 482 of Code of Criminal Procedure.

      2.   It is alleged in the petition that the petitioner is the

sole accused in S.C.No.678/2013 on the file of the Assistant

Sessions Court, Payyanur.      The case was originated on the

basis of Crime No.436/2012 of Payyanur Police Station which

was registered on the basis of the statement given by the

second respondent who is none other than the husband of the

petitioner alleging that the petitioner had attempted to commit

murder of the second respondent by mixing sleeping pills in

the milk and attempted to give the same to him.               After

investigation, final report was filed and the learned magistrate

has committed the case to the Court of Sessions, Thalassery

where it was taken on file as S.C.No.678/2013 and thereafter,

it was made over to Assistant Sessions Court, Payyanur for

disposal.   Now, the matter has been settled between the

Crl.M.C.No.2751 of 2014      :   2 :

parties, there were other cases pending before the Family

Court as well. On account of the intervention of the mediators,

parties have arrived at settlement and decided to withdraw all

the cases and file a joint petition for divorce as well. Since the

offence alleged is non-compoundable in nature, they cannot

file an application before the court below. On account of the

settlement, no purpose will be served in proceeding with the

case as well. So, the petitioner has no other remedy except to

approach this court seeking the following relief:

         "To call for records and quash Annexure-A2 Charge

   and all further proceedings in S.C.678 of 2013 on the file of

   the Assistant Sessions Court, Payyanur and appropriate

   orders may be passed accordingly in the interest of justice."



      3.     The second respondent appeared through Counsel

and submitted that the matter has been settled due to the

intervention of mediators and family members and he does not

want to prosecute the case. The Counsel for the petitioner

also submitted that in view of the settlement, no conviction will

be possible and allowing the case to proceed with amount to

only wastage of judicial time. So, he prayed for allowing the

application.

Crl.M.C.No.2751 of 2014      :  3 :

      4.     The learned Public Prosecutor, on instructions, as

directed to this court submitted that, except this case, there is

no other case against the petitioner but opposed the

application on the ground that offence under Section 307 of

Indian Penal Code has been incorporated.

      5.     Heard both sides.

      6.     It is an admitted fact that the petitioner is the wife

of second respondent and on account of some difference of

opinion, now they are living separately as well. It is also seen

from the allegations that even during the time when they are

living together, their relationship was not that cordial and the

family life was not peaceful. It is also an admitted fact that on

the basis of the statement given by the de facto complainant

-the second respondent herein Annexure A1 crime was

registered as Crime No.436/2012 of Payyanur Police Station

against the petitioner alleging offence under Section 307 of

Indian Penal Code and after investigation, final report was filed

and it was committed to the Court of Sessions and now

pending as S.C.No.678/2013 before the Assistant Sessions

Court, Payyanur.        The matrimonial dispute between the

petitioner and the second respondent were settled due to the

Crl.M.C.No.2751 of 2014      :   4 :

intervention of mediators and they have decided to separate

by filing a joint petition for divorce by mutual consent before

the Family Court. On the basis of settlement, they have also

decided to forgive each other and decided to withdraw the

criminal case now pending against the petitioner as well so as

to allow her to have a peaceful matrimonial life in future. It is

on that basis that the present petition has been filed to quash

the proceedings on the basis of the settlement.

       7.    It is true that offence under Section 307 of Indian

Penal Code has been incorporated and the allegation was that

she had tried to kill the second respondent by mixing sleeping

pills in the milk and gave the same to him. Since it is a matter

where the entire episode happened due to the unhappy

situations prevailing in the matrimonial home while they were

living together which has been now settled by deciding to

separate by filing a joint application for divorce and the

husband has prepared to forgive the act of his wife to arrive at

a settlement, pendency of this case should not be a hurdle for

the same and this may affect the future matrimonial prospects

of the petitioner as well especially when the incident happened

due to some matrimonial dispute prevailing at that time

Crl.M.C.No.2751 of 2014        :  5 :

between the parties which has been amicably settled due to

the intervention of family members, it cannot be treated as a

matter of public interest.

      8.     Further, in the decision reported in Gian Singh V.

State of Punjab [2012 (4) KLT 108 (SC)], it is held as

follows:

            "The position that emerges from the above
      discussion can be summarised thus: the power of the
      High Court in quashing in criminal proceeding or F.I.R.
      or complaint in exercise of its inherent jurisdiction is
      distinct and different from the power given to a criminal
      court for compounding the offences under S.320 of the
      Code.    Inherent power is of wide plenitude with no
      statutory limitation but it has to be exercised in accord
      with the guideline engrafted in such power viz;(i) to
      secure the ends of justice or (ii) to prevent abuse of the
      process of any Court. In what cases power to quash the
      criminal proceeding or complaint or F.I.R may be
      exercised where the offender and victim have settled
      their   dispute   would   depend     on  the   facts  and
      circumstances of each case and no category can be
      prescribed.    However, before exercise of such power,
      the High Court must have due regard to the nature and
      gravity of the crime. Heinous and serious offences of
      mental depravity or offences like murder, rape, dacoity,
      etc., cannot be fittingly quashed even though the victim
      or victim's family and the offender have settled the
      dispute.    Such offences are not private in nature and
      have   serious impact on society.          Similarly, any
      compromise between the victim and offender in relation
      to the offences under special statutes like Prevention of
      Corruption Act or the offences committed by public
      servants while working in that capacity etc; cannot
      provide for any basis for quashing criminal proceedings
      involving such offences. But the criminal cases having
      overwhelmingly and pre-dominatingly civil flavour stand
      on different footing for the purposes of quashing,
      particularly the offences arising from commercial,
      financial, mercantile, civil,  partnership or such like

Crl.M.C.No.2751 of 2014         :  6 :

      transactions or the offences arising out of matrimony
      relating to dowry, etc; or the family disputes where the
      wrong is basically private or personal in nature and the
      parties have resolved their entire dispute.        In this
      category of case, High Court may quash criminal
      proceedings if in its view, because of the compromise
      between the offender and victim, the possibility of
      conviction is remote and bleak and continuation of
      criminal case would put accused to great oppression and
      prejudice and extreme injustice would be caused to him
      by not quashing the criminal case despite full and
      complete settlement and compromise with the victim.
      In other words, the High Court must consider whether it
      would be unfair or contrary to the interest of justice to
      continue with the criminal proceeding or continuation of
      the criminal proceeding would tantamount to abuse of
      process of law despite settlement and compromise
      between the victim and wrongdoer and whether to
      secure the ends of justice, it is appropriate that criminal
      case is put to end and if the answer to the above
      question(s) is in affirmative, the High Court shall be well
      within its jurisdiction to quash the criminal proceeding."




      9.     In view of the dictum laid down in the above

decision and also considering the fact that the matter has been

settled between the parties and the entire episode has

happened due to some unhappy things prevailing between the

petitioner and second respondent during the course of their

living together in the matrimonial home as husband and wife

and the matter has been now settled and parties have decided

to settle the issue and separate by filing a joint application for

divorce by mutual consent and on account of the settlement,

there is no possibility for the second respondent-de facto

Crl.M.C.No.2751 of 2014     :  7 :

complainant supporting the case of the prosecution and

conviction in such cases will be remote, this court feels that it

is a fit case where the power under Section 482 of Code of

Criminal Procedure has to be invoked to quash the proceedings

so as to promote the settlement arrived at between the parties

and to secure a settled and happy life in their future.

      10. So, the petition is allowed and further proceedings

in S.C.No.678/2013 pending before Assistant Sessions Court,

Payyanur (Crime No.436/2012 of Payyanur Police Station) as

against the petitioner is quashed.

      Office is directed to communicate this order to the

concerned court immediately.




                                            Sd/-
                                  K.Ramakrishnan, Judge.


Bb

                                            [True copy]

                                                  P.A to Judge



