
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                      PRESENT:

                       THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE K.RAMAKRISHNAN

                  MONDAY,THE 30TH DAY OF JUNE 2014/9TH ASHADHA, 1936

                                            Crl.MC.No. 1759 of 2013
                                            ----------------------------------

 CC 513/2011 of JUDICIAL FIRST CLASS MAGISTRATE COURT-I, CHANGANACHERRY
         CRIME NO. 986/2011 OF CHANGANASSERY POLICE STATION , KOTTAYAM
                                                      ---------------


PETITIONERS/ACCUSED NO. 1,2,4 AND 5:
----------------------------------------------------------

        1. MARY ANN VARGHESE, AGED 56 YEARS,
            W/O. K.N.CHERIAN, KOCHUTHAZHATHU ANUGRAHA HOUSE,
            ANGADY ROAD, CHANGANACHERRY VILLAGE,
            CHANGANACHERRY TALUK, KOTTAYAM DISTRICT.

        2. K.N.CHERIAN, AGED 62 YEARS,
            S/O. NINAN, KOCHUTHAZHATHU ANUGRAHA HOUSE, ANGADY ROAD,
            CHANGANACHERRY VILLAGE, CHANGANACHERRY TALUK,
            KOTTAYAM DISTRICT.

        3. ANJANA ANN CHERIAN, AGED 26 YEARS,
            D/O. K.N.CHERIAN, KOCHUTHAZHATHU ANUGRAHA HOUSE,
            ANGADY ROAD, CHANGANACHERRY VILLAGE,
            CHANGANACHERRY TALUK, KOTTAYAM DISTRICT.

        4. ANGEL TESS CHERIAN, AGED 22 YEARS,
            D/O. K.N.CHERIAN, KOCHUTHAZHATHU ANUGRAHA HOUSE,
            ANGADY ROAD, CHANGANACHERRY VILLAGE,
            CHANGANACHERRY TALUK, KOTTAYAM DISTRICT.

            BY ADV. SRI.GOKUL DAS V.V.H.

RESPONDENTS/DEFACTO COMPLAINANT AND STATE:
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

        1. ROSHIN PIUS,
            D/O. PIUS, KUZHITTU HOUSE, MANIKKASSERRY KARA,
            KONGODU VILLAGE, PALAKKAD DISTRICT-678001.

        2. STATE OF KERALA,
            REPRESENTED BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR,
            HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM.

            R1 BY ADVS. SRI.S.SREEKUMAR (SR.)
                                SRI.P.MARTIN JOSE
                                SRI.P.PRIJITH
            R2 BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SMT.P.MAYA

            THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD ON 30-05-2014
            THE COURT ON 30-06-2014, PASSED THE FOLLOWING:

PJ

Crl.MC.No. 1759 of 2013
----------------------------------

                                               APPENDIX

PETITIONER(S)' ANNEXURES
------------------------------------------

ANNEXURE I- TRUE COPY OF THE F.I.R. IN CRIME NO. 986/2011 BEFORE THE
                     CHANGANACHERRY POLICE SATION, KOTTAYAM DISTRICT.

ANNEXURE II- CERTIFIED COPY OF THE FINAL REPORT IN CRIME NO. 986/2011
                     BEFORE THE CHANGANACHERRY POLICE STATION, KOTTAYAM
                     DISTRICT.

ANNEXURE III-COPY OF THE COMPLAINT DATED 22/6/11 SUBMITTED BY THE FIRST
                     RESPONDENT BEFORE THE DISTRICT SUPERINTENDENT OF POLICE,
                     KOTTAYAM.

RESPONDENT(S)' ANNEXURES
--------------------------------------------

                     NIL.


                                                           / TRUE COPY /


                                                           P.S. TO JUDGE

PJ


                       K. RAMAKRISHNAN, J.
                   .................................................
                      Crl.M.C.No.1759 of 2013
                   ..................................................
              Dated this the 30th day of June, 2014.

                                O R D E R


      This Criminal Miscellaneous Case is filed by accused 1, 2,

4 and 5 in C.C.No.513/2011 pending before the Judicial First

Class Magistrate Court-I, Changanacherry to quash the

proceedings under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal

Procedure (hereinafter referred to as 'the Code')

      2. It is alleged in the petition that the petitioners were

arrayed as accused 1,2,4 and 5 in Crime No.986/2011 of

Changanacherry police station. The first respondent herein is

the de facto complainant in the above crime. She married the

third accused as per custom. Accused Nos. 1 and 2 are the

mother and father and petitioners 3 and 4, who are accused

Nos. 4 and 5,    are the sisters of third accused. According to

the complainant, the marriage had taken place on 7.1.2010.

Prior to the marriage, she was working in a Software Institution

at Bangalore and in connection with the marriage, the father of

the de facto complainant entrusted Rs.20 lakhs with the first

petitioner and 80 sovereigns of ornaments were purchased using

Crl.M.C.No.1759 of 2013         2

this amount. According to the de facto complainant, except few

ornaments, her other ornaments were taken by the first

petitioner and the third accused had taken the entire money

from the deposit in her name by using her ATM card. The third

accused was harassing the de facto complainant demanding

more dowry. She had undergone a surgery to remove a cyst in

the ovary even prior to the marriage and after the marriage

the accused persons ill treated her demanding more dowry and

also on account of the surgery undergone, she will not conceive

and she was made to do all the household works and to do the

menial work and that was instigated accused       Nos.1, 4 and 5.

The father of the third accused namely the second petitioner,

according to the de facto complainant, was compelling her to

have a divorce since the demand for dowry has not been fulfilled

by her parents. This was expressed by him even in the presence

of her father and other relatives. In order to pressurize her to

agree for divorce, they started ill treating her and thereby

according to the de facto complainant, the accused have

committed the offence punishable under Section 498 A read

with Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code.      On account of the

ill treatment, she could not live in the house of the accused. So

Crl.M.C.No.1759 of 2013                  3

she was compelled to leave the matrimonial home. Thereafter

she filed Annexure-I private complaint before the Judicial First

Class Magistrate Court, Changanacherry which was forwarded

to     the      police      for   investigation     and     on   that basis

Changanacherry             police   had    registered      Annexure-I First

Information Report as Crime No.986/2011 of Changanacherry

police station against the petitioners alleging offences under

Section 498 A read with Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code and

after the investigation, Annexure-II final report was filed and it

was taken on file as C.C.No.513/2011 before the Judicial First

Class Magistrate Court-I, Changanacherry. According to the

petitioners, even if the entire allegations are accepted, there is

no offence of 498 A is attracted as against the petitioners and

conviction in such cases will be remote and the case to continue

as against them will be only wastage of judicial time and so

the petitioners have no other remedy except to approach this

Court seeking the following relief:

                   So it is most humbly prayed that this Hon'ble

           court may be pleased to quash Annexure-II Final

           Report in      C.C.No.513/2011 before   the   Judicial

           First Class Magistrate Court-I, Changanacherry,

Crl.M.C.No.1759 of 2013             4

           Kottyam District.

        3. Heard the counsel for the petitioners, learned Public

Prosecutor appearing         for the second  respondent and    the

learned counsel for the 1st respondent/de facto complainant.

        4. The learned counsel for the petitioners submitted that

though voluminous complaint has been filed by the de facto

complainant, there is no allegation regarding cruelty which lead

to an offence under Section 498 A of the Indian Penal Code has

been made out. Silly and normal things that will happen in the

house has been projected an act of cruelty, which in law will not

amount to cruelty for attracting the offence under Section

498 A of the Indian Penal Code. So, according to the counsel for

the petitioners, since there is no       ingredient to attract the

offence under Section 498 A         has been made out, there is no

possibility of conviction and it is only an abuse of process of

the court to drive the petitioners to face trial. So, according

to him, the petitioners are entitled to the relief of quashing of

proceedings as against them.

        5. On the other hand, the learned counsel for the first

respondent argued that various allegations made in the

complaint will go to show that it cannot be treated as a normal

Crl.M.C.No.1759 of 2013          5

routine household work which was expected to be done by the

housewife. Further, if these things were insisted for the purpose

of harassing her for not meeting the demand for dowry which

caused mental and physical harassment which made her living

there impossible, then it will come under the explanation to

the definition of cruelty under the said section.   Further, they

were pressurizing her to agree for divorce since her father was

not amenable for the demand for further dowry claimed by the

petitioners. Further, the allegations are sufficient to proceed

against the accused persons and the particulars of cruelty are

all matters of evidence and if the matter has to be decided on

the basis of evidence, then the power under Section 482 of the

Code cannot be invoked to quash the proceedings. So, according

to the learned counsel, the petitioners are not entitled to get

the relief and they will have to face trial in accordance with

law.

         6. The learned    Public Prosecutor  appearing for the

second respondent supported the case of the counsel for the 1st

respondent.

         7. Before going to the facts of the case, it must be

remembered that every cruelty as understood under law will

Crl.M.C.No.1759 of 2013                6

not be sufficient to attract the offence under Section 498 A of

the Indian Penal Code. Similarly, every quarrel which may

ensue in the normal             course of    family life also will not be

sufficient to come to the conclusion that there is                 cruelty as

contemplated under Section 498 A of the Indian Penal Code.

Similarly, mere demand for dowry or demand for money alone

is not sufficient, but it must be followed by physical or mental

harassment which the victim may anticipate harm to her life

or limb and then only the offence under Section 498 A can be

said to have been committed.

        8. Section 498 A of the Indian Penal Code deals with

offence of cruelty by husband or relatives of husband which

reads as follows:

                    "498A. Husband or relative of husband of a

           woman subjecting her to cruelty:- Whoever, being

           the husband or the relative of the       husband of a

           woman,      subjects such woman to cruelty shall be

           punished with imprisonment for a term which may

           extend to three years and shall also be liable to fine.

           Explanation:- For the purpose of      this      section,

           "cruelty" means-

           (a) any wilful conduct which is of such a nature as

Crl.M.C.No.1759 of 2013                  7

           is likely to drive the woman to commit suicide or to

           cause grave injury or danger to life, limb or health

           (whether mental or physical) of the woman; or

           (b) harassment of the woman where such harassment

           is with a view to coercing her or any person related

           to her to meet any unlawful demand for any property

           or valuable security or is on account of failure by

           her or any person       related to her to meet such

           demand".

        9. Explanation to the section defines cruelty. First part of

the explanation deals with any willful conduct which is of

such a nature which is likely to drive the woman to commit

suicide or to cause grave injury or danger to life, limb or health

(whether mental or physical) of the woman and that deals with

physical and mental cruelty and there is a               direct attack on

the person which results in cruelty as defined under the Act.

The second part of the explanation deals with harassment so as

to coerce her to meet the unlawful demand of any property or

valuable security and that is being done on failure to meet such

demand. So, unless these two things are independently proved

or established or alleged             and proved, it cannot be said that

the offence under Section 498 A of the Indian Penal Code is

Crl.M.C.No.1759 of 2013           8

attracted.

        10. In the decision reported in Bhaskar Lal Sharma and

Another v. Monica ( 2009 (10) SCC 604), it has been held

that for proving the offence under Section 498 A, the complaint

must be unlawful demand for dowry or any willful conduct on

the part of the accused of such a nature as is likely to drive

the woman to commit suicide or to cause grave injury or danger

to life, limb or health. The Hon'ble Supreme Court has relied

on the decisions reported in Noorjahan v. State (2008 (11)

SCC 55)         and    Sushil Kumar Sharma v. Union of India

( 2005 (6) SCC 281) regarding the same aspect.

        11. Further, in the decision       reported in Shakson

Belthissor v. State of Kerala [2009 (3) KLT suppl. 412(SC)],

the Hon'ble Supreme Court held that in order to attract an

offence under Section 498 A of the Indian Penal Code, the

ingredients to constitute an offence under explanation (a) or

(b) of Section 498 A of the Indian Penal Code must be made

out either in the First Information Report or in the charge

sheet. If such ingredients are not there, then it cannot be said

that there was a prima facie case or ground made out for

proceeding against the accused and the case is liable to be

Crl.M.C.No.1759 of 2013                  9

quashed. Further, in the decision reported in Preeti Gupta v.

State of Jharkhand [2010 (3) KLT SN 96 (C.No.101 (SC)], the

Hon'ble Supreme Court has held that:

              Tendency of implicating husband and all his immediate

           relations is also not uncommon. The courts must extremely

           careful and cautious in dealing with these complaints and

           must take a pragmatic realities into consideration.

This was the observation made by the Hon'ble Supreme Court

in the case as misuse of Section 498 A of the Indian Penal Code

by the de facto complainant.

        12. In the decision reported in Suresh Kumar v. State

of Kerala [2004 (3) KLT SN 40 (C.No.56)], this Court has held

that:

         Family flickering which cannot be taken seriously does not

         come within the ambit of Section 498 A as cruelty.

        13. It is also settled law that power under Section 482 of

the Code to quash the proceedings in a criminal matter can be

invoked very sparingly and only if court is satisfied that even if

the allegations in the complaint or the materials collected

during investigation are admitted to be true,even then no offence

under the section alleged is attracted, then only the court can

quash the proceedings at the threshold of the prosecution itself.

Crl.M.C.No.1759 of 2013            10

If the court feels that there are allegations and the defence

alleged by the accused are matters to be considered on the basis

of evidence, then the court should be slow in quashing the

proceedings by invoking the power under Section 482 of the

Code.       With this principle in mind, the case in hand has to be

considered.

        14. It is an admitted fact that the third accused married

the de facto complainant on 7.1.2010.          It is alleged in the

complaint that at the time of betrothal, Rs.20 lakhs was

demanded and it was entrusted and as per the request of the

father of the petitioner, at that time 80 sovereigns        of gold

ornaments will have to be purchased by using Rs.10 lakhs out

of Rs.20 lakhs given and according to the complainant, this

was done by the second accused. Further allegation in the

complaint was that even on the date of marriage itself, the first

accused, who is the mother of the          husband of the de facto

complainant had obtained the gold ornaments and the de facto

complainant was allowed to use only limited gold ornaments.

Further, the allegation against petitioners 1,3 and 4 was that

there was no servant maid in the            house and the de facto

complainant was made to do all the household works and she

Crl.M.C.No.1759 of 2013              11

was even asked to wash the cloths including the undergarments

of accused Nos.1, 4 and 5, who are the mother-in-law and

sisters-in-law         of the de facto complainant. Further, it was

mentioned in the complaint itself that when she informed about

the same to her father and he asked her to tell petitioners 1, 3

and 4 that she will not do the same and accordingly she came

and informed the same and thereafter they did not ask her to do

those works. The de facto complainant had no case that this

continued thereafter          as a  harassment for non payment of

dowry. It is also in a way admitted in the complaint itself that

there was no servant maid in the house and household work

was being done by the first accused/mother-in-law prior to the

marriage of her son and when the complainant was brought to

their house as daughter-in-law, she was asked to do the

household works. Normally, this cannot be said to be an act of

cruelty. But, if it is done with a view to harass and make to her

work hard than a normal person without sharing the household

works since she did not bring dowry or she did not accede for

the demand for dowry and that harassment was such which

makes it impossible for her to live in the house, then that may

prima facie amount to cruelty. Such an allegation is not there

Crl.M.C.No.1759 of 2013          12

in the complaint and even, according to the             de facto

complainant, when she resisted the same, they did not ask her

to do the work and she had no case that on account of her

resistance, she was further harassed or ill treated cruelly as

defined under Section 498 A of the Indian Penal Code. Except

this allegation, there is no much allegation of alleged cruelty

met at the hands of accused 1, 4 and 5, who are petitioners 1,3

and 4 in this petition. Even the evidence collected by the

investigating officer also did not show that there was any act of

cruelty met by the complainant at the hands of petitioners 1, 3

and 4, who are accused 1, 4 and 5 in the complaint. The other

allegations made are only general in nature and there is no

specific act of cruelty has been alleged against these petitioners.

So, under the circumstances, there is some force in the

submission made by the counsel for the petitioners that

allegations are not sufficient, even assuming that the entire

allegations are admitted to be true, to attract the definition of

cruelty as contemplated under Section 498 A of the Indian Penal

Code and they are entitled to get the relief of quashing the case

as against them. So even assuming that the allegations are true,

in view of the discussions made above, it cannot be said that the

Crl.M.C.No.1759 of 2013           13

allegations are sufficient to come to a prima facie conclusion

that the offence punishable under Section 498 A of the Indian

Penal Code is attracted as against the petitioners 1, 3 and 4,

who are accused 1, 4 and 5 and further proceedings as against

them is liable to be quashed.

        15. As regards the second petitioner, the father of the

husband        is concerned, it was alleged in the complaint that he

continued to demand for dowry and even in the meeting held

between the father of the de facto complainant, their relatives

and the first accused, he demanded more amount and when that

was rejected, he demanded for divorce and started treating the

petitioner cruelly made her to amenable for the request of

divorce of the marriage with the third accused and, according

to the de facto complainant, this continued till she left the house.

So, under the circumstances, at this stage it cannot be said

that there is no prima facie case made out to attract the offence

under Section 498 A of the Indian Penal Code as against the

first petitioner as there are allegations of demand for dowry

and insisting to do certain things which the de facto complainant

is not normally entitled to do as a refusal or meeting the demand

for dowry as coming with the second part of the explanation to

Crl.M.C.No.1759 of 2013           14

Section 498 A of the Indian Penal Code. So under the

circumstances, it cannot be said that no prima facie or sufficient

ground made out to proceed against the first petitioner so as to

quash the proceedings as against him at this stage.          So the

second petitioner is not entitled to get the relief of quashing the

complaint at this stage invoking the power under Section 498 A

of the Indian Penal Code.

        16. In view of the discussions made above, it can be safely

concluded that the allegations are not sufficient to come to a

prima facie conclusion that either there is a prima facie case

or sufficient ground made out to proceed against accused 1, 4

and 5, who are petitioners 1, 3 and 4 in this petition so as to

attract the offence under Section 498 A of the Indian Penal Code

and no purpose will be served by proceeding with the case as

against them as it will amount to abuse of process of court and

so case against them is liable to be quashed. But, as against

the second accused, who is the second petitioner herein is

concerned, it cannot be said that there is no prima facie case

made out and it is not a fit case to invoke Section 482 of the

Code to quash the proceedings as against him at this stage. So

the petition is allowed in part as follows:

Crl.M.C.No.1759 of 2013                 15

        Further proceedings as against              petitioners 1, 3 and 4,

who are accused 1, 4 and                5 in C.C.No.513/2011        (Crime

No.986/2011 of Changanacherry police station) pending before

the Judicial First Class Magistrate Court-I, Changanassery is

quashed and the prayer for quashing the case as against the

second petitioner, who is the second accused in that case is

rejected.

        Office is directed to communicate this order to the

concerned court immediately.

                                                           Sd/-
                                        K. RAMAKRISHNAN, JUDGE.
cl
                           /true copy/
                                             P.S to Judge



