
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                      PRESENT:

                     THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE ALEXANDER THOMAS

               THURSDAY, THE 9TH DAY OF OCTOBER 2014/17TH ASWINA, 1936

                                           Crl.MC.No. 5653 of 2014 ()
                                                ---------------------------
                CC 346/2014 of JUDICIAL FIRST CLASS MAGISTRATE COURT - I,
                                                 PERUMBAVOOR
                                                        ----------
PETITIONERS/ACCUSED NO.1 TO 4 :
--------------------------------------------------

        1. REJI VARGHESE, AGED 33 YEARS,
            S/O.VARGHESE, PUTHIYAMADAM HOUSE, PUKKATTUPADY,
            OORAKKAD KARA, KIZHAKKAMBALAM VILLAGE, PIN - 683 561.

        2. ANNAMMA VARGHESE, AGED 72 YEARS,
            W/O.LATE VARGHESE, PUTHIYAMADAM HOUSE, PUKKATTUPADY
            OORAKKAD KARA, KIZHAKKAMBALAMVILLAGE, PIN - 683 561.

        3. YACOB, AGED 44 YEARS,
            S/O.VARGHESE, PUTHIYAMADAM HOUSE, PUKKATTUPADY,
            OORAKKAD KARA, KIZHAKKAMBALAM VILLAGE, PIN - 683 561.

        4. BENNY KURIAKOSE, AGED 48 YEARS,
            S/O.KURIAKOSE, MUTHIRAKALAYIL HOUSE,
            VENGOLA P.OPERUMBAVOOR, PIN - 683 561.

            BY ADV. SRI.RENNY AUGUSTINE

RESPONDENTS/STATE & DEFACTO COMPLAINANT :
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

        1. THE STATE OF KERALA
            REP. BY ITS PUBLIC PROSECUTOR,
            HIGH COURT OF KERALA, PIN - 682 031.

        2. MERIN REJI
            W/O.REJI VARGHESE, D/O.MANNUEL, THEKKEKARA HOUSE,
            KANJIKUZHI VILLAGE, THODUPUZHA TALUK,
            PRESENTLY RESIDING AT PUTHIYAMADAM HOUSE,
            PUKKATTUPADY, OORAKKAD KARA, KIZHAKKAMBALAM VILLAGE
            PIN -683 561.

            R1 BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SRI. DHANESH MATHEW MANJOORAN
            R2 BY ADV. SRI.SUMAN CHAKRAVARTHY

            THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE HAVING COME UP FOR ADMISSION
            ON 09-10-2014, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE
            FOLLOWING:
bp

Crl.MC.No. 5653 of 2014 ()
---------------------------

                                          APPENDIX

PETITIONER(S)' EXHIBITS
-------------------------------------

ANNEXURE-A: CERTIFIED COPY OF THE FIR SUBMITTED BY THADIYITTAPARAMBU
                       POLICE STATION DATED 14.12.2013.

ANNEXURE-B: CERTIFIED COPY OF THE CHARGE SHEET/AS C.C.NO.346/2014 BY
                       JFCM, PERUMBAVOOR DATED 7.3.2014.

ANNEXURE-C: ORIGINAL ATTESTED AFFIDAVIT DATED 23.8.2014


RESPONDENT(S)' EXHIBITS                  :           NIL.


                                                          //TRUE COPY//




                                                          P.A. TO JUDGE

bp


                     ALEXANDER THOMAS, J.
                    -----------------------------
                    Crl.M.C.No.5653 Of 2014
                  ---------------------------------
            Dated this the 9th day of October, 2014.

                             O R D E R



      The prayer in the above captioned Criminal Miscellaneous

Case (Crl.M.C) is to quash the impugned Annexure-B final

report/charge sheet which has led to C.C.No.346/2014 on the

file of the Judicial First Class Magistrate Court, Perumbavoor.

The 1st petitioner is the husband of the 2nd respondent and the

other petitioners are the mother, brother and brother-in-law of

the 1st petitioner. The 2nd respondent is the wife of the 1st

petitioner. At the instance of the 2nd respondent, Annexure-A

FIR    was    filed   leading    to    Crime     No.875/2013  of

Thadiyattaparamba       Police  Station.       Subsequently, the

investigating officer submitted Annexure-B final report before

the Judicial First Class Magistrate Court, Perumbavoor and the

matter is now pending as C.C.No.346/2014 on the file of the

said court for offence punishable under Sections 498A, 392,

392 r/w 34 IPC. The gist of the allegation raised is that after

the marriage between the 1st petitioner and the 2nd respondent,

accused Nos.1 & 2, physically and mentally ill-treated her

alleging that she has some mental problems and that on

                              ::2::

Crl.M.C.No.5653 Of 2014

3.12.2013 the 3rd accused had caused her hurt to her by

beating and the 4th accused forcefully removed her gold

bangles from her and thus the accused have committed the

above offences. Later, the petitioners and the 2nd respondent

entered into an amicable settlement and resolved the disputes.

The 2nd respondent has sworn to an affidavit dated 23.8.2014

produced as Annexure-C herein stating the above aspects and

further stating that the disputes have been amicably settled

and that the complaint was lodged by her due to the

instigation of others.   Now, she seeks no relief from the

accused and that she is now staying with the 1st petitioner who

is her husband and his mother (2nd petitioner) at their house

and that in considering the better future and welfare of the 2nd

respondent and her children, all further proceedings in the

impugned C.C.No.346/2014 and all further proceedings arising

therefrom may be quashed etc.       It is in the background of

these facts and circumstances that the aforementioned Crl.M.C

has been filed.

      2.   The Crl.M.C. has been admitted and Sri.Suman

Chakravarthy has taken notice for the 2nd respondent and the

learned   Public Prosecutor  has   taken   notice for   the  1st

                                ::3::

Crl.M.C.No.5653 Of 2014

respondent State of Kerala.

      3.    Heard Sri.Renny Augustine, learned counsel for the

petitioners, Sri.Suman Chakravarthy, learned counsel for the 2nd

respondent and the learned Public Prosecutor appearing for the

1st respondent State of Kerala.

      4.    The learned counsel for the petitioners has submitted

that during the pendency of the aforementioned criminal

proceedings, the matter has been settled amicably between the

parties, and that the continuation of the proceedings in the above

case/crime will cause miscarriage of justice to both parties as the

real disputants to the controversy have arrived at an amicable

settlement and any further continuation of the criminal

proceedings will amount to sheer wastage of time and money

and would unnecessarily strain the judicial, administrative and

financial resources of the State.

      5.    Sri.Suman Chakravarthy, learned counsel appearing

for the 2nd respondent has submitted, on the basis of the specific

instructions furnished by the 2nd respondent, that the 2nd

respondent has amicably settled the disputes with the petitioners

as stated above and that she has no objection in the quashment

of   the   impugned     criminal    proceedings   and   that   the

complainant/victim/injured does not intend to proceed any

                               ::4::

Crl.M.C.No.5653 Of 2014

further against the petitioners as she has no grievance against

them and that she will not raise any dispute/complaint in future if

the prayer for quashing the impugned criminal proceedings is

allowed.

      6.   The learned Public Prosecutor also was heard, who

also has not raised any serious objections and submitted that the

court may consider the prayer in this case in the light of the law

well settled by the Apex Court in that regard.

      7.   After having carefully considered the submissions of

the parties and after having perused the pleadings as well as the

documents and materials placed in this matter, it can be seen

that the offences alleged are more or less personal in nature and

not much element of public interest is involved.      The crucial

aspect of the matter is that though such offences are involved,

the real disputants to the controversy, which has led to the

impugned criminal proceedings, have actually arrived at an

amicable settlement of the matter. From the submissions made

by the learned counsel for the 2nd respondent, it is clear to the

Court that the injured/victim/defacto complainant has no further

grievance against the petitioners/accused in the light of the

settlement arrived at by them. In this connection, it is relevant

to note the decision of the Apex Court in the case between Gian

                                   ::5::

Crl.M.C.No.5653 Of 2014

Singh v. State of Punjab reported in 2013 (1) SCC (Cri) 160,

para 61 = (2012) 10 SCC 303 = 2012(4) KLT 108(SC), wherein

the Supreme Court has held as follows in para 61 thereof [ See

SCC (Cri)]:

              "61. The position that emerges from the above
       discussion can be summarised thus: the power of the
       High Court in quashing a criminal proceeding or FIR or
       complaint in exercise of its inherent jurisdiction is
       distinct and different from the power given to a criminal
       court for compounding the offences under S.320 of the
       Code.     Inherent power is of wide plenitude with no
       statutory limitation but it has to be exercised in accord
       with the guideline engrafted in such power viz;(i) to
       secure the ends of justice or (ii) to prevent abuse of
       the process of any Court.        In what cases power to
       quash the criminal proceeding or complaint or F.I.R.
       may be exercised where the offender and victim have
       settled their dispute would depend on the facts and
       circumstances of each case and no category can be
       prescribed..

It is further held as follows:-

       "......... But the criminal cases having overwhelmingly
       and pre-dominatingly civil flavour stand on different
       footing for the purposes of quashing, particularly the
       offences arising from commercial, financial, mercantile,
       civil, partnership or such like transactions or the
       offences arising out of matrimony relating to dowry
       etc. or the family disputes where the wrong is basically
       private or personal in nature and the parties have
       resolved their entire dispute. In this category of cases,
       High Court may quash criminal proceedings if in its
       view, because of the compromise between the offender
       and victim, the possibility of conviction is remote and
       bleak and continuation of criminal case would put
       accused to great oppression and prejudice and
       extreme injustice would be caused to him by not
       quashing the criminal case despite full and complete
       settlement and compromise with the victim........"

                                  ::6::

Crl.M.C.No.5653 Of 2014

Further, in the case Jitendra Raghuvanshi and Others v.

Babita Raghuvanshi and another reported in (2013) 4 SCC

58 [see 2013 (1) KLD 817 (SC)], the Apex Court has held as

follows:-

            "8. It is not in dispute that matrimonial disputes
      have been on considerable increase in recent times
      resulting in filing of complaints under Sections 498A
      and 406 of I.P.C. not only against the husband but also
      against the relatives of the husband. The question is
      when such matters are resolved either by the wife
      agreeing to rejoin the matrimonial home or by mutual
      settlement of other pending disputes for which both
      the sides approached the High Court and jointly prayed
      for quashing of the criminal proceedings or the FIR or
      complaint by the wife under Sections 498A and 406 of
      I.P.C., whether the prayer can be declined on the sole
      ground that since the offences are non-compoundable
      under Section 320        of the Code, it would be
      impermissible for the court to quash the criminal
      proceedings or FIR or complaint.
            9. It is not in dispute that in the case on hand
      subsequent to the filing of the criminal complaint under
      Sections 498A and 406 of IPC and Sections 3 and 4 of
      the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961, with the help and
      intervention of family members, friends and well-
      wishers, the parties concerned have amicably settled
      their   differences   and   executed    a   compromise/
      settlement. Pursuant thereto, the appellants filed the
      said compromise before the Trial Court with a request
      to place the same on record and to drop the criminal
      proceedings against the appellants herein. It is also
      not in dispute that in additional to the mutual
      settlement arrived at by the parties, respondent/-wife
      has also filed an affidavit stating that she did not wish
      to pursue the criminal proceedings against the
      appellants and fully supported the contents of the
      settlement deed. It is the grievance of the appellants
      that no only the Trial Court rejected such prayer of the
      parties but also the High Court failed toe exercise its
      jurisdiction under Section 482 of the Code only on the

                                ::7::

Crl.M.C.No.5653 Of 2014

      ground that the criminal proceedings relate to the
      offences punishable under Sections 498A and 406 of
      IPC which are non-compoundable in nature.
            15. In our view, it is the duty of the Courts
      to encourage genuine settlements of matrimonial
      disputes, particularly, when the same are on
      considerable increase.     Even if the offences are
      non-compoundable, if they relate to matrimonial
      disputes and the Court is satisfied that the parties
      have settled the same amicably and without any
      pressure, we hold that for the purpose of securing
      ends of justice, Section 320 of the Code would not
      be a bar to the exercise of power of quashing of
      FIR,   complaint    or   the   subsequent     criminal
      proceedings.
            16.     There has been an outburst of
      matrimonial disputes in recent times.             The
      institution of marriage occupies an important place
      and it has an important role to play in the society.
      Therefore, every effort should be made in the
      interest of the individuals in order to enable them
      to settle down in life and live peacefully. If the
      parties ponder over their defaults and terminate
      their disputes amicably by mutual agreement
      instead of fighting it out in a Court of law, in order
      to do complete justice in the matrimonial matters,
      the Courts should be less hesitant in exercising its
      extraordinary jurisdiction. It is trite to state that
      the power under Section 482 should be exercised
      sparingly and with circumspection only when the
      Court is convinced, on the basis of material on
      record, that allowing the proceedings to continue
      would be an abuse of the process of the Court or
      that   the   ends   of  justice   require  that    the
      proceedings ought to be quashed."

      8.    Considering the facts and circumstances of this case,

it is seen further that the impugned criminal proceedings have

arisen consequent to the matrimonial disputes between the

                                ::8::

Crl.M.C.No.5653 Of 2014

disputants and the disputes have been settled amicably between

the parties. Accordingly, this Court is inclined to hold that in the

light of the facts and circumstances involved in the present case

and particularly in view of the settlement arrived at between the

parties, the principles laid down in the aforementioned decisions

of the Apex Court will be squarely applicable in the present case.

Moreover, since the real disputants to the controversy have

amicably settled the disputes, which led to these impugned

criminal proceedings, it is also the duty of the court to promote

such settlement, instead of compelling the parties to go on with

the dispute. It is also pertinent to note that since the matter is

settled out of court, in the event of proceeding with the trial,

there may not be any fruitful prosecution and the chances of

conviction of the accused is rather negligible and therefore, the

net result of continuance of criminal proceedings would be sheer

waste of judicial time rather meaningless and therefore would

amount to abuse of the process of court proceedings in the larger

sense. Hence following decisions of the Apex Court cited supra,

this Court is inclined to hold that the Crl.M.C. can be allowed by

granting the prayers sought for.

      In the result, Crl.M.C is allowed and impugned Annexure-B

final report/charge sheet in Annexure-A FIR in Crime

                                ::9::

Crl.M.C.No.5653 Of 2014

No.875/2013 of Thadiyattaparamba Police Station, which is

now pending as C.C.No.346/2014 on the file of the Judicial

First Class Magistrate Court, Perumbavoor and all further

proceedings arising therefrom stand quashed.         The petitioner

shall produce certified copies of this order before the court below

concerned as well as before the Station House Officer concerned.




                                            ALEXANDER THOMAS,
                                                     Judge.

bkn/-



