
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                      PRESENT:

                     THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE ALEXANDER THOMAS

                FRIDAY,THE 31ST DAY OF OCTOBER 2014/9TH KARTHIKA, 1936

                                            Crl.MC.No. 6168 of 2014
                                           ------------------------------------

            C.C.NO.432/2011 OF JUDICIAL FIRST CLASS MAGISTRATE COURT-II,
                                                PATHANAMTHITTA
                                                      ---------------


PETITIONER(S)/ACCUSED NO.1 AND 2 :
----------------------------------------------------------

          1. MARIYAMMA THOMAS @ RANI, AGED 41 YEARS,
              W/O.THOMAS MATHEW, MULLAN KUZHIYIL HOUSE,
              THAMBAKKULAM, THANNITHODE, PATHANAMTHITTA.

          2. THOMAS MATHEW, AGED 43 YEARS,
             S/O.MATHEW, MULLAN KUZHIYIL HOUSE, THMABAKKULAM,
             THANNITHODE, PATHANAMTHITTA.

            BY ADV. SRI.M.T.SURESHKUMAR

RESPONDENT(S)/DEFACTO COMPLAINANT/STATE :
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

          1. OMANA @ SARAMMA, AGED 34 YEARS,
             D/O.MARIYAMMA, VALIYA IRUPPAKKATTIL, THUMBAKKULAM,
             THANNITHODE, PATHANAMTHITTA-689 645.

          2. STATE OF KERALA,
             REPRESENTED BY THE PUBLIC PROSECUTOR,
             HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM-682 031.

             R1 BY ADV. SMT.T.J.SEEMA
             R2 BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SRI.JITHESH

            THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE HAVING COME UP FOR ADMISSION
           ON 31-10-2014, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE FOLLOWING:




Msd.

Crl.MC.No. 6168 of 2014
----------------------------------

                                             APPENDIX


PETITIONER(S)' ANNEXURES :


ANNEXURE A1:                   TRUE COPY OF THE FIRST INFORMATION REPORT AND FIS
                               DATED 06-07-2011.

ANNEXURE A2:                   TRUE COPY OF THE FINAL REPORT DATED 03-08-2011.


RESPONDENT(S)' ANNEXURES :

                                            NIL

                                                             //TRUE COPY//


                                                             P.S.TO JUDGE.

Msd.


                   ALEXANDER THOMAS, J.
                   -----------------------------
                   Crl.M.C.No.6168 Of 2014
                 ---------------------------------
           Dated this the 31st day of October, 2014.

                            O R D E R



     The two petitioners herein are the accused Nos. 1 & 2 in

the impugned Annexure-A1 FIR in Crime No.51/2011 of

Thannithode Police Station alleging offences punishable under

Secs.447, 341, 323, 324, 354, 294(b), 427 r/w 34 IPC. The

copy of the impugned FIR in Crime No.51/2011 is marked as

Annexure-A1.     Police after investigation filed Annexure-A2

Final Report/Charge Sheet in the impugned Annexure-A1 FIR

in Crime No.51/2011 of Thannithode Police Station which is

now pending as C.C.No.432/2011 on the file of the Judicial

First Class Magistrate Court-II, Pathanamthitta.        The 1st

respondent herein is the defacto complainant and the injured

in the case. The gist of the allegation is that on 5.7.2011 at

about 1:30 p.m. while the wire fencing of the property of the

defacto complainant-1st respondent herein was in progress, the

accused Nos.1 & 2, who are the neighbours and adjacent

property owners who had long standing boundary dispute with

the defacto complainant raised objections and the workers had

allegedly intimated the objections of the accused to the defacto

                               ::2::

Crl.M.C.No.6168 Of 2014

complainant and on reaching the spot the 2nd accused was

found engaged in an altercation with the workers. On seeing

the defacto complainant he had allegedly assaulted her with

the handle of a chopper on her left cheek and as a result of

which she had fell down and on seeing this the accused No.1

had allegedly caught hold of the defacto complainant by her

hand and the 2nd accused had allegedly hit on her back and she

was further abused by the accused in filthy language and the

workers had intervened and accused No.2 allegedly torn her

churidar and she was allegedly taken to the hospital and

intimation was given from the hospital in response to which

the Sub Inspector of Police had registered the impugned

Annexure-A1 FIR etc.    It is stated by the petitioners that they

are innocent of the allegations and that they are implicated

falsely due to personal vengeance arising out of above said

dispute and that there was a long standing boundary dispute

between the rival parties. It is further stated that the disputes

between the petitioners and the 1st respondent-defacto

complainant have been amicably settled out of court and both

parties are no grievance against each other. The rival parties

                              ::3::

Crl.M.C.No.6168 Of 2014

in their wisdom have now learnt that the continued

proceedings before the court below instituted on the basis of

Annexure-A2 Final Report would only remain as a scratch in

the healing wound. The 1st respondent has sworn to affidavit

dated 2.6.2014 which is produced in this Crl.M.C along with

Crl.M.A.No.10146/2014 stating the above aspects and further

stating that she has no surviving grievance against the

petitioners and they are living happily as neighbours and any

further continuation of the proceedings will only tamper the

smooth and cordial atmosphere between them and that the

impugned criminal proceedings may be terminated that the

disputes between the parties are purely personal in nature and

no public interest is involved and she has no objection in

allowing the prayer in the Crl.M.C. It is in the background of

these facts and circumstances, the instant Crl.M.C has been

filed with the prayer to quash the impugned Annexure-A2 Final

Report/Charge Sheet filed in the impugned Annexure-A1 FIR in

Crime No.51/2011 of Thannithode Police Station which has led

to the pendency of C.C.No.432/2011 on the file of the Judicial

First Class Magistrate Court-II, Pathanamthitta and all further

                                ::4::

Crl.M.C.No.6168 Of 2014

proceedings arising therefrom.

      2.   The Crl.M.C has been admitted and Smt.T.J.Seema,

Advocate, has taken notice for the 1st respondent and the

learned Public Prosecutor has taken notice for the 2nd

respondent-State of Kerala.

      3.   Heard Sri.Raja Vijayaraghavan, learned counsel

appearing for the petitioners, Smt.T.J.Seema, learned counsel

appearing for the 1st respondent and the learned Public

Prosecutor appearing for the 2nd respondent.

      4.   The   learned    counsel   for  the   petitioners  has

submitted that during the pendency of the aforementioned

criminal proceedings, the matter has been settled amicably

between the parties, and that the continuation of the

proceedings in the above case/crime will cause miscarriage of

justice to both parties as the real disputants to the controversy

have arrived at an amicable settlement and any further

continuation of the criminal proceedings will amount to sheer

wastage of time and money and would unnecessarily strain the

judicial, administrative and financial resources of the State.

      5.   Smt.T.J.Seema, learned counsel appearing for the

                               ::5::

Crl.M.C.No.6168 Of 2014

1st respondent has submitted on the basis of the specific

instructions furnished by the 1st respondent that the 1st

respondent has amicably settled the disputes with the

petitioners and that she has no objection in the quashment of

the    impugned     criminal    proceedings   and   that   the

complainant/victim/injured does not intend to proceed any

further against the petitioners as she has no grievance against

them and that she will not raise any dispute/complaint in

future if the prayer for quashing the impugned final report is

allowed.

      6.   The learned Public Prosecutor also was heard and

submitted that this Court may consider the prayer in this case

in the light of the law well settled by the Apex Court in that

regard.

      7.   After having carefully considered the submissions of

the parties and after having perused the pleadings as well as

the documents and materials placed in this matter, it can be

seen that the offences alleged are more or less personal in

nature. The crucial aspect of the matter is that though such

offences are involved, the real disputants to the controversy,

                                     ::6::

Crl.M.C.No.6168 Of 2014

which has led to the impugned criminal proceedings, have

actually arrived at an amicable settlement of the matter. From

the submissions made by the learned counsel for the 1st

respondent,         it   is   clear     to   the    Court     that   the

injured/victim/defacto complainant has no further grievance

against the petitioners/accused in the light of the settlement

arrived at by them.

       8.      In this connection, it is relevant to note the decision

of the Apex Court in the case between Gian Singh v. State of

Punjab reported in 2013 (1) SCC (Cri) 160, para 61 = (2012)

10 SCC 303 = 2012(4) KLT 108(SC), wherein the Supreme

Court has held as follows in para 61 thereof [ See SCC (Cri)]:

               "61.   The position that emerges from the above
      discussion can be summarised thus: the power of the High
      Court in quashing a criminal proceeding or FIR or complaint in
      exercise of its inherent jurisdiction is distinct and different
      from the power given to a criminal court for compounding the
      offences under S.320 of the Code. Inherent power is of wide
      plenitude with no statutory limitation but it has to be
      exercised in accord with the guideline engrafted in such
      power viz;(i) to secure the ends of justice or (ii) to prevent
      abuse of the process of any Court. In what cases power to
      quash the criminal proceeding or complaint or F.I.R. may be
      exercised where the offender and victim have settled their
      dispute would depend on the facts and circumstances of each
      case and no category can be prescribed..

It is further held as follows:-

       "......... But the criminal cases having overwhelmingly and
       pre-dominatingly civil flavour stand on different footing for

                                   ::7::

Crl.M.C.No.6168 Of 2014

      the purposes of quashing, particularly the offences arising
      from commercial, financial, mercantile, civil, partnership or
      such like transactions or the offences arising out of
      matrimony relating to dowry etc. or the family disputes
      where the wrong is basically private or personal in nature
      and the parties have resolved their entire dispute. In this
      category    of cases,    High  Court   may     quash   criminal
      proceedings if in its view, because of the compromise
      between the offender and victim, the possibility of conviction
      is remote and bleak and continuation of criminal case would
      put accused to great oppression and prejudice and extreme
      injustice would be caused to him by not quashing the
      criminal case despite full and complete settlement and
      compromise with the victim........"

In the decision reported in the case Yogendra Yadav & others

v. The State of Jharkhand & another reported in 2014 (8)

Scale 634 = III (2014) Current Criminal Reports CCR 426 (SC),

the Apex Court has held as follows:

             "When the High Court is convinced that the offences
      are entirely personal in nature and, therefore, do not affect
      public peace or tranquility and where it feels that quashing of
      such proceedings on account of compromise would bring
      about peace and would secure ends of justice, it should not
      hesitate to quash them".

The Apex Court in the above case was dealing with a case

involving offences under Sections 341, 323, 324, 504 & 307 r/w

Section 34 Indian Penal Code.

      9.     Considering the facts and circumstances of this

case, it is seen further that the impugned criminal proceedings

have arisen consequent to the personal disputes between the

disputants and the disputes have been settled amicably

                                ::8::

Crl.M.C.No.6168 Of 2014

between the parties. Accordingly, this Court is inclined to hold

that in the light of the facts and circumstances involved in the

present case and particularly in view of the settlement arrived

at between the parties, the principles laid down in the

aforementioned decisions of the Apex Court will be squarely

applicable in the present case. Moreover, since the real

disputants to the controversy have amicably settled the

disputes, which led to these impugned criminal proceedings, it

is also the duty of the court to promote such settlement,

instead of compelling the parties to go on with the dispute. It

is also pertinent to note that since the matter is settled out of

court, in the event of proceeding with the trial, there may not

be any fruitful prosecution and the chances of conviction of the

accused is rather negligible and therefore, the net result of

continuance of criminal proceedings would be sheer waste of

judicial time rather meaningless and therefore would amount

to abuse of the process of court proceedings in the larger

sense. Hence following decisions of the Apex Court cited supra,

this Court is inclined to hold that the Crl.M.C. can be allowed

by granting the prayers sought for.

                               ::9::

Crl.M.C.No.6168 Of 2014

      In the result, Crl.M.C is allowed and the impugned

Annexure-A2 Final Report/Charge Sheet filed in Annexure-A1

FIR in Crime No.51/2011 of Thannithode Police Station which

has led to the pendency of C.C.No.432/2011 on the file of the

Judicial First Class Magistrate Court-II, Pathanamthitta and all

further proceedings arising therefrom stand quashed.        The

petitioners shall forward certified copies of this order to the

Station House Officer concerned as well as to the jurisdictional

Magistrate concerned.




                                          ALEXANDER THOMAS,
                                                  Judge.

bkn/-



