
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                  PRESENT:

                          THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE P.BHAVADASAN

                 FRIDAY,THE 10TH DAY OF JANUARY 2014/20TH POUSHA, 1935

                                            CRL.A.No. 592 OF 2004
                                             --------------------------

      S.C.NO. 153/2001 OF ADDITIONAL SESSIONS COURT, FAST TRACK (ADHOC-I),
                                            ALAPPUZHA DISTRICT.
                                                   -------------

APPELLANT/IST ACCUSED:
----------------------------------------

            SHAMON, S/O.KASIMKUNJU,
            UMAPARAMPUVEEDU, VELLAKINAR WARD,
            ALAPPUZHA.

            BY ADV. SRI.K.GOPALAKRISHNA KURUP

RESPONDENT/COMPLAINANT:
--------------------------------------------

            STATE OF KERALA, REPRESENTED BY THE
            PUBLIC PROSECUTOR, HIGH COURT OF KERALA,
            ERNAKULAM.

            BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SMT. P.MAYA

          THIS CRIMINAL APPEAL HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD
          ON 10-01-2014, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY DELIVERED
          THE FOLLOWING:


Msd.


                 -Crl.Appeal.-No.-592-of -2004-
                   - - - - -
                       P. BHAVADASAN,- J.-
                              -   - -         -

            Dated-this the 10th day of January, 2014.
                   - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -


                           JUDGMENT


          Three persons were prosecuted for the offences

punishable under Sections 498A and 306 read with Section 34

of Indian Penal Code. They were acquitted of the charge under

Section 306 of I.P.C. The first accused was found guilty of the

offence under Section 498A of I.P.C.            He was therefore

convicted and sentenced to suffer rigorous imprisonment for

one year and six months and to pay fine of Rs.10,000/- with a

default sentence of rigorous imprisonment for six months. It

was also directed that if the fine amount was realized a sum of

Rs,8,000/- was directed to be paid to the parents of Sheeba

as compensation under Section 357 of Cr.P.C.

          2. The first accused married Sheeba on 19.4.1998.

The couple took up residence in the matrimonial house. They

Crl.Appeal.592/2004.
                                2

had no children. It is alleged that at the time of marriage

Sheeba was given 1,50,000/- and 25 sovereigns of gold. As

could be seen from the records, their marriage        life was

smooth and happy for a while.          Then, according to the

prosecution, there began ill-treatment demanding dowry and

Sheeba was mentally harassed. Instances are made mention

of by the witnesses regarding the ill-treatment meted out by

the first accused as well as accused Nos. 2 and 3 on the

victim. Finally, according to the prosecution case, unable to

bear the trauma any more, she on 7.3.2000, committed

suicide.     P.W.1, the brother of the victim made Ext.P1 first

information statement. A crime was registered as per Ext.P1

(a) FIR. Investigation was taken over by P.W.16. He recorded

the statements of witnesses and prepared scene manahazar.

He seized Ext.P7 and Ext.D1 letters and also had the records

of Mahal seized.      He arrested the accused and had them

Crl.Appeal.592/2004.
                                3

produced before court, completed investigation and laid

charge before court.

             3. The court, before which final report was laid

took cognizance of the offences.      Finding that the offences

are exclusively triable by a court of Sessions, the said court

committed the case to Sessions Court, Alappuzha. The said

court made over the case to Additional Sessions Court Fast

Track (Adhoc-I), Alapuzha for trial and disposal.

             4. The latter court, on receipt of records and on

appearance of the accused framed charge for the offences

punishable under Sections 498A and 306 of I.P.C. To the

charge, the accused pleaded not guilty and claimed to be tried.

The prosecution therefore had P.Ws.1 to 16 examined and

had Exts.P1 to P16 marked. M.Os 1 to 3 were got identified

and marked. After the close of the prosecution evidence, the

accused were questioned under Section 313 Cr.P.C.         They

Crl.Appeal.592/2004.
                                4

denied all the incriminating circumstances       brought out in

evidence        against them and maintained that they were

innocent. They denied having committed any act as alleged.

Finding that the accused could not be acquitted under Section

232 Cr.P.C., they were asked to enter on their defence. The

accused examined D.Ws. 1 to 7 and had Exts.D1 to D12

marked. On an appreciation of the evidence in the case , the

court below mainly impressed by the testimony of P.Ws.2, 6, 9

and 15 came to the conclusion that though offence under

Section 306 of I.P.C. has not been made out, offence under

Section 498A of I.P.C. is made made out as against the first

accused. He was therefore convicted and sentenced for the

said offence as already mentioned. The said conviction and

sentence are assailed in this appeal.

             5. The learned Senior Counsel Shri. K.Gopalakrishna

Kurup appearing for the appellant contended that the

Crl.Appeal.592/2004.
                               5

conviction and sentence are not sustainable both on facts and

in law. Drawing attention to Ext.P4 a compromise entered into

between the parties with regard to the differences they had

with reference to Ext. P3 and D11, it is contended that all the

issues are settled and there was an amicable settlement

reached between the parties. In pursuance to that settlement,

the victim had gone along with the first accused and taken up

residence in the matrimonial house. There is absolutely no

allegation that from the date of Ext.P4 till the date of

commission of suicide by the victim on 7.3.2000, there was

any ill-treatment much less any cruel treatment by any of the

accused      persons on the victim. According to the learned

Senior Counsel, the court below taking aid of certain incidents

which had happened prior to Ext.P4 held the first accused

guilty of the offence under Section 498A of I.P.C. It is also

pointed out that even with regard to those incidents, there is

Crl.Appeal.592/2004.
                                 6

no consistency between the evidence of P.Ws. 2, 6, 9 and 15

and the court below was not justified in observing that some

of their versions are not challenged in cross-examination.

Learned Senior Counsel therefore pointed out that by no

stretch of imagination the offence under Section 498A of I.P.C.

could be attracted as against the first accused.

             6.    Learned Public Prosecutor on the other hand

sought to support the finding of the court below mainly on

the basis of the evidence of the        witnesses already made

mention of. It is pointed out that those acts have been proved

beyond reasonable doubt and if that be so, the offence is

made out.        The court below which has the opportunity to

watch the demeanor of witnesses has chosen to accept their

evidence and it could not be said that the finding of the court

below in that regard is either perverse or contrary to the

evidence on record. If that be so, no interference is called for.

Crl.Appeal.592/2004.
                                  7

             7.    There is an allegation that the accused were

disturbed by the fact that the victim may not be capable of

bearing children though there is no conclusive evidence in that

regard.      But there is evidence      to show that she was

undergoing treatment for the same.

             8.     As noticed, the marriage between the first

accused and the deceased took place on 19.4.1998.

             9. P.W.1 is the brother of the victim who laid the

first information statement. Of course, like other witnesses,

namely, P.Ws. 2, 6, 9 and 15, he would also say that for about

three or four months the life was smooth and happy in the

matrimonial house.          According to him, thereafter the

ill-treatment began.        He would say that his sister was

subjected to physical assault by the first accused. Even when

she was in her house, she was beaten by the accused. He then

speaks about having received a phone call about the mishap

Crl.Appeal.592/2004.
                                 8

that had occurred to his sister and having gone to the hospital

etc. It is significant to notice that he does not refer to any

specific incident or any specific act of the first accused as

against the victim. He simply says that the accused used to

manhandle the victim without giving any details whatsoever.

In cross-examination, he disowns quite a few of his previous

statements and also certain omissions are brought to his

notice.

             10. P.W.2 is the father of the victim. He would say

that at the time of marriage his daughter was given

Rs.1,50,000/- and 25 sovereigns of gold. He would say that

after marriage they took up residence in the matrimonial

house. Like P.W.1, he too would say that the marital life was

happy for about three or four months. Surprisingly he came

forward with an allegation that his daughter was used to be

harassed by the accused on the pretext that she was elder to

Crl.Appeal.592/2004.
                                9

the first accused. He speaks about an incident which took

place when the first accused and his daughter had gone to

visit a family. He says that for some or other reason he picked

up     quarrel with his daughter and the          third accused

telephoned him and told that his daughter was unwell and

that he should take her immediately to his house. According

to him, his wife and son went and brought his daughter to his

house. He would say that on the next day she was taken to

the hospital. Later it was revealed that the victim was pushed

down from the bed by the first accused. He then speaks

about the demands made by the first accused for opening a

workshop etc.       According to him, his daughter used to be

tortured quite frequently by the first accused.        He then

speaks about the conciliation attempted by the Mahal

Committee and his daughter having gone along with the first

accused. He ends up by saying that it was due to the acts

Crl.Appeal.592/2004.
                                10

committed by the accused persons that his daughter had

committed suicide.

             11. P.W.6 is the husband of the sister of the victim.

According to him, initially there was nothing wrong in the

marital life of the couple. He claims to have gone to the house

of the victim almost a month after the marriage on getting

information that there was some problem in the house. He

says that when he reached the matrimonial          house of the

victim, he found the victim crying in her bed room.            On

enquiry he was told that she was badly beaten up by the first

accused. He claims to have seen broken bangles and broken

pieces of tube light in the room. On questioning the first

accused regarding the said act, the reply given to him was that

the victim was arrogant to him. He then says that he had

returned to his place of employment and after three months

he     found Sheeba was staying in her parental house.

Crl.Appeal.592/2004.
                                11

According to him, she was dumped in her house labelling her

as a mentally ill person. However, he would concede that due

to the intervention of of the Mahal Committee the victim had

gone along with the first accused.

             12. P.W.9 is the sister of the victim. According to

her, when the first accused is not at home, the cudgel was

taken by accused Nos. 2 and 3 and when the cruelty meted out

by accused Nos.2 and 3 was conveyed to the first accused, he

used to get violent. According to this witness, one day in the

morning, the first accused came home with the victim. She

was seen crying. Inspite of enquiry, she did not reveal what

the reason was. On persistence, Sheeba complained of back

pain and abdominal pain. Later she conveyed that she had

been kicked on the abdomen by the first accused. The next

day she claims to have taken the victim to the hospital and

soon thereafter the accused persons came to take Sheeba back

Crl.Appeal.592/2004.
                                   12

to their house. In cross-examination, P.W.9 would say that

she had to concede that several of the statements made her

did not find a place in her previous statement.

             13. The next witness who speaks about the incident

is P.W.15, the mother of the victim. She too speaks about the

ill-treatment suffered by the victim at the hands of the

accused persons. But her version regarding the coming home

by Sheeba is entirely different from the version given by P.Ws.2

and 9.

             14. It is significant to notice that even though there

was     an     allegation   that    the   gold    ornaments    were

misappropriated, P.W.15, the mother of the victim in

cross-examination conceded that after the death of the victim,

all the gold ornaments were returned to them.             It is also

significant to notice that both P.Ws. 2 and 15 admitted that

the first accused had bought 10 cents of land in the joint

Crl.Appeal.592/2004.
                               13

name of late Sheeba and in his name utilizing his own funds.

             15. The court below was persuaded to find the

accused guilty based on the statements given by P.Ws.2, 6, 9

and 15 which have already been referred to. If those acts are

construed independently, may be that the court below was

justified in coming to the conclusion.    But the subsequent

events cannot be ignored.

             16.    It has come out in evidence that on one

occasion due to the unusual behaviour of the victim when the

matter was informed to the family of the victim, they came

and took her to their house and exhortion was done and later

she was taken back to their house. The evidence also shows

that at a later point of time she came home and continued to

remain there. Neither the first accused nor others showed any

inclination to take her back. The family of the victim filed a

complaint before their Mahal and the family of the accused

Crl.Appeal.592/2004.
                               14

filed a complaint before their Mahal.          The respective

complaints were produced as Exts. P3 and D11. As a result of

the joint meeting of the Mahal committee office bearers, a

compromise was entered into which is Ext.P4.           What is

significant is that in Ext.P3 complaint, there is no whisper

about any ill-treatment by the accused of the victim. The

narration of the incidents given at the time of evidence by

P.Ws.2, 6, 9 and 15 are conspicuously absent in Ext.P3.

However, Ext.D11 complaint filed by the accused indicates

about the adamant attitude of the victim and the quarrel

ensuing therefrom. Whatever that be, what is important is that

there is no mention that the victim had to take up residence in

her parental house due to the ill-treatment meted out by the

accused persons. Surprisingly enough, at the time of evidence

P.W.2 disowns quite a few of the statements in Ext.P3 that can

be taken note of as an after thought.

Crl.Appeal.592/2004.
                                15

             17. What is significant is that all the witnesses for

the prosecution, namely on whom reliance was placed by the

court below, i.e., P.Ws. 2, 6, 9, and 15 too concede that after

the date of Ext.P4, i.e., 24.9.1999 when the victim went along

with the first accused and took up residence in the

matrimonial house, till 7.3.2000, the date on which the

mishap occurred, there was no ill-treatment by any of the

accused nor did she complain about any such ill-treatment.

This significant aspect has been omitted to be noticed by the

court below and the court below on the basis of the evidence

of P.Ws.2, 6, 9 and 15 find the earlier incidents in favour of the

prosecution and held the first accused guilty. There too, as

already noticed, the incidents spoken to by the witnesses did

not find a place in their previous statement. Whatever that be,

one has to take that since there is no mention of any

ill-treatment or harassment, either mental or physical, made

Crl.Appeal.592/2004.
                                16

mention of in Ext.P3,        the subsequent statements of

ill-treatment has to be viewed with certain amount of

suspicion.

             18. Going by the prosecution version, Sheeba was

taken to the hospital on various occasions, but no documents

were seen produced to substantiate the same. On the other

hand, the defence has produced several documents to show

that Sheeba was being attended to and medical aid was made

available as could be seen from Exts.D3, D4 etc.

             19. Under these circumstances, the conviction on

the basis of the evidence of P.Ws.2, 6, 9 and 15, even

assuming that there is some substance in those complaints,

they are prior to Ext.P4, and after Ext.P4 when everything has

been given a quietus and a new life had been started, it is

improper for the court to rely on previous incidents to find the

accused guilty especially when there is no complaint after

Crl.Appeal.592/2004.
                               17

24.9.1999 till the date of mishap there is any ill-treatment or

cruelty meted out by any of the inmates in the house of the

accused. Of course there is some doubt regarding the suicide

committed by the victim which need not be dealt with in this

judgment.

             For the above reasons, this Court is unable to

uphold the finding of the court below that the first accused is

guilty of the offence under Section 498A of I.P.C. and the

conviction and sentence passed against the appellant are set

aside and he is acquitted of the said charge. His bail bond

shall stand cancelled and he is set at liberty. If he has paid the

fine amount, the same shall be refunded to the appellant.




                                             P. BHAVADASAN,
                                                    JUDGE

sb.



