
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                      PRESENT:

                            THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE K.HARILAL

                 FRIDAY, THE 17TH DAY OF JANUARY 2014/27TH POUSHA, 1935

                                                RPFC.No. 7 of 2014
                                                  ----------------------

                              MC 402/2011 of FAMILY COURT, PALAKKAD


REVISION PETITIONER(S)/RESPONDENT:
------------------------------------------------------------

            RAMANKUTTY
            S/O.MARUTHIVEERAN, PUTHAN VEEDU, AZHIKKARAPARAMBU
            PALAPPURAM P.O., OTTAPALAM-678108.

            BYADV. SRI.P.JAYARAM

RESPONDENTS/PETITIONERS:
-------------------------------------------

       1. BINDHU, AGED 33 YEARS
            D/O.KURUPPUSWAMY, KARIMBU VEEDU, ANDIKUNDU
            MANNARKKAD-678583.

       2. AKSHAYA, AGED 6 YEARS
            D/O.BINDHU, KARIMBU VEEDU, ANDIKUNDU
            MANNARKKAD-678583
            (2ND RESPONDENT REPRESENTED BY THE 1ST RESPONDENT MOTHER)

            R1 & R2 BYADV. DR.ABRAHAM P.MEACHINKARA

            THIS REV.PETITION(FAMILY COURT) HAVING COME UP FOR ADMISSION
ON 17-01-2014, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE FOLLOWING:




OKB


                         K.HARILAL, J.

                   _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _

                     R.P(FC). No.7 of 2014
                   _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _

            Dated this the 17th day of January, 2014



                             O R D E R



           The  revision     petitioner    is   the  respondent  in

M.C.No.402/2011 on the files of the Family Court, Palakkad. He

is the husband of the 1st respondent as well as the father of the

2nd respondent, herein. The above M.C. was filed under Section

125 of the Code of Criminal Procedure seeking maintenance

allowance from the revision petitioner.         According to the 1st

respondent, she is the legally wedded wife of the revision

petitioner and the 2nd respondent is the child born in that wed-

lock. At the time of marriage, her parents gave 25 sovereigns of

gold ornaments and `2 lakhs as gift. But, after the birth of the

2nd respondent, the revision petitioner and his family members

began to harass the 1st respondent for more dowry and money.

The revision petitioner has been neglecting to pay maintenance

allowance to the respondents from the year 2010 onwards. On

16.1.2010, the 1st respondent was brutally assaulted by the

R.P(FC).7/14                     :2:



revision petitioner and his family members and, thereafter, they

kicked out her from her matrimonial home. Thereupon, on her

complaint, the Ottapalam police registered Crime No.74/2010

against the revision petitioner and others. The 1st respondent

has no job or income. She is unable to maintain herself and also

the 2nd respondent. The 2nd respondent is studying at school

level and she is in need of money to meet her educational

expenses. The revision petitioner is working as a driver and

earning `30,000/- per month. Apart from that, he is also getting

income from the joint agricultural property of his family.

     2.     The revision petitioner filed a counter affidavit

admitting the marriage and paternity of the child.        But, he

denied the entire allegations of cruelty and harassment levelled

against him.    According to him, he was constrained to file

O.P.No.630/2010 before the Family Court for getting a decree

of divorce as the behaviour of the 1st respondent was

intolerable. The 1st respondent is working in a footwear shop

before and after their marriage. Now she is doing tailoring

work at her house and earning `5,000/- per month. Thus, she is

able enough to maintain herself. After considering the rival

contentions, the court below directed the revision petitioner to

pay maintenance allowance @ `3,000/- to the 1st respondent and

R.P(FC).7/14                      :3:



`2,000/- to the 2nd respondent. This order is under challenge in

this Revision Petition.

      3. Heard both sides. The short question that arises for

consideration in this Revision is, whether there is any illegality

or impropriety in the impugned order directing the revision

petitioner to pay maintenance allowance to the respondents at

the rate quantified by the Family Court?

      4.    The marriage and paternity of the 2nd respondent are

admitted.    It has come out in evidence that the revision

petitioner himself has filed O.P.No.630/2010 before the same

Family Court seeking divorce. It is sufficient to show that he

was not interested to live along with the 1st respondent.

Therefore, the question, whether there are sufficient grounds to

live separately without forfeiting the right of maintenance, pales

to insignificant. Certainly, the revision petitioner is liable to pay

maintenance allowance to the respondents. I concur with the

findings of the court below that the 1st respondent has the right

to live separately without forfeiting her right to get maintenance

allowance from the revision petitioner.

      5.    The next point that survives for consideration is,

whether the court below can be justified in fixing the quantum

of maintenance allowance? According to the 1st respondent, she

R.P(FC).7/14                      :4:



has no job or income and she is depending upon her parents.

Though the revision petitioner contended that the 1st

respondent was working in a footwear shop, before and after

the marriage, and she is doing tailoring work also at her house,

no evidence had been adduced to substantiate the said

contention.   The 1st respondent contended that the revision

petitioner is a driver by profession and earning `30,000/- per

month.

      6.    Per contra, the revision petitioner contended that he

is working as a cleaner in a private bus and getting    `200/- as

daily wages. No evidence except the oral evidence has been

adduced to show the exact salary of the revision petitioner.

The revision petitioner has no case that he is unhealthy or

disabled or incapacitated to do work so as to earn for his wife

and the only child. An able bodied man is presumed to be

having sufficient earning capacity so as to earn for his family.

Though he contended that he has to look after his aged parents,

no evidence was forthcoming to show that he is the only person

responsible to look after his mother. Moreover, the liability to

look after the parents cannot be taken as a ground to wriggle

out from the statutory liability to pay maintenance allowance to

wife and children. The specific contention of the 1st respondent

R.P(FC).7/14                      :5:



is that the revision petitioner is a driver by profession. Though

the revision petitioner claimed that he is a cleaner working in a

private bus, he was not ready to examine either the owner of the

bus or to produce any documentary evidence to substantiate the

said contention.     As rightly held by the court below, the

contention of the revision petitioner that he is getting only

`200/- per day     is unbelievable.    As of now, in Kerala, an

ordinary manual labourer is getting more than `500/- per day

and it is a matter of common knowledge, which does not require

any proof. As rightly held by the court below, those who are

ready to work will get work and they will get good wages also in

Kerala.

     7. Having regard to the standard of life of the respondents

and the living cost, I find that the amount quantified by the

court below as maintenance allowance per month is just and

proper and the determination of the quantum of maintenance

does not call for any interference under the revisional

jurisdiction.  Consequently, this Revision Petition will stand

dismissed.

     8.     The learned counsel for the revision petitioner

submits that the revision petitioner is suffering from acute

financial crisis caused by paucity of funds. He is unable to pay

R.P(FC).7/14                    :6:



the arrear in lump sum. The learned counsel sought for some

time to pay the arrear.      Having regard to the facts and

circumstances of the case, the revision petitioner is given four

months time to pay the arrear provided that half of the entire

arrear shall be paid within two months and the remaining half

shall be paid within the next two months, failing which this

instalment facility will automatically stand vacated and the

Family Court will be free to enforce realisation of the arrear in

lump sum.

                                                Sd/-
                                      (K.HARILAL, JUDGE)

okb.



