
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                              PRESENT:

               THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE V.K.MOHANAN
                                  &
              THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE A.HARIPRASAD

       THURSDAY, THE 5TH DAY OF JUNE 2014/15TH JYAISHTA, 1936

                      Mat.Appeal.No. 65 of 2006
                     --------------------------
    [AGAINST THE ORDER IN OP 653/2001 of FAMILY COURT,KOZHIKODE
                          DATED 08-07-2005]

APPELLANT(S)/PETITIONER:
------------------------

       KALLUMPURATH SHAHINA,
       AGED 22 YEARS, D/O ABDULLA, KAVILUMPARA AMSOM DESOM
       VADAKARA TALUK, KAVILUMPARA P.O.

       BY ADV. SRI.SUNNY MATHEW

RESPONDENTS(S)/RESPONDENTS:
----------------------------

          1. KOONAMVELLIKKANDIYIL SUBAIR
       AGED 30 YEARS, S/O. MOIDEEN, MEPPAYOOR AMSOM DESOM
       KOYILANDY TALUK.

          2. KOONAMVELLIKANDIYIL MOIDEEN,
       AGED 56 YEARS, S/O. AMMED, MEPPAYOOR AMSOM
       DESOM, KOYILANDY TALUK.

       R2  BY ADV. SRI.C.VATHSALAN
       R2  BY ADV. SRI.K.RAKESH ROSHAN


          THIS MATRIMONIAL APPEAL  HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD  ON

05-06-2014, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY DELIVERED THE FOLLOWING:


            V.K.MOHANAN & A.HARIPRASAD, JJ.
                  ----------------------------------------
                    Mat. Appeal No. 65 of 2006
                  ----------------------------------------
                 Dated this the 5th day of June, 2014

                          J U D G M E N T

Haiprasad,J:

           A divorced wife, aggrieved by the order passed by the


learned Judge of the Family Court, Kozhikode in O.P.No.653 of 2001,


has come up in appeal, challenging the legality and propriety of the


order.


      2. The facts lie in a narrow compass.             The appellant was

married by the first respondent on 11.9.1997 as per the customs

prevailing among Muslims. They resided as husband and wife in the

house of the first respondent and a child was born in the wedlock.

The appellant was presented with 80 sovereigns of gold ornaments at

the time of marriage. Immediately after the marriage, the respondents

started harassing the appellant demanding more dowry and gold

ornaments.   On two occasions, the respondents appropriated 42

Mat.Appeal No. 65 of 2006

                                 :-2-:

sovereigns and 23 sovereigns of gold respectively belonging to the

appellant.     Therefore, a total quantity of 65 sovereigns of gold

ornaments have been mis-appropriated by the respondents. Later, the

appellant was coerced to see that her father was paying Rupees One

lakh to the respondent, on the threat of divorcing her. Subsequently

also ten sovereigns of gold ornaments were appropriated by the

respondents. With these allegations, she has approached the court

below for return of 75 sovereigns of gold ornaments or its value and

Rupees One Lakh received by the respondents from the appellant.

     3. Second respondent contested the case by filing a counter

statement.

     4. The case of the appellant that she was presented with 80

sovereigns of gold ornaments at the time of marriage, is strongly

denied by the second respondent. He also denied the contention that

the respondents appropriated 75 sovereigns of gold belonging to the

appellant. The further case of the appellant that rupees One Lakh was

Mat.Appeal No. 65 of 2006

                                 :-3-:

received by the respondents by putting the appellant to threat of

divorce is also stoutly denied. The respondents would contend that

none of the claims in the petition are allowable.

      5. The court below examined three witnesses on the side of the

appellant and three witnesses on the side of the respondents. Ext.A1

series are the documents produced and marked on the side of the

appellant and Exts.B1 to B4 are the documents marked and relied on

by the respondents.

      6. We heard the learned counsel appearing for the appellant and

the respondents.

      7. Even though the marriage between the first respondent and

the appellant was challenged by the respondents, it is now seen that

the challenge no longer subsists for consideration.         Likewise,

paternity of the child is also not in dispute now. We are called up to

resolve the issue regarding the claim made by the appellant for return

of either 75 sovereigns of gold ornaments or its value and Rupees One

Mat.Appeal No. 65 of 2006

                                :-4-:

lakh as dowry taken by the respondents.

     8. PW1 is the appellant. When cross-examined, she stated that

75 sovereigns of gold ornaments were handed over to the

respondents. But she was not able to clearly state the details of the

ornaments. It has come out in evidence through PW1 that some gold

ornaments were made by PW3 and some other ornaments were

purchased from Dinesh Jewellery, Thottippalam. As observed by the

learned trial Judge, we also find no document to show that the gold

ornaments were purchased from 'Dinesh Jewellery.         In order to

support the case of PW1, PW3 was examined. He deposed that he is a

goldsmith by profession and conducting a jewellery by name Likkesh

Jewellery, Thottippalam. Ext.A1 series are the documents proved

through this witness. Ext.A1 series are the orders issued by Likkesh

Jewellery, Thottippalam. Three receipts in Ext.A1 series would show

that a total quantity of 605 gms. of gold were given to PW3 for

making ornaments. The court below discarded this evidence, by

Mat.Appeal No. 65 of 2006

                                  :-5-:

finding that it is not acceptable.       The learned counsel for the

respondents submitted that these documents were produced long after

the examination of PW1.         There is no mention in the petition

regarding making of gold ornaments in Likesh Jewellery. Further,

three work orders in Ext.A1 are dated 5.8.1997, 18.8.1997 and

23.8.1997. It is seen from these documents that an endorsement is

made as 'paid on 5.8.1997'. If actually gold was entrusted only on

18.8.1997 and 23.8.1997,        it is not clear as to why or how the

endorsement 'paid on 5.8.1997' could be made even before

entrustment of the gold.    It is pertinent to note that these documents

come up for the first time long after examination of PW1. The learned

counsel for the respondent submitted that if actually gold ornaments

were made by PW3, as per Ext.A1 series, the receipt/work order

would have been cancelled when the ornaments were handed over to

PW1 or her father. Besides this, PW3 has also been cited much after

examining PW1. Therefore, the court below is perfectly justified in

Mat.Appeal No. 65 of 2006

                                :-6-:

finding that Ext.A1 series cannot be believed.

     9.     If we eschew        Ext.A1 series of documents from

consideration, then there is only the unconvincing and shaky evidence

of PW1 remaining. For the above mentioned reasons, we are unable

to accept the testimony of PW3 also. Therefore, we find that the court

below rightly rejected the claim of the appellant regarding the return

of 75 sovereigns of gold ornaments or its value.

     10. The next contention is regarding the return of Rupees One

lakh paid by the father of PW1 in the presence of PW2 to the second

respondent.     PW1 has asserted that when she was staying in her

matrimonial house, the first respondent threatened that he will divorce

her unless she paid rupees One lakh for meeting the marriage expenses

of his sister. The duress exerted by the first respondent prompted the

appellant to contact PW2 and through him, her father, who was

working abroad at that time. These aspects have been clearly deposed

by Pws.1 and 2. In spite of strict cross-examination on these two

Mat.Appeal No. 65 of 2006

                                  :-7-:

witnesses, we do not find any reason to hold that the case of the

appellant, i.e., rupees One Lakh was paid to the respondents under the

above circumstances has been made unbelievable. Even though RW1

in his oral evidence controverted the contention of the appellant, we

are satisfied that the evidence adduced by the appellant regarding this

aspect is credible and acceptable. Therefore, to this extent, we find

that the court below erred in dismissing the application.

      11. To sum up, we find that the claim made by the appellant for

return of 75 sovereigns of gold ornaments or its value is not

sustainable, whereas the claim for return of Rupees One Lakh paid by

the father of the appellant to the respondents is to be allowed.

      In the result, this appeal is partly allowed. The appellant is

allowed to recover Rupees One Lakh from the person as well as the

Mat.Appeal No. 65 of 2006

                                 :-8-:

properties of the respondents.      The appellant is entitled to claim

proportionate cost of the proceedings through out.




                                                   Sd/-

                                            V.K.MOHANAN,
                                                   Judge




                                                  Sd/-

                                            A.HARIPRASAD,
                                                    Judge.

MBS/


            The last sentence of the judgment dated 5.6.2014 is deleted
and substituted by the following "There will be no order as to costs",
vide order dated 29/08/2014 in Mat.Appl.65/2006.

                                                       Sd/-
                                                  Registrar (Judicial)

Mat.Appeal No. 65 of 2006

                             :-9-:



