
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                     PRESENT:

                     THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE ALEXANDER THOMAS

                FRIDAY,THE 31ST DAY OF OCTOBER 2014/9TH KARTHIKA, 1936

                                          Bail Appl..No. 7572 of 2014
                                          --------------------------------------

             CRIME NO. 1309/2014 OF VELLAMUNDA POLICE STATION , KANNUR
                                                      -------------


PETITIONER(S)/ACCUSED A1:
------------------------------------------

            SUBHASH, AGED 35 YEARS,
            S/O NARAYANAN, PARIVIL MELATHIL VEEDU
            KULAKKADA EAST P.O, KULAKKADA, KOTTARAKKARA TALUK,
            KOLLAM DISTRICT.

            BY ADV. SRI.K.V.ANIL KUMAR


RESPONDENT(S)/COMPLAINANT:
-----------------------------------------------

            STATE OF KERALA,
            REPRESENTED BY THE PUBLIC PROSECUTOR,
            HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM 682031.

            BY GOVERNMENT PLEADER SMT.R.REMA


            THIS BAIL APPLICATION HAVING COME UP FOR ADMISSION ON 31-10-2014,
            THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE FOLLOWING:


PJ


                       ALEXANDER THOMAS, J.
                   ==================
                        B.A.No. 7572 of 2014
                   ==================
            Dated this the 31st day of October, 2014
                              O R D E R

      The petitioner herein is accused No.1 in crime No.1309/2014

of Puthoor Police Station, Kollam district. The crime has been

registered for offences punishable under Sections 308, 313, 325,

498A read with Section 34 of the IPC, at the instance of the

compliant of the petitioner's wife, Smt.Sobha, before the Judicial

First Class Magistrate's Court-I, Kottarakara. The petitioner, who is

accused No.1, is the husband of the defacto complainant and A2,

A3 and A4 are the father, mother and sister respectively of the

petitioner herein. The gist of the allegations is that after the

marriage between the parties, the petitioner and other accused

misused the defacto complainant's 38.5 sovereigns of gold

ornaments and Rs.2 lakhs and committed mental and physical

torture on her demanding more money and that on 10.10.2009

accused Nos.2 and 4 assaulted the defacto complainant demanding

more money and alleged that without the consent the defacto

BA 7572/14                       - : 2 :-

complainant, accused Nos.2 to 4 had committed forceful

miscarriage on her and that on 25.12.2012, the 2nd accused (father

of the petitioner) pushed the defacto complainant and she fell on a

cup-board and sustained head injury and on 8.9.2014, she was

ousted from the matrimonial home demanding more dowry. It is the

case of the petitioner that the defacto complainant is a mentally ill

person and this fact was suppressed at the time of marriage and she

is a patient of schizophrenia and is undergoing treatment and

occasionally she becomes violent and cause harm to herself and

others and she has beaten the petitioner and his family members.

The child born out of the wedlock is also mentally retarded and the

defacto complainant's mother is a nurse and she suppressed the

disease of the child and that none of the accused has committed

any offences as alleged. Sri.K.V.Anil Kumar, the learned counsel for

the petitioner would submit that it is clearly admitted by the defacto

complainant herein in paragraph No.3 of the petition filed under

Section 156(3) Cr.P.C. before the learned Magistrate, which has

triggered the registration of the instant crime, that, to a small

extent, she is a mentally ill person and he would further submit that

Annexure A2 is the prescriptions of psychiatrist medicines, which

BA 7572/14                        - : 3 :-

have been taken by the defacto complainant. It is further submitted

that the only offence alleged as against the petitioner in the

aforementioned crime is one under Section 498A and the other

offences alleged are directed solely against accused Nos.2 to 4 and

that accused No.2, who is the father of the petitioner, subsequently

committed suicide. In these circumstances, the learned counsel for

the petitioner would pray that the plea of pre-arrest bail may be

allowed in favour of the petitioner after imposing conditions that

may be deemed necessary by this Court.

      2.   The learned Public Prosecutor would fairly submit that

the only non-bailable offence alleged against the petitioner by the

defacto complainant herein in this crime is the one under Section

498A and that the other offences alleged are only as against

accused No.2 to 4. The Prosecutor would also fairly submit that

paragraph 4 of the defacto complainant's petition as stated above,

contains an admission as stated above. Accordingly, it is submitted

that in case this Court is inclined to allow the plea of pre-arrest bail,

then the same may be hedged with necessary conditions so as to

protect the bonafide interests of the prosecution.

      3.   Having regard to the facts and circumstances involved in

BA 7572/14                              - : 4 :-

this case and in the light of the submissions made by the learned

counsel for the petitioner and the learned Public Prosecutor, I am

inclined to take the view that this application for anticipatory bail

can be granted, subject to necessary conditions and safeguards.

      4.     In the result, there will be a direction that in the event of

the arrest of the petitioner herein in connection with the above said

crime, he shall be released on bail on his executing a bond for

Rs. 35,000/- (rupees thirty five thousand only) with two solvent

sureties each for the like amount to the satisfaction of the

investigating officer in the above crime and subject to the following

conditions:

(i)      The petitioner shall surrender his passport, if any, before the
         jurisdictional Magistrate concerned within 3 days from the execution of
         the bail bond before the Investigating Officer and if the petitioner is not a
         holder of passport, then he shall file an affidavit to that effect in the said
         court. If the petitioner requires his passport in connection with his travel
         abroad, then he is free to approach the court below concerned for the
         release of the same and for necessary permission in that regard. In case
         such an application is filed, the trial court or the jurisdictional Magistrate
         concerned, as the case may be, is free to consider the same on merits
         and to pass appropriate orders thereon, taking necessary guidance from
         the principles laid down in the decision of this Court in the case Asok
         Kumar      v. State of Kerala,          reported in 2009 (2) KLT 712,
         notwithstanding the aforementioned conditions imposed by this Court.

(ii)     The petitioner shall report before the Investigating Officer in the above
         said crime between 10 a.m. and 11 a.m. on every alternate Sundays.

(iii)    The petitioner shall not involve in any criminal offence of similar        or
         graver in nature.

(iv)     The petitioner shall co-operate with the investigation and report before
         the investigating officer as and when required.

BA 7572/14                            - : 5 :-


(v)      The petitioner shall not influence the witnesses or shall not tamper or
         attempt to tamper evidence in any manner whatsoever.

      If the petitioner violates any of the conditions as ordered

above, then the bail granted to him is liable to be cancelled.

      With the above said directions, the Application stands finally

disposed of.


                                                             Sd/-
sdk+                                          ALEXANDER THOMAS, JUDGE

          ///True copy///



                                 P.S. to Judge



