
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                      PRESENT:

                     THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE ALEXANDER THOMAS

               FRIDAY, THE 24TH DAY OF OCTOBER 2014/2ND KARTHIKA, 1936

                                            Crl.MC.No. 6005 of 2014
                                            -----------------------------------

    C.C.NO.803/2011 OF JUDICIAL FIRST CLASS MAGISTRATE COURT-III,THRISSUR

                 CRIME NO. 963/2011 OF PEECHI POLICE STATION , THRISSUR
                                                   --------------------

PETITIONER(S) / ACCUSED AND THE DEFACTO COMPLAINANT :
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

          1. SHAJAHAN, AGED 40 YEARS,
             S/O.UMMERKUTTY, CHAVADIPARAMBIL HOUSE,
             PANDIPARAMBU DESOM, SURYA NAGAR, VELLANIKARA,
             THRISSUR.

          2. AYISHA, AGED 68 YEARS,
              W/O.UMMERKUTTY, CHAVADIPARAMBIL HOUSE,
              PANDIPARAMBU DESOM, SURYA NAGAR, VELLANIKARA,
             THRISSUR.

          3. BUSHARA,
              W/O.SHAJAHAN, CHAVADIPARAMBIL HOUSE,
              PANDIPARAMBU DESOM, SURYA NAGAR, VELLANIKARA,
             THRISSUR.

             BY ADV. SRI.G.SREEKUMAR (CHELUR)

RESPONDENT(S) / STATE OF KERALA :
---------------------------------------------------------

            THE STATE OF KERALA,
            REPRESENTED BY THE SUB INSPECTOR OF POLICE,
            PEECHI POLICE STATION,
            THRISSUR THROUGH THE PUBLIC PROSECUTOR,
            HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM-682 031.

             BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SRI.R.GITHESH

            THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD
            ON 24-10-2014, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE FOLLOWING:


Msd.

Crl.MC.No. 6005 of 2014

                                   APPENDIX


PETITIONER(S)' ANNEXURES :


ANNEXURE I :         A TRUE COPY OF THE F.I.R IN CRIME NO.963 OF 2011 OF
                     THE PEECHI POLICE STATION DATED 09.10.2011.

ANNEXURE II:         A TRUE COPY OF THE FINAL REPORT SUBMITTED BY
                     THE PEECHI POLICE, BEFORE THE J.F.C.M-III, THRISSUR
                     DATED 07.11.2011.

RESPONDENT(S)' ANNEXURES :

                                  NIL

                                                     //TRUE COPY//


                                                     P.S.TO JUDGE.

Msd.


                     ALEXANDER THOMAS, J.
                    -----------------------------
                    Crl.M.C.No.6005 Of 2014
                  ---------------------------------
           Dated this the 24th day of October, 2014.

                             O R D E R



      The prayer in the above captioned Criminal Miscellaneous

Case (Crl.M.C) is to quash the impugned criminal proceedings as

per Annexure-II Final Report/Charge Sheet in impugned

Annexure-I FIR in Crime No.963/2011 of Peechi Police Station

and all further proceedings arising therefrom. The 1st petitioner

is the husband of the 3rd petitioner. Based on the complaint of

the 3rd petitioner (wife), the impugned Annexure-I FIR in Crime

No.963/2011 of Peechi Police Station was registered for offence

under Section 498A. The 1st petitioner and 2nd petitioner are the

accused Nos.1 & 2          in that crime.       Pursuant to police

investigation, impugned Annexure-II Final Report/Charge Sheet

was filed pertaining to the impugned Annexure-I FIR in the

aforementioned     crime.     This   led   to   the  institution of

C.C.No.803/2011 on the file of the Judicial First Class Magistrate

Court-III, Thrissur. It is stated that all the issues between the

petitioners have been amicably settled and 1st petitioner and 3rd

petitioner are now living together as husband and wife and so the

3rd petitioner does not want to continue the impugned

proceedings any further and then there is no purpose with the

                                ::2::

Crl.M.C.No.6005 Of 2014

proceedings as no conviction is possible and that the 3rd

petitioner leads a happy married life with the 1st petitioner

(husband) now and she is terminating the impugned criminal

proceedings that the disputes is essentially personal disputes

within the matrimonial home and that termination of the

impugned criminal proceedings does not affect the interest of the

State and it is prayed that the impugned criminal proceedings

pursuant to Annexure-I & II may be quashed.           It is in the

background of these facts and circumstances that the above said

Crl.M.C has been filed.

      2.   The Crl.M.C. has been admitted and the learned Public

Prosecutor has taken notice for the respondent-State of Kerala.

      3.   Heard Sri.Sreekumar G. (Chelur), learned counsel for

the petitioners and the learned Public Prosecutor appearing for

the respondent-State of Kerala.

      4.   The learned counsel for the petitioners has submitted

that during the pendency of the aforementioned criminal

proceedings, the matter has been settled amicably between the

parties, and that the continuation of the proceedings in the above

case/crime will cause miscarriage of justice to both parties as the

real disputants to the controversy have arrived at an amicable

settlement and any further continuation of the criminal

                                 ::3::

Crl.M.C.No.6005 Of 2014

proceedings will amount to sheer wastage of time and money

and would unnecessarily strain the judicial, administrative and

financial resources of the State.

      5.    Sri.Sreekumar G. (Chelur), learned counsel appearing

for the 3rd petitioner (defacto complainant) has submitted, on the

basis of the specific instructions furnished by the 3rd petitioner,

that the 3rd petitioner has amicably settled the disputes with the

petitioners 1 & 2 as stated above and that she has no objection

in the quashment of the impugned criminal proceedings and that

the complainant/victim/injured does not intend to proceed any

further against the petitioners 1 & 2 as she has no grievance

against them and that she will not raise any dispute/complaint in

future if the prayer for quashing the impugned criminal

proceedings is allowed.

      6.    The learned Public Prosecutor also was heard, who

also has not raised any serious objections and submitted that the

court may consider the prayer in this case in the light of the law

well settled by the Apex Court in that regard.

      7.    After having carefully considered the submissions of

the parties and after having perused the pleadings as well as the

documents and materials placed in this matter, it can be seen

that the offences alleged are more or less personal in nature and

                                  ::4::

Crl.M.C.No.6005 Of 2014

not much element of public interest is involved.          The crucial

aspect of the matter is that though such offences are involved,

the real disputants to the controversy, which has led to the

impugned criminal proceedings, have actually arrived at an

amicable settlement of the matter. From the submissions made

by the learned counsel for the 3rd petitioner, it is clear to the

Court that the injured/victim/defacto complainant has no further

grievance against the petitioners 1 & 2/accused in the light of the

settlement arrived at by them. In this connection, it is relevant

to note the decision of the Apex Court in the case between Gian

Singh v. State of Punjab reported in 2013 (1) SCC (Cri) 160,

para 61 = (2012) 10 SCC 303 = 2012(4) KLT 108(SC), wherein

the Supreme Court has held as follows in para 61 thereof [ See

SCC (Cri)]:

            "61. The position that emerges from the above
      discussion can be summarised thus: the power of the
      High Court in quashing a criminal proceeding or FIR or
      complaint in exercise of its inherent jurisdiction is
      distinct and different from the power given to a criminal
      court for compounding the offences under S.320 of the
      Code.    Inherent power is of wide plenitude with no
      statutory limitation but it has to be exercised in accord
      with the guideline engrafted in such power viz;(i) to
      secure the ends of justice or (ii) to prevent abuse of
      the process of any Court.        In what cases power to
      quash the criminal proceeding or complaint or F.I.R.
      may be exercised where the offender and victim have
      settled their dispute would depend on the facts and
      circumstances of each case and no category can be
      prescribed..

                                   ::5::

Crl.M.C.No.6005 Of 2014

It is further held as follows:-

       "......... But the criminal cases having overwhelmingly
       and pre-dominatingly civil flavour stand on different
       footing for the purposes of quashing, particularly the
       offences arising from commercial, financial, mercantile,
       civil, partnership or such like transactions or the
       offences arising out of matrimony relating to dowry
       etc. or the family disputes where the wrong is basically
       private or personal in nature and the parties have
       resolved their entire dispute. In this category of cases,
       High Court may quash criminal proceedings if in its
       view, because of the compromise between the offender
       and victim, the possibility of conviction is remote and
       bleak and continuation of criminal case would put
       accused to great oppression and prejudice and
       extreme injustice would be caused to him by not
       quashing the criminal case despite full and complete
       settlement and compromise with the victim........"

Further, in the case Jitendra Raghuvanshi and Others v.

Babita Raghuvanshi and another reported in (2013) 4 SCC

58 [see 2013 (1) KLD 817 (SC)], the Apex Court has held as

follows:-

              "8. It is not in dispute that matrimonial disputes
       have been on considerable increase in recent times
       resulting in filing of complaints under Sections 498A
       and 406 of I.P.C. not only against the husband but also
       against the relatives of the husband. The question is
       when such matters are resolved either by the wife
       agreeing to rejoin the matrimonial home or by mutual
       settlement of other pending disputes for which both
       the sides approached the High Court and jointly prayed
       for quashing of the criminal proceedings or the FIR or
       complaint by the wife under Sections 498A and 406 of
       I.P.C., whether the prayer can be declined on the sole
       ground that since the offences are non-compoundable
       under Section 320         of the Code, it would be
       impermissible for the court to quash the criminal
       proceedings or FIR or complaint.

                                  ::6::

Crl.M.C.No.6005 Of 2014

            9. It is not in dispute that in the case on hand
      subsequent to the filing of the criminal complaint under
      Sections 498A and 406 of IPC and Sections 3 and 4 of
      the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961, with the help and
      intervention of family members, friends and well-
      wishers, the parties concerned have amicably settled
      their   differences   and   executed    a   compromise/
      settlement. Pursuant thereto, the appellants filed the
      said compromise before the Trial Court with a request
      to place the same on record and to drop the criminal
      proceedings against the appellants herein. It is also
      not in dispute that in additional to the mutual
      settlement arrived at by the parties, respondent/-wife
      has also filed an affidavit stating that she did not wish
      to pursue the criminal proceedings against the
      appellants and fully supported the contents of the
      settlement deed. It is the grievance of the appellants
      that no only the Trial Court rejected such prayer of the
      parties but also the High Court failed toe exercise its
      jurisdiction under Section 482 of the Code only on the
      ground that the criminal proceedings relate to the
      offences punishable under Sections 498A and 406 of
      IPC which are non-compoundable in nature.
            15. In our view, it is the duty of the Courts
      to encourage genuine settlements of matrimonial
      disputes, particularly, when the same are on
      considerable increase.       Even if the offences are
      non-compoundable, if they relate to matrimonial
      disputes and the Court is satisfied that the parties
      have settled the same amicably and without any
      pressure, we hold that for the purpose of securing
      ends of justice, Section 320 of the Code would not
      be a bar to the exercise of power of quashing of
      FIR,    complaint    or    the   subsequent     criminal
      proceedings.
            16.      There has been an outburst of
      matrimonial disputes in recent times.                The
      institution of marriage occupies an important place
      and it has an important role to play in the society.
      Therefore, every effort should be made in the
      interest of the individuals in order to enable them
      to settle down in life and live peacefully. If the
      parties ponder over their defaults and terminate

                                ::7::

Crl.M.C.No.6005 Of 2014

      their disputes amicably by mutual agreement
      instead of fighting it out in a Court of law, in order
      to do complete justice in the matrimonial matters,
      the Courts should be less hesitant in exercising its
      extraordinary jurisdiction. It is trite to state that
      the power under Section 482 should be exercised
      sparingly and with circumspection only when the
      Court is convinced, on the basis of material on
      record, that allowing the proceedings to continue
      would be an abuse of the process of the Court or
      that   the   ends    of  justice  require   that   the
      proceedings ought to be quashed."

      8.    Considering the facts and circumstances of this case,

it is seen further that the impugned criminal proceedings have

arisen consequent to the matrimonial disputes between the

disputants and the disputes have been settled amicably between

the parties. Accordingly, this Court is inclined to hold that in the

light of the facts and circumstances involved in the present case

and particularly in view of the settlement arrived at between the

parties, the principles laid down in the aforementioned decisions

of the Apex Court will be squarely applicable in the present case.

Moreover, since the real disputants to the controversy have

amicably settled the disputes, which led to these impugned

criminal proceedings, it is also the duty of the court to promote

such settlement, instead of compelling the parties to go on with

the dispute. It is also pertinent to note that since the matter is

settled out of court, in the event of proceeding with the trial,

                                ::8::

Crl.M.C.No.6005 Of 2014

there may not be any fruitful prosecution and the chances of

conviction of the accused is rather negligible and therefore, the

net result of continuance of criminal proceedings would be sheer

waste of judicial time rather meaningless and therefore would

amount to abuse of the process of court proceedings in the larger

sense. Hence following decisions of the Apex Court cited supra,

this Court is inclined to hold that the Crl.M.C. can be allowed by

granting the prayers sought for.

      In the result, Crl.M.C is allowed and the impugned

Annexure-II Final Report/Charge Sheet in impugned Annexure-I

FIR in Crime No.963/2011 of Peechi Police Station which has led

to institution of C.C.No.803/2011 on the file of the Judicial First

Class Magistrate Court-III, Thrissur and all further proceedings

arising therefrom stand quashed.      The petitioners 1 & 2 shall

produce certified copies of this order before the court below

concerned as well as before the Station House Officer concerned.




                                            ALEXANDER THOMAS,
                                                    Judge.

bkn/-



