
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                          PRESENT:

          THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE V.K.MOHANAN
                              &
           THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE K.HARILAL

  MONDAY, THE 8TH DAY OF DECEMBER 2014/17TH AGRAHAYANA, 1936

              Mat.Appeal.No. 111 of 2008 (A)
              -------------------------------


AGAINST THE ORDER      IN OP 829/2003 of FAMILY COURT,
THRISSUR DATED 09-10-2007.

APPELLANT(S)/APPELLANT/RESPONDENT:
-----------------------------------

       P.L.SHAJU, S/O. PERUMBILLY LONAPPAN,
       KARUVANNUR DESOM, PORATHISSERY VILLAGE,
       MUKUNDAPURAM TALUK, THRISSUR DISTRICT.

       BY ADV. SRI.N.P.SAMUEL

RESPONDENT(S)/PETITIONER:
-------------------------

       ANITHA, D/O. CHEERAKATHIL MATHAI,
       P.O.NALUKETTU, KONNOOR VILLAGE, THRISSUR DISTRICT,
       PIN-680 308.

       R - BY ADV. SRI.N.SUBRAMANIAM
           BY ADV. SRI.M.S.NARAYANAN
           BY ADV. SRI.P.T.GIRIJAN
           BY ADV. SMT.USHA NARAYANAN
           BY ADV. SMT.THUSHARA JAMES[CONCILIATOR]

    THIS MATRIMONIAL APPEAL      HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD
ON  30-10-2014,    THE COURT ON 08-12-2014 DELIVERED THE
FOLLOWING:


                                                          'C.R.'


          V.K. MOHANAN & K. HARILAL, JJ.
        ------------------------------------------------------
              Mat. Appeal No. 111 of 2008-A
        ------------------------------------------------------
          Dated this the 8th day of December, 2014

                          JUDGMENT

Harilal J.

    This appeal is directed against the judgment and

decree passed in O.P.No.829/2003 on the files of the

Family Court, Thrissur.              The appellant and the

respondent are the husband and wife respectively.

The above O.P. was filed by the respondent herein

under Sec.10 of the Family Courts Act praying for a

declaration that the Fixed Deposit amount in the

Service Co-operative Bank, Karuvannur, which stands

in the joint names of the appellant and the respondent

exclusively belongs to the respondent and directing

the said Bank to pay Rs.3,20,000/- together with

interest to the respondent and also granting a decree

Mat. Appeal No. 111 of 2008        -: 2 :-

for realising Rs.74,000/- from the appellant.

     2. The marriage between the parties was

solemnized            on    19/1/2000     at  Cherupuzhpam

Devalayam, Thirumudikunnu, as per religious             rites

and ceremony and they lived as husband and wife

upto 2003.            Thereafter, due to the discordency in

matrimony, the relationship got strained and they are

living      separately.      The    respondent   had    filed

O.S.No.529/2003 before the same court seeking

divorce under Sec.10(vii) and (x) of the Divorce Act on

the ground that the respondent had wilfully refused to

consummate the marriage and the marriage had,

therefore, not been consummated and the non-

consummation of the marriage amounted to an act of

cruelty to her. Both cases were tried jointly. After trial

the court below dismissed the O.P.No.529/2003,

decreed O.P.No.829/2003 filed by the respondent in

part and dismissed the counter claim filed by the

appellant. This appeal is filed challenging the decree

and the judgment passed in                  O.P.No.829/2003,

Mat. Appeal No. 111 of 2008        -: 3 :-

decreeing the Original Petition in part and dismissing

the counter claim.

     3. The brief facts of the case is given below: Prior

to the marriage, the respondent's parents deposited

Rs.3,00,000/- in the Catholic Syrian Bank, Chalakudy

Branch and also paid Rs.2,00,000/- in cash for

purchasing the gold ornaments.               Gold ornaments

were purchased for a sum of Rs.1,47,000/- and

remaining Rs.53,000/- was in the possession of the

appellant.            1 = years after      the marriage, the

appellant compelled her to withdraw the fixed deposit

amount in the Catholic Syrian Bank and to transfer the

account to the Co-operative Bank, Chalakkdy.            She

had withdrawn the Fixed Deposit of Rs.3,41,000/-,

including        the     interest and     out of the  same,

Rs.3,20,000/- was again deposited in the joint names

of the appellant and the respondent for a period of 3

years with a direction to transfer the interest to the

account of the appellant.          For the last one year the

respondent is residing with her parents.          The fixed

Mat. Appeal No. 111 of 2008        -: 4 :-

deposit amount exclusively belongs to the respondent,

though it stands in the joint names of the appellant

and the respondent. She is also entitled to recover

Rs.53,000/-, being the balance amount in the

possession of the appellant, after purchasing the gold

ornaments.            Apart from that, she is also entitled to

get Rs.21,000/- spent by the appellant on withdrawal

of the F.D. amount from the Catholic Syrian Bank.

She prayed for a declaration that the fixed deposit

amount in the Service Co-operative Bank, Karuvannur,

stands in the joint names of the appellant and the

respondent exclusively belongs to the respondent and

directing the appellant to pay Rs.3,20,000/- together

with interest. She also prayed for granting decree for

payment of Rs.74,000/-.

     4. The appellant filed a counter statement

contending as follows:          The suit is not maintainable.

The amount deposited in the Catholic Syrian Bank,

Chalakkudy Branch, jointly belongs to the appellant

and the respondent.            The allegation that the entire

Mat. Appeal No. 111 of 2008       -: 5 :-

amount exclusively belongs to the respondent is

incorrect.        The further allegation that the respondent

and her father paid Rs.2,00,000/- for purchasing gold

ornaments is also incorrect.           He does not know the

price of the ornaments purchased.             He denied the

allegation         that    he  received   Rs.2,00,000/-   for

purchasing ornaments.                Ornaments had been

purchased by the respondent herself and the

appellant was made to believe that they have

purchased ornaments to the tune of Rs.2,00,000/-.

The averment regarding trust and entrustment is

denied.        The fixed deposit amount from the Catholic

Syrian Bank was withdrawn at the instance of the

respondent.           The balance amount of Rs.21,000/- was

given to the respondent while she was admitted to a

computer course and for purchasing books.            He filed

O.P.No.529/2003 for divorce and all the averments

made in O.P.N.529/2003 are true and correct. In fact,

he has given 39.71 grams of thali chain worth

Rs.18,723/- to the respondent at the time of marriage.

Mat. Appeal No. 111 of 2008     -: 6 :-

Thereafter, at her instance, the thali chain was

exchanged. That thali chain weighing 51.600 grams

and another chain of 52.300 grams, which had been

purchased by the             appellant and given to the

respondent are in her possession.        Besides, he had

spent Rs.10,000/- for wedding clothings at the time of

marriage. Later, he had given dresses to the tune of

Rs.25,000/- in addition. He had given two ear-rings

weighing 7.44 grams and a jewel ring worth Rs.3,750/-

and a wrist watch also. The appellant filed a counter

claim for return of the above ornaments or Rs.94,039/-

as the equal value thereof. He prayed for dismissal of

the O.P. and allowing the counter claim.

     5. In the joint trial, P.Ws.1 and 2 were examined

and Exts.A1 to A13 were marked for the appellant.

R.Ws.1 to 3 were examined and Exts.B1 to B6 were

marked for the respondent.

     6. We have heard Sri. Dilip J. Akkara, the learned

counsel for the appellant and Sri. M.S. Narayanan, the

learned counsel for the respondent.         The learned

Mat. Appeal No. 111 of 2008        -: 7 :-

counsel       for the       appellant    advanced arguments

challenging the findings whereby the Original Petition

was allowed in part and rejecting the counter claim

filed by the respondent. The learned counsel mainly

canvassed two points before us. Firstly, according to

him, the court below has seriously erred in finding

that the amount deposited in the joint account of the

appellant and the respondent as Fixed Deposit

belongs exclusively to the respondent. By depositing

the money in joint account of more than one person,

each person would get legal title proportionately over

the amount deposited.            Each person would acquire

proportionate title over the amount and after the

withdrawal each person is entitled to realise his

proportionate share. As per banking law and practice

also, the Fixed Deposit amount standing in the names

of two persons belongs to both and each can claim

only half of the amount. But the court below has not

adverted to the              above principle and also the

circumstances under which the said amount was

Mat. Appeal No. 111 of 2008     -: 8 :-

deposited in the joint names.           The circumstances

clearly prove that the Fixed Deposit was made by the

father of the respondent as a gift for both. Secondly,

the receipt of four items of gold ornaments given by

the appellant to the respondent had been admitted by

the respondent in her evidence. But, the court below

went wrong by rejecting the claim of the said admitted

ornaments or its value without any reasoning.

     7.       Per contra, the learned counsel for the

respondent          advanced  arguments   to   justify the

reasonings whereby the court below allowed the

Original Petition in part and dismissing the counter

claim filed by the appellant. According to the learned

counsel for the respondent, the appellant has

successfully proved the sources of said Fixed Deposit

by adducing, both oral and documentary, evidence.

Exts.B4 to B6 Passbooks unambiguously show that the

amount in the Fixed Deposit absolutely belonged to

the father of the respondent and the same was given

to his daughter only as a gift at the eve of her

Mat. Appeal No. 111 of 2008         -: 9 :-

marriage.           In view of Exts.B4 to B6 and evidence

given by R.W.3, the court below can be justified in

decreeing the Original Petition in part and dismissing

the counter claim.

     8. In view of the legal issue mooted before us by

the respective counsel, the questions to be decided

are: (i) Whether the deposit in Bank in the               joint

account of more than one person would confer legal

title proportionately to each person over the money

deposited.          (ii) Will the parties in the joint account

acquire proportionate title by the act of deposit in the

joint account?             Is one of the parties of the joint

account precluded from establishing his absolute and

exclusive legal title over such deposit? Though the

learned        counsel      for  the    appellant vehemently

contended that by the act of deposit of money in the

joint account of more than one person each person

would acquire legal title proportionately over such

deposit and placed reliance on banking laws and

practice, neither any banking law nor judicial authority

Mat. Appeal No. 111 of 2008       -: 10 :-

was placed before us to convince that point. But the

learned          counsel     for  the      respondent    cited

Vasanthakumari v. Omanakuttan Nair [2009 (2) KHC

1049] and contended that banking laws and practice

govern the mode of withdrawal or discharge of the

such amount from the joint account only and such

rules and guidelines do not confer legal                  title

proportionately to the depositors in the joint account.

     9. We have gone through the Banking Regulation

Act and Rules made thereunder and S.N. Gupta's

Banking Law and Practice. But we could not find out

any     provision         which would     confer  legal   title

proportionately to the joint depositors as contended

by the learned counsel for the appellant.          It is to be

borne in mind that the right to withdraw money from

the joint account and the right to title over the money

deposited in such account are entirely different and

distinct. In our view, the main purpose of depositing

money in bank is to keep it safely with the benefit of

interest and the bank has no authority to confer legal

Mat. Appeal No. 111 of 2008       -: 11 :-

title proportionately over the money to the joint

depositors. The reasons or circumstances condusive

to make such deposit in the joint account may be

various and different. Banking rules and guidelines of

the Reserve Bank determines the rights regulating the

mode of operation and withdrawal of money from such

account and also discharge of that account             on

maturity and nothing more than that.            No doubt,

money deposited in the joint account can be

withdrawn               or account can be discharged in

accordance with banking laws practice, guidelines of

the Reserve Bank, agreement entered into between

the joint depositors and with the bank at the time of

deposit. Those laws, rules or guidelines or agreement

do not prevent one of the joint depositors from

establishing his absolute and exclusive title over the

money which is pending in joint account in accordance

with the               general law and rules governing the

transfer of movable property and declaration of right

and title etc., before the civil court.      Merely on the

Mat. Appeal No. 111 of 2008        -: 12 :-

reason that the money was deposited in the joint

account of two or more persons, one who has

contributed nothing to that deposit or who has no

prior right over any portion of that amount prior to

that deposit cannot claim that by the act of deposit in

the     joint      account,    he    acquired   legal  title

proportionately           over such deposit.  For declaring

absolute or proportionate title over the money in such

joint account, the sources of fund,           percentage of

contribution to that fund, the manner in which that

fund accumulated or raised prior to the deposit, the

mode of acquisition of title over the said amount

before the deposit are decisive, determinative and

depends upon the same, inter alia.

     10. To sum up, the act of deposit of money in the

joint account in the Bank does not confer         legal title

proportionately over the money to the joint account

holders.           Such account holders will not acquire

proportionate title over the money merely by way of

such deposit or the nature of account.          One of the

Mat. Appeal No. 111 of 2008         -: 13 :-

parties of the joint account is at liberty to establish

his absolute and exclusive or proportionate title over

the money pending in joint account, before the civil

court.

     11. We have meticulously considered the proposition

laid   down        in    the decision    in  Vasanthakumari v.

Omanakuttan Nair [2009 (2) KHC 1049].                The above

proposition was rendered while considering the legal effect

of Sec.45 of the Transfer of Property Act which deals with

the joint transfer of immovable property for consideration.

There, the Court held that where consideration came

exclusively from the fund of one of the two joint acquirers

with the other contributing nothing for purchase of

immovable property, notwithstanding the fact that name of

one of them is included in the document for whatever

purpose, such person cannot be held to acquire any right.

Even though the proposition relates to acquisition of

immovable property, we are of the opinion that the

Mat. Appeal No. 111 of 2008        -: 14 :-

principle underlying in the above proposition can be applied

to the case where money is deposited in the joint account,

for the interest of justice and equity also.

      12.       In the light of the legal position settled

above, the points to be considered in the instant case

are: (i) Whether the respondent has succeeded in

proving that the amount deposited in the bank in the

joint account absolutely and exclusively belongs to her

as she has title over the entire amount? (ii) Whether

the appellant has succeeded in proving his claim of

gold ornaments or the value of the same raised

against the respondent in the counter claim?

      13. Coming to the evidence on record it is seen

that the marriage was solemnized on 19/1/2000 and

the first Fixed Deposit was made in the joint names of

the respondent and the appellant in the 'Catholic

Syrian Bank' on 7/1/2000 i.e., 12 days before the

proposed marriage.           It is also not disputed that the

said amount was deposited voluntarily by the father of

the respondent at the eve of the marriage. Though

Mat. Appeal No. 111 of 2008    -: 15 :-

the appellant contended that it was a gift to both the

appellant and the respondent and thereby both have

acquired equal right, no evidence has been adduced

to substantiate the said contention. To the contrary,

the respondent succeeded in proving that the amount

pending in the joint account is the money which was

gifted to the respondent alone by her father, by

adducing oral and documentary evidence. Since the

said amount is the amount which was gifted to the

respondent alone earlier to the marriage, the

subsequent deposit in the joint account does not make

any difference in the respondent's exclusive title over

the property, though the account is joint. Even though

it was pleaded that half of the said amount was gifted

to him also neither any independent evidence nor any

circumstance has been brought out in evidence by

the appellant, except his oral assertion.    As rightly

noted by the court below, it is the usual custom of the

society, especially in the Christian Community, that

money and ornaments would be given to the bride

Mat. Appeal No. 111 of 2008      -: 16 :-

considering the welfare and future of the bride, by her

parents. That apart, going by the oral evidence of

R.W.1, the respondent, she has testified that the said

amount was deposited in the name of the appellant

also as a Trustee of the respondent. The evidence

given by R.W.1 gets further assurance from R.W.3, the

father of the respondent, who acquired the fund, kept

in custody and gave for depositing in the Bank,

unequivocally deposed that the money was given for

the beneficial enjoyment of his daughter alone.       We

find no reason to disbelieve his version, deposed

before the court.           There is no evidence to prove

otherwise from the part of the appellant.       In view of

the Dowry Prohibition Act, it cannot be legally

presumed that half of the amount was deposited

either as dowry or gift to the appellant.      Subsequent

to the marriage, the said amount was withdrawn

together with interest and out of that amount,

Rs.3,20,000/- was again deposited in another bank in

the joint names also. As evidenced by Exts.B4 to B6,

Mat. Appeal No. 111 of 2008    -: 17 :-

it was the amount which had been withdrawn from the

Catholic Syrian Bank, Chalakkudy Branch, which

exclusively belonged to the respondent, though it

stood in their joint names.            It follows that the

subsequent deposit made in another bank, after

withdrawing the said amount from the earlier bank,

also belongs to the respondent. In this analysis, the

court below can be justified in finding that item No.1

deposit exclusively belongs to the respondent.        The

challenge against that part of the impugned order will

stand dismissed.

     14. Coming to the counter claim, it is case of the

appellant that he is entitled to realise gold ornaments

and other articles or Rs.94,039.20 as value of the gold

ornaments, dresses and a wrist watch which he had

given to the respondent.       When the respondent was

examined as R.W.1, she had denied all the claims of

the appellant, except four items in the counter claim;

but the appellant miserably failed to adduce any

evidence to prove his claims, which she had denied.

Mat. Appeal No. 111 of 2008        -: 18 :-

Since the marriage has not been dissolved, the court

below can be justified in rejecting the claim of 'thali'.

But, at the same time, going by the oral evidence of

R.W.1, it is seen that she has admitted that the

appellant had given a necklace, one pair of ear-rings,

a wrist watch and a ring to her. But she emphatically

denied the weight of the aforementioned three items

of gold ornaments claimed by the appellant. She has

no case that she had returned the same to the

appellant.          If that be so, we find no reason to reject

the said claim which stands admitted. The appellant

prayed for returning the said necklace and ear-rings or

its market value of Rs.49,183.20 in this account. So

also prayed for return of ring and wrist watch or its

value of Rs.5,750/- (Rs.3750/- + Rs.2,000/-). We find

that the respondent is liable to return the aforesaid

four items or its total market value of Rs.54,933.20

which he claimed in the counter claim.             He is not

entitled to get interest for the said amount, as the

same is not prayed for.

Mat. Appeal No. 111 of 2008      -: 19 :-

      15. In the result, counter claim will stand decreed

directing the respondent to return the necklace, one

pair of ear-rings, a wrist watch and a ring or to pay

Rs.54,933.20 as the value of the same, in case now

the said gold ornaments and watch are not available

in her hand. In the event of default, the appellant is

allowed to realise the same ornaments if available in

respondent's           hand  or  Rs.54,933.20     from the

respondent. He is also entitled to get interest at the

rate of 6% per annum from the date of this judgment

only as he has not claimed interest for the said

amount in the counter claim. The appellant is directed

to remit the balance court fee, if any, in respect of

appeal against the dismissal of the counter claim,

within two weeks from today.

      The Mat. Appeal is allowed in part.

                                         Sd/-

                                (V.K. MOHANAN, JUDGE)

                                         Sd/-

Nan/                                (K. HARILAL, JUDGE)
           //true copy//      P.S. to Judge



