
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                              PRESENT:

             THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE K.RAMAKRISHNAN

      MONDAY, THE 17TH DAY OF NOVEMBER 2014/26TH KARTHIKA, 1936

                      RP(FC)NO. 123 OF 2012 ()
                      ------------------------


 AGAINST THE ORDER IN MC NO.225/2011 OF FAMILY COURT,KOZHIKODE DATED
                            31.01.2012.
                    ----------------------------


REVISION PETITIONER(S)/PETITIONER :
----------------------------------

       AJISHA, AGED 21 YEARS,
       D/O ASOKAN, MEEKUNNATH THAMARATH, CHATHAMANGALAM
       P.O., CHATHAMANGALAM, KOZHIKODE-673601.

       BY ADVS.SRI.SANTHARAM.P
               SMT.REKHA ARAVIND

RESPONDENT(S)/RESPONDENT :
--------------------------

       RATHEESH
       S/O RAJAN, AMBALAVALAPPIL, THAMBI ROAD
       NADUVATTOM, BEYPORE, 673015. (BEYPORE PSL).

       BY ADVS. SRI.K.M.FIROZ
                SMT.M.SHAJNA

      THIS REV.PETITION(FAMILY COURT)  HAVING COME UP FOR ADMISSION
      ON 17-11-2014, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE FOLLOWING:




NS

RP(FC)NO. 123 OF 2012 ()


                              APPENDIX


PETITIONER(S) ANNEXURES :


ANNEXURE 1 : COPY OF THE JUDGMENT DATED 08.02.2012 IN O.P. 658 OF
            2011 OF THE FAMILY COURT, KOZHIKODE.

ANNEXURE 2 : COPY OF THE ORDER DATED 08.02.2012 IN O.P.NO.658 OF 2011
             OF FAMILY COURT, KOZHIKODE.


RESPONDENT(S) ANNEXURES : NIL




                                                 / TRUE COPY /


NS                                              P.A. TO JUDGE


                                                   C.R.
                 K. RAMAKRISHNAN,J
                --------------------------------
               R.P. (FC) No.123 of 2012
                --------------------------------
      Dated this the 17th day of November 2014

                         O R D E R

          The petitioner in M.C. No.225 of 2011 on the

file of the Family Court, Kozhikode is the revision

petitioner herein. The revision petitioner is the wife of the

respondent and their marriage has taken place on

06.02.2011 as per custom and they are relatives as well.

After marriage, they were living together only for

sometime. It is alleged in the petition that, at the time of

marriage, she was made to believe that he is a concrete

worker and after marriage, it was revealed that he is

working in a burial ground and doing the job of burning

dead bodies and thereby, they have cheated her. Further,

it is contended that 20 sovereigns of gold ornaments

which were given to her at the time of marriage were

misappropriated and she has been subjected to cruelty

demanding more dowry by the family members of the

respondent. It is also contended that the respondent used

to come drunk, used to ill treat her and started

consumption of liquor with his friends and relatives in the

R.P. (FC) No.123 of 2012   2

house making it as a bar. Though it was objected by her,

she was harassed on that ground also. They were freely

entering in to her room in the house affecting her privacy

and he used to come late and sometimes he did not come

to the house also. He is spending more amount for

consuming liquor. She was ill treated both physically and

mentally. Since the ill treatment continued, she left the

house on 15.05.2011 and as per the mediation, she came

back on the undertaking given by the respondent that he

will not consume alcohol, will not ill treat her, will not go

for work in the burial ground etc. and she came back on

17.06.2011 and they lived together for 2 days but, there

was no change in the attitude of the respondent. She was

ejected from the house and she had to leave the house on

28.06.2011. Though, a complaint was filed to the Marad

Police, they did not take any action. She has no

independent income to maintain herself. She was

pregnant at the time when this petition was filed. He was

getting an income not less than Rs.10,000/- per month

and he is not providing any maintenance after she left the

house. She requires Rs.3,000/- for maintenance. So she

R.P. (FC) No.123 of 2012     3

filed this petition for getting maintenance under Sec.125

of the Code of Criminal Procedure.

           2.   Respondent appeared and filed counter

admitting the marriage but, denied the allegations made

in the petition. He denied all the allegations raised

against him. The fact that he was helping his father in the

burial work is known to the revision petitioner, as they

were relatives. Mother and father of the petitioner used

to come to their house and take her back to their house

and earlier he did not object the same and later they

wanted him also to come and stay with them and she

voluntarily left the house. Though he is prepared to give

up the work in the burial ground she is not prepared to

come and live with him. The other allegations are false

and the petitioner is not entitled to get any maintenance

as she is living separately without any reasonable or

justifiable ground. So he prayed for dismissal of the

application.

           3. The petitioner was examined as PW1 and the

respondent was examined as RW1 and B1 was marked on

his side. After considering the evidence on record, the

R.P. (FC) No.123 of 2012     4

Court below has come to the conclusion that she is

residing separately without any reasonable cause or

justifiable ground and he is not entitled to get

maintenance and dismissed the application. Aggrieved by

the same, the present revision has been filed by the

revision petitioner who is the petitioner before the Court

below.

           4. Heard both sides.

           5. Learned counsel for the revision petitioner

submitted that the reasoning given by the Court below for

denying maintenance to the petitioner is not sustainable

in law. Further, she had categorically stated that she is

not willing to go to their house not because the house is

situated near the burial ground but, on account of the ill

treatment she had met at their house. Even after

mediation when she went back, the ill treatment

continued and there is no change in the attitude. So the

reason given by the Court below is not proper and not

justifiable and it requires interference. Further, the offer

made by the respondent is also without bonafides. The

petition for restitution of the conjugal rights, filed by the

R.P. (FC) No.123 of 2012    5

respondent was dismissed by the Family Court. That also

can be considered by this Court as subsequent event to

come to the conclusion that the reasons stated by the

Court below is not proper for denying maintenance.

           6. On the other hand, the learned counsel for

the respondents submitted that he never ill treated the

revision petitioner. She wanted to live in her house and

she wanted him also to come and live with her in their

house for which, he was not amenable and at the

instigation of the family members, she is now living in

that house. Further, the decision of the Family Court in

the petition for restitution of conjugal rights is not

binding on the proceedings under Sec.125 of the Code.

Further, the Court will have to consider the evidence

available in that case for coming to an independent

conclusion and the Court below had considered those

aspects and rightly come to the conclusion that she is

living separately without any justifiable ground. Further,

the Court is satisfied with the offer made by the revision

petitioner that has to be considered by the Court as to

whether it is bonafide or not and if the offer is bonafide

R.P. (FC) No.123 of 2012   6

and the petitioner did not come and live with him, then,

by virtue of Sec.125 (4) of the Code, the revision

petitioner is not entitled to get maintenance and the

Court     below    was  perfectly   justified in   denying

maintenance to the revision petitioner.

           7. It is an admitted fact that the respondent

herein married the revision petitioner on 06.02.2011 as

per custom and they were living together for sometime in

his house. It is also an admitted fact that the revision

petitioner is none other than the 1st cousin of the

respondent. So it cannot be said that they were not aware

of each others family background earlier. The case of the

revision petitioner was that, at the time when the

marriage has taken place, she was made to believe that

he is a concrete worker and later, after marriage, it is

revealed that he is working in a burial ground and not a

concrete worker and he is consuming alcohol and

behaving cruelly with her. It is true that under Sec.125(4)

if the respondent had taken a ground that she is living

separately without any justifiable cause and the offer

made by him is bonafide then, the Court will have to

R.P. (FC) No.123 of 2012   7

consider those aspects also before coming to the

conclusion that the petitioner is entitled to get

maintenance or not. The burden is on the petitioner to

prove her reasons for living separately as well. This was

so held in the decisions reported in A.S.N. Nair v.

Sulochana [1981 KHC 311] and Mammad V.

Rukhiya [1978 KHC 211]. In the later decision, it was

observed that even at the time of execution, if the offer is

made, Court will have to find out whether the offer is

bonafide or not. But in the decision reported in Sunitha

Kachwaha and Others V. Anil Kachwaha [2014 (4)

KHC (SN) 15 (SC)], the Honourable Supreme Court has

held that since the proceedings under Sec.125 of the

Code is summary in nature, it is not necessary for the

Court to ascertain as to who was wrong and the minute

details of matrimonial dispute. Therefore, maintenance

cannot be denied for the reason that the wife had left the

matrimonial home without reasonable cause or justifiable

ground. The fact that the wife is a qualified post graduate

would not be sufficient to hold that she is in a position to

maintain herself. Merely because the wife is earning

R.P. (FC) No.123 of 2012    8

something, that also would not be a ground to reject her

claim for maintenance. Further, it is a summary

procedure the Court need not go into the details of the

dispute as well. With this principle in mind, the case in

hand has to be considered. In this case, the petitioner

was examined as PW1 and the respondent was examined

as DW1. PW1 had categorically stated that there was a

mediation and on the basis of which, an undertaking was

given by the respondent that he will not consume alcohol

and he will go for some other work and maintain her and

he will not ill treat her. When she came back, the things

did not change and when she questioned his activities,

she was sent out of the house. This aspect has not been

challenged in cross examination of PW1. It is true that

some suggestions have been given in the cross

examination of PW1 that if he is prepared to go for some

other work, whether she is willing to come. For which,

she had stated that she is not interested in coming. The

entire reading of the deposition of PW1 will go to show

that the respondent herein used to come drunk and he

used to drunk in the house itself with his friends and

R.P. (FC) No.123 of 2012    9

other relatives that has caused agony to the petitioner.

Inspite of the resistance made by her, it continued.

Except the bare denial on this when he was examined as

RW1 on this aspect, no effective evidence has come from

his side also. She had categorically stated when she was

cross examined that, she is not prepared to live with him

as their house is situated near to the burial ground she

answered in the negative. All these things will go to show

that it is not because the house is situated near to the

burial ground that she is not willing to live in that house

and it is because of the attitude of the respondent which

she had narrated in the evidence. Further, there is no

offer as contemplated as under Sec.125(4) has been made

by the revision petitioner either in the counter statement

or in his evidence except stating that the revision

petitioner is residing separately without any reasonable

cause. So, that also will go to show that the offer cannot

be said to be bonafide. Only if an offer has been made and

it has been projected as a defence then only, that will

have to be considered by the Court as to whether the

offer made is bonafide or not. On the other hand, what is

R.P. (FC) No.123 of 2012    10

done by the respondent is that he had only filed         a

counter statement denying the allegations and justifying

his non payment of maintenance and nothing more. The

same thing has been repeated in his evidence as well.

           8. So under the circumstances, the submissions

made by the counsel for the respondent that the offer

made by him is bonafide and the Court below was

justified in denying maintenance to the petitioner cannot

be accepted.

           9. Further, it was in away admitted that after

the disposal of this petition for restitution of conjugal

rights which was pending when the maintenance

proceedings were pending before the Family Court was

later dismissed by the Family Court and an appeal

against that is pending. That also will give an indication

that the Family Court after analysing the evidence in that

case found that she is living separately with reasonable

and justifiable reason and ground. So under the

circumstances, the Court below had not properly

appreciated the evidence before coming to the conclusion

that the revision petitioner is not entitled to get any

R.P. (FC) No.123 of 2012    11

maintenance and mis appreciation of evidence in a

proceedings of this nature will amount to irregularity and

that is amenable for correction under the revisional

jurisdiction by this Court. So, the finding of the Court

below that the revision petitioner is living separately

without    any    reasonable  or  justifiable ground    is

unsustainable in law and the same is liable to be set

aside.

           10.   If   that finding is   set  aside,  then

automatically, the liability to pay maintenance to the

petitioner by the respondent will arise. Admittedly, after

she left the house he did not pay any maintenance to her

as well. He had no case that he is not capable of doing

any work or earning anything. His case is that he is

helping his father when he is not well in the burial

ground. That is not a ground for coming to the conclusion

that he is unable to maintain his wife. Once it is proved

by the petitioner that he is an able body person capable

of doing work and earn something then he is bound to

provide reasonable maintenance to his wife for her

livelihood. He had admitted that he is going for cooli

R.P. (FC) No.123 of 2012   12

work and a cooli will get Rs.300/- to Rs.350/- per day.

Further he had stated that he did not know the present

rate of remuneration for a cooli worker that is being paid

there. One can understand the income derived by a cooli

worker nowadays. So considering those aspects, it can

be presumed that he may be getting atleast Rs.400/- per

day and he will be getting atleast Rs.10,000/- per month

as income and if that be the income, he can able to

provide atleast Rs.2,500/- per month as maintenance to

the petitioner as well. So the respondent herein is liable

to pay maintenance at the rate of Rs.2500/- per month

from the date of petition as the proceedings are pending

from 2011 onwards, as it is settled law that if the matter

is pending for long time, then the Court is justified in

ordering maintenance from the date of petition and it is

also settled law that there is no special reasons need be

given by the Court for ordering maintenance from the

date of petition but reasonings have to be given for

ordering maintenance to the petitioner if that is objected

by the counter petitioner.

           10. So under the circumstances, the order

R.P. (FC) No.123 of 2012   13

passed by the Court below dismissing the petition is set

aside and the same is allowed and the respondent is

directed to pay maintenance at the rate of Rs.2,500/- per

month to the revision petitioner from the date of petition.

Considering the fact that huge amount will be in arrears,

five months time is granted to the revision petitioner to

pay the amount in equal monthly instalments. If any

default is committed, the revision petitioner is at liberty

to move the execution Court for executing the order.

           With the above observation, the revision is

allowed. Office is directed to communicate this order to

the Court below at the earliest.




                                     Sd/-
                              K. RAMAKRISHNAN
                                    JUDGE
                                       / True Copy /


NS                                      P.A. To Judge



