
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                      PRESENT:

                     THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE ALEXANDER THOMAS

               TUESDAY, THE 21ST DAY OF OCTOBER 2014/29TH ASWINA, 1936

                                         Bail Appl..No. 7455 of 2014 ()
                                              -------------------------------
CRIME NO. 1599/2014 OF NEYYATTINKARA POLICE STATION, THIRUVANANDAPURAM
                                                        -----------

PETITIONERS/ACCUSED A1, A2 & A3 :
-----------------------------------------------------

        1. MIDHUN V.ASHOK, AGED 24 YEARS,
            S/O.ASHOK KUMAR, MIDHUNAM, CONVENT ROAD,
            NEYYATTINKARA P.O.

        2. ASHOK KUMAR, AGED 54 YEARS,
            MIDHUNAM, CONVENT ROAD, NEYYATTINKARA P.O.

        3. VIJAYAMBIKA, AGED 52 YEARS,
            MIDHUNAM, CONVENT ROAD, NEYYATTINKARA P.O.

            BY ADV. SRI.R.T.PRADEEP

RESPONDENT :
---------------------

            THE STATE OF KERALA
            REPRESENTED BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR,
            HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM.

             BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SRI. DHANESH MATEHW MANJOORAN

            THIS BAIL APPLICATION HAVING COME UP FOR ADMISSION
            ON 21-10-2014, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE
            FOLLOWING:


bp


                 ALEXANDER THOMAS, J.
               = = = = = = = = = = = = = =
                 B.A.No.7455 of 2014
              = = = = = = = = = = = = = = =
           Dated this the 21st day of October, 2014

                         O R D E R


     Petitioners herein are accused Nos.1, 2 and 3 respectively

in Crime No.1599/2014 of Neyyattinkara Police Station,

Thiruvananthapuram District, for the offences punishable under

Secs. 294(b), 506(i), 498A     read with Sec.34 of the Indian

Penal Code. The gist of the allegation in the aforementioned

crime is that the 1st petitioner (A1) had married the de facto

complainant    by getting dowry of 120 sovereigns of gold

ornaments, 10 lakhs as pocket money, conveyance of 1.62 acres

of land with house thereon, bequest of 1.40 acres by way of

testament/Will, bullet motorbike worth 1,30,000/-, television,

washing machine, vacuum cleaner, orbytruck etc. and that the

marriage was solemnized in accordance with Christian rites and

customs.   The 1st petitioner (A1) is employed as High School

Assistant (HSA) in an aided school, whereas the 2nd petitioner

(A2) who is the father of the 1st petitioner (A1) is employed as

Administrative Officer in a private school and 3rd petitioner (A3)

who is the mother of the 1st petitioner is employed as Senior

B.A.No.7455 of 2014
                                2

Grade Clerk in the office of the District Educational Officer,

Neyyattinkara.      The 1st petitioner has sold 30 sovereigns of

gold ornaments and the sale proceeds were misappropriated by

the petitioners and they intimidated the de facto complainant to

agree to the demand to sell an extent of 25 cents of property and

to purchase an auditorium situated nearby and they abused her

for being reluctant to do household work and pressurized her to

abort her pregnancy. The 2nd petitioner had behaved vulgarly to

the de facto complainant     to ridicule her  and that she was

mentally tormented by such acts etc. Annexure A1 is the FIR

registered   on    24-9-2014    in   Crime   NO.1599/2014      of

Neyyattinkara Police Station.

     2. Sri.R.T.Pradeep, the learned counsel for the petitioners

would submit that the entire allegations against the petitioners

are falsely foisted on them and the same is only due to the

matrimonial disputes between the 1st petitioner and his wife i.e.,

the de fact complainant and that the father of the de facto

complainant is the Sub Inspector of Police and his official clout

has been made use of to get even the crime registered in the

Police Station concerned on a suo motu basis etc. The learned

counsel for the      petitioners would further urge that the

investigation is completed and that the custodial interrogation of

B.A.No.7455 of 2014
                                  3

the petitioners for the purpose of investigation is not required

and that plea of pre arrest bail may be allowed in the interest of

justice. The learned counsel for the petitioners would strongly

rely on the decision of the Apex Court reported in

Arneshkumar v. State of Bihar (2014 (3) KLT 143 (SC) and

submitted that arrest of the petitioners in the facts and

circumstances of the case, would amount to violation of the

guidelines issued by the Apex Court in the aforementioned

decision.

     3. The learned Public Prosecutor, on instructions, fairly

submits that the investigation is almost completed and the 4th

accused, who is the brother of the 1st accused has already been

deleted from the accused array in the aforementioned crime

after completion of necessary formalities in that regard. The

Public Prosecutor further submits that the investigation has been

conducted in a fair and proper manner and that the Investigating

Officer is not in any way swayed by the allegations and counter

allegations of the rival parties concerned. The Prosecutor would

further submit that if this court is inclined to grant anticipatory

bail to the petitioners,   the same should be conditioned with

necessary safeguards to protect the interest of the prosecution.

     4. The learned counsel for the petitioners would submit

B.A.No.7455 of 2014
                                    4

that the petitioners are prepared to abide by any of the

conditions that are deemed necessary and just by this Court in

the interest of the justice and to protect the interest of the

prosecution.

      5.   Having considered the submissions of the learned

counsel for the petitioners and the learned Public Prosecutor and

taking into account the totality of the facts and circumstances

of the case, this Court is inclined to grant anticipatory bail to the

petitioners.   Accordingly, it is ordered that in the event of the

arrest of the petitioners in connection with Crime No.1599 of 2014

of Neyyattinkara Police Station, Thiruvananthapuram District, they

shall be released on bail on his executing a bond for Rs.35,000/-

(Rupees Thirty Five Thousand Only) each with two solvent

sureties each for the like amount to the satisfaction of the

investigating officer in the aforementioned crime, and subject to

the following conditions:



             i)  The petitioners shall surrender their passport,
                 if any,  before the jurisdictional Magistrate
                 concerned   within    three  days   from    the
                 execution of the bail bond before the
                 Investigating Officer and if they are not a
                 holder of passport, they shall file an affidavit
                 to that effect in the said court.        If the
                 petitioners   require    their   passport    in
                 connection with their travel abroad, then they
                 shall approach the court concerned for the
                 release of the same and for necessary
                 permission in that regard. In case such an

B.A.No.7455 of 2014
                                      5

                  application is filed, the trial court or the
                  jurisdictional Magistrate concerned, as the
                  case may be, is free to consider the same on
                  merits    and  to  pass    appropriate  orders
                  thereon, taking necessary guidance from the
                  principles laid down in the decision of this
                  Court in the case Asok Kumar v State of
                  Kerala, (2009(2) KLT 712), notwithstanding
                  the aforementioned conditions imposed by
                  this Court.


             ii)  The   petitioners  shall   report  before   the
                  Investigating Officer as may be required by
                  the Investigating Officer.


             iii) The petitioners shall not involve in any
                  criminal offence of similar nature.

             iv)  The    petitioners shall   not  influence   the
                  witnesses or shall not tamper or attempt to
                  tamper evidence in any manner whatsoever.

             v)   The petitioners shall fully co-operate with the
                  investigation    and    report    before    the
                  Investigating Officer as and when required by
                  him.



           If there is any violation of any of the aforementioned

conditions, the bail granted to the petitioners shall stand

cancelled.



                                            ALEXANDER THOMAS,
                                                             JUDGE.
Stu

                               //True copy//


                                P.A to Judge

B.A.No.7455 of 2014
                       6



