
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                      PRESENT:

                     THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE ALEXANDER THOMAS

             THURSDAY, THE 23RD DAY OF OCTOBER 2014/1ST KARTHIKA, 1936

                                            Crl.MC.No. 5985 of 2014
                                            -----------------------------------
 CRIME NO. 1019/2014 OF VILAPPILSALA POLICE STATION , THIRUVANANTHAPURAM
                                                    ------------------

PETITIONER(S)/ACCUSED 1 TO 4 :
-------------------------------------------------

          1. VIJEESH,
              S/O.VIJAYAN, VIJEESH BHAVAN, NEAR NSS HALL,
              PUTTILMMELKONAM, VILAPPILSALA,
              THIRUVANANTHAPURAM - 695 573.

          2. VIJAYAN,
              S/O.BHANU NADAR, VIJEESH BHAVAN, NEAR NSS HALL,
              PUTTILMMELKONAM, VILAPPILSALA,
             THIRUVANANTHAPURAM-695 573.

          3. USHA,
              D/O.LEELA, VIJEESH BHAVAN, NEAR NSS HALL,
              PUTTILMMELKONAM, VILAPPILSALA,
              THIRUVANANTHAPURAM-695 573.

          4. LEELA,
              D/O.PARU, VIJEESH BHAVAN,
              NEAR NSS HALL, PUTTILMMELKONAM, VILAPPILSALA,
             THIRUVANANTHAPURAM-695 573.

             BY ADVS.SRI.K.P.SUJESH KUMAR
                           SMT.KEERTHI K.NARAYANAN

RESPONDENT(S) / STATE AND DEFACTO COMPLAINANT :
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

          1. STATE OF KERALA,
             REPRESENTED BY THE PUBLIC PROSECUTOR,
             HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM.

          2. DIVYA,
             D/O.AJITHA, T C 21/1169, PANAYIL VEEDU,
             KEEZHARANNOOR, NEDUMKKADU WARD, MANAKKAD VILLAGE,
             THIRUVANANTHAPURAM, PIN-695 009.

             R1 BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SRI.R.GITHESH
             R2 BY ADV. SRI.RAJESH KANNAN

          THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD
          ON 23-10-2014, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE FOLLOWING:

Msd.

Crl.MC.No. 5985 of 2014
-----------------------------------

                                            APPENDIX

PETITIONER(S)' ANNEXURES :

ANNEXURE A1:                   CERTIFIED COPY OF THE FIR IN CRIME NO.1019 OF 2014 OF
                               VILAPPILSALA POLICE STATION, DATED 14/09/2014.

ANNEXURE A2:                   AFFIDAVIT SWORN TO BY THE SECOND RESPONDENT
                               BEFORE THE NOTARY PUBLIC, DATED 17/10/2014.

RESPONDENT(S)' ANNEXURES :

                                           NIL

                                                               //TRUE COPY//


                                                               P.A.TO JUDGE.

Msd.


                     ALEXANDER THOMAS, J.
                     -----------------------------
                     Crl.M.C.No.5985 Of 2014
                   ---------------------------------
            Dated this the 23rd day of October, 2014.

                              O R D E R



      The above captioned Criminal Miscellaneous Case (Crl.M.C),

seeking invocation of the powers of this Court conferred as per

Section 482 Cr.P.C, has been filed with the prayer to quash the

impugned      Annexure-A1     FIR   in   Crime    No.1019/2014   of

Vilappilsala Police Station registered for offences under Sections

498A and 34 of the Indian Penal Code on the basis of the

information lodged by the 2nd respondent herein, who is the

defacto complainant. The 1st petitioner is the husband of the 2nd

respondent and petitioners 2 & 3 are the father and mother of

the 1st petitioner and 4th petitioner is the grandmother of the 1st

petitioner. The 1st petitioner is a soldier in the Indian Army. The

allegation in the above said crime is that after the marriage

between the 1st petitioner and 2nd respondent, the above accused

persons had ill-treated and harassed the 2nd respondent

demanding for gold ornaments stating that the gold ornaments

given to her at the time of marriage was not sufficient and that

the 1st petitioner is deserving for more dowry and that the

accused had demanded the defacto complainant to give her gold

                                ::2::

Crl.M.C.No.5985 Of 2014

ornaments to pledge the same for the purpose of purchase of

landed property.    It is on this basis that the information was

lodged which led to the registration of the impugned Annexure-

A1 FIR in the aforementioned Crime. It is stated that the 2nd

respondent filed the impugned First Information Statement due

to temperamental differences and implied imputations and that

she has now resolved all the disputes with the petitioners and as

a result thereof she has again started living with her husband-1st

petitioner with whom she earlier had differences and all disputes

between them have been settled amicably. It is submitted that

in this eventuality there would be no chance of conviction. The

2nd respondent-wife has sworn to an affidavit dated 17.10.2014

produced as Annexure-A2 in this Crl.M.C stating the above said

aspects and further stating that all the disputes between the

parties have been amicably settled and that she is now residing

together with the 1st petitioner and that no purpose would be

served in prosecuting the case any further and that she has no

subsisting grievance against the petitioners and therefore, it has

become highly necessary to quash the impugned Annexure-A1

FIR in Crime No.1019/2014 of Vilappilsala Police Station

registered against the petitioners, in the interest of justice, and

accordingly, it is prayed that this Court may allow the Crl.M.C

                                ::3::

Crl.M.C.No.5985 Of 2014

and quash the impugned Annexure-A1 FIR.              It is in the

background of these facts and circumstances, the above Crl.M.C

has been filed.

      2.    The Crl.M.C. has been admitted and Sri.Rajesh

Kannan has taken notice for the 2nd respondent and the learned

Public Prosecutor has taken notice for the 1st respondent State of

Kerala.

      3.    Heard Sri.K.P.Sujesh Kumar, learned counsel for the

petitioners, Sri.Rajesh Kannan, learned counsel for the 2nd

respondent and the learned Public Prosecutor appearing for the

1st respondent State of Kerala.

      4.    The learned counsel for the petitioners has submitted

that during the pendency of the aforementioned criminal

proceedings, the matter has been settled amicably between the

parties, and that the continuation of the proceedings in the above

case/crime will cause miscarriage of justice to both parties as the

real disputants to the controversy have arrived at an amicable

settlement and any further continuation of the criminal

proceedings will amount to sheer wastage of time and money

and would unnecessarily strain the judicial, administrative and

financial resources of the State.

                               ::4::

Crl.M.C.No.5985 Of 2014

      5.   Sri.Rajesh Kannan, learned counsel appearing for the

2nd respondent has submitted, on the basis of the specific

instructions furnished by the 2nd respondent, that the 2nd

respondent has amicably settled the disputes with the petitioners

as stated above and that she has no objection in the quashment

of   the   impugned    criminal    proceedings  and     that   the

complainant/victim/injured does not intend to proceed any

further against the petitioners as she has no grievance against

them and that she will not raise any dispute/complaint in future if

the prayer for quashing the impugned criminal proceedings is

allowed.

      6.   The learned Public Prosecutor also was heard, who

also has not raised any serious objections and submitted that the

court may consider the prayer in this case in the light of the law

well settled by the Apex Court in that regard.

      7.   After having carefully considered the submissions of

the parties and after having perused the pleadings as well as the

documents and materials placed in this matter, it can be seen

that the offences alleged are more or less personal in nature and

not much element of public interest is involved.      The crucial

aspect of the matter is that though such offences are involved,

the real disputants to the controversy, which has led to the

                                   ::5::

Crl.M.C.No.5985 Of 2014

impugned criminal proceedings, have actually arrived at an

amicable settlement of the matter. From the submissions made

by the learned counsel for the 2nd respondent, it is clear to the

Court that the injured/victim/defacto complainant has no further

grievance against the petitioners/accused in the light of the

settlement arrived at by them. In this connection, it is relevant

to note the decision of the Apex Court in the case between Gian

Singh v. State of Punjab reported in 2013 (1) SCC (Cri) 160,

para 61 = (2012) 10 SCC 303 = 2012(4) KLT 108(SC), wherein

the Supreme Court has held as follows in para 61 thereof [ See

SCC (Cri)]:

              "61. The position that emerges from the above
       discussion can be summarised thus: the power of the
       High Court in quashing a criminal proceeding or FIR or
       complaint in exercise of its inherent jurisdiction is
       distinct and different from the power given to a criminal
       court for compounding the offences under S.320 of the
       Code.     Inherent power is of wide plenitude with no
       statutory limitation but it has to be exercised in accord
       with the guideline engrafted in such power viz;(i) to
       secure the ends of justice or (ii) to prevent abuse of
       the process of any Court.        In what cases power to
       quash the criminal proceeding or complaint or F.I.R.
       may be exercised where the offender and victim have
       settled their dispute would depend on the facts and
       circumstances of each case and no category can be
       prescribed..

It is further held as follows:-

       "......... But the criminal cases having overwhelmingly
       and pre-dominatingly civil flavour stand on different

                                 ::6::

Crl.M.C.No.5985 Of 2014

      footing for the purposes of quashing, particularly the
      offences arising from commercial, financial, mercantile,
      civil, partnership or such like transactions or the
      offences arising out of matrimony relating to dowry
      etc. or the family disputes where the wrong is basically
      private or personal in nature and the parties have
      resolved their entire dispute. In this category of cases,
      High Court may quash criminal proceedings if in its
      view, because of the compromise between the offender
      and victim, the possibility of conviction is remote and
      bleak and continuation of criminal case would put
      accused to great oppression and prejudice and
      extreme injustice would be caused to him by not
      quashing the criminal case despite full and complete
      settlement and compromise with the victim........"

Further, in the case Jitendra Raghuvanshi and Others v.

Babita Raghuvanshi and another reported in (2013) 4 SCC

58 [see 2013 (1) KLD 817 (SC)], the Apex Court has held as

follows:-

            "8. It is not in dispute that matrimonial disputes
      have been on considerable increase in recent times
      resulting in filing of complaints under Sections 498A
      and 406 of I.P.C. not only against the husband but also
      against the relatives of the husband. The question is
      when such matters are resolved either by the wife
      agreeing to rejoin the matrimonial home or by mutual
      settlement of other pending disputes for which both
      the sides approached the High Court and jointly prayed
      for quashing of the criminal proceedings or the FIR or
      complaint by the wife under Sections 498A and 406 of
      I.P.C., whether the prayer can be declined on the sole
      ground that since the offences are non-compoundable
      under Section 320        of the Code, it would be
      impermissible for the court to quash the criminal
      proceedings or FIR or complaint.
            9. It is not in dispute that in the case on hand
      subsequent to the filing of the criminal complaint under
      Sections 498A and 406 of IPC and Sections 3 and 4 of
      the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961, with the help and

                                  ::7::

Crl.M.C.No.5985 Of 2014

      intervention of family members, friends and well-
      wishers, the parties concerned have amicably settled
      their   differences   and   executed    a   compromise/
      settlement. Pursuant thereto, the appellants filed the
      said compromise before the Trial Court with a request
      to place the same on record and to drop the criminal
      proceedings against the appellants herein. It is also
      not in dispute that in additional to the mutual
      settlement arrived at by the parties, respondent/-wife
      has also filed an affidavit stating that she did not wish
      to pursue the criminal proceedings against the
      appellants and fully supported the contents of the
      settlement deed. It is the grievance of the appellants
      that no only the Trial Court rejected such prayer of the
      parties but also the High Court failed toe exercise its
      jurisdiction under Section 482 of the Code only on the
      ground that the criminal proceedings relate to the
      offences punishable under Sections 498A and 406 of
      IPC which are non-compoundable in nature.
            15. In our view, it is the duty of the Courts
      to encourage genuine settlements of matrimonial
      disputes, particularly, when the same are on
      considerable increase.       Even if the offences are
      non-compoundable, if they relate to matrimonial
      disputes and the Court is satisfied that the parties
      have settled the same amicably and without any
      pressure, we hold that for the purpose of securing
      ends of justice, Section 320 of the Code would not
      be a bar to the exercise of power of quashing of
      FIR,    complaint    or    the   subsequent     criminal
      proceedings.
            16.      There has been an outburst of
      matrimonial disputes in recent times.                The
      institution of marriage occupies an important place
      and it has an important role to play in the society.
      Therefore, every effort should be made in the
      interest of the individuals in order to enable them
      to settle down in life and live peacefully. If the
      parties ponder over their defaults and terminate
      their disputes amicably by mutual agreement
      instead of fighting it out in a Court of law, in order
      to do complete justice in the matrimonial matters,

                                ::8::

Crl.M.C.No.5985 Of 2014

      the Courts should be less hesitant in exercising its
      extraordinary jurisdiction. It is trite to state that
      the power under Section 482 should be exercised
      sparingly and with circumspection only when the
      Court is convinced, on the basis of material on
      record, that allowing the proceedings to continue
      would be an abuse of the process of the Court or
      that   the   ends    of  justice  require   that   the
      proceedings ought to be quashed."

      8.    Considering the facts and circumstances of this case,

it is seen further that the impugned criminal proceedings have

arisen consequent to the matrimonial disputes between the

disputants and the disputes have been settled amicably between

the parties. Accordingly, this Court is inclined to hold that in the

light of the facts and circumstances involved in the present case

and particularly in view of the settlement arrived at between the

parties, the principles laid down in the aforementioned decisions

of the Apex Court will be squarely applicable in the present case.

Moreover, since the real disputants to the controversy have

amicably settled the disputes, which led to these impugned

criminal proceedings, it is also the duty of the court to promote

such settlement, instead of compelling the parties to go on with

the dispute. It is also pertinent to note that since the matter is

settled out of court, in the event of proceeding with the trial,

there may not be any fruitful prosecution and the chances of

                                ::9::

Crl.M.C.No.5985 Of 2014

conviction of the accused is rather negligible and therefore, the

net result of continuance of criminal proceedings would be sheer

waste of judicial time rather meaningless and therefore would

amount to abuse of the process of court proceedings in the larger

sense. Hence following decisions of the Apex Court cited supra,

this Court is inclined to hold that the Crl.M.C. can be allowed by

granting the prayers sought for.

      In the result, the Crl.M.C is allowed and the impugned

Annexure-I FIR in Crime No.1019/2014 of Vilappilsala Police

Station and all further proceedings arising therefrom stand

quashed. The petitioners shall produce certified copies of this

order before the court below concerned as well as before the

Station House Officer concerned.




                                            ALEXANDER THOMAS,
                                                    Judge.

bkn/-



