
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                        PRESENT:

                       THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE K.RAMAKRISHNAN

                TUESDAY,THE 25TH DAY OF MARCH 2014/4TH CHAITHRA, 1936

                                        Crl.Rev.Pet.No. 780 of 2003 ( )
                                              --------------------------------
CRL.A.NO. 106/2001 OF SESSIONS COURT, MANJERI DATED 07-02-2003
                                          .......................................
         CC.NO. 156/1997 OF JUDICIAL FIRST CLASS MAGISTRATE COURT,
                                MALAPPURAM DATED 04-05-2001
                                          --------------------

REVISION PETITIONER/APPELLANT/ACCUSED :
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

            UDAYAKUMAR,S/O.SREEDHARAN,
            KATTILPARAMBA HOUSE, ARIYALLUR AMSOM AND DESOM,
            PARAPPANANGADI, MALAPPURAM DISTRICT.


            BY ADV. SRI.MANJERI SUNDERRAJ

RESPONDENT/RESPONDENT/COMPLAINANT & STATE :
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

            STATE OF KERALA,
            REP. PUBLIC PROSECUTOR,
            HIGH COURT OF KERALA.

             BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SMT.MADHU BEN.M.

            THIS CRIMINAL REVISION PETITION HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD
            ON 18-02-2014, THE COURT ON 25-03-2014 PASSED THE FOLLOWING:




sts


                      K. RAMAKRISHNAN, J.
                  .................................................
                      Crl.R.P.No.780 of 2003
                  ..................................................
             Dated this the 25th day of March, 2014.

                               O R D E R


      The first accused in C.C.No.156/1997 on the file of the

Judicial First Class Magistrate Court, Malappuram is the

petitioner herein.

     2. The petitioner along with his mother and sister were

charge sheeted by the Circle Inspector of Police, Tirur in Crime

No.155/1994 of Parappanangadi police station alleging the

offences under Section 498A read with Section 34 of the Indian

Penal Code (hereinafter referred to as 'the Code'). The case was

originated on the basis of Ext.P3 private complaint filed by

PW1, the wife of the petitioner, before the Judicial First Class

Magistrate Court, Malappuram, which was forwarded to the

police for investigation under Section 156(3) of the Code of

Criminal Procedure and on receipt of the same, PW6 Head

Constable attached to that police station registered Ext.P7 First

Information Report as Crime No.155/1994 of Parappanangadi

police station against the above three persons under Section

498A read with Section 34 of the Code.                       The investigation in

Crl.R.P.No.780 of 2003         2

this case was undertaken by PW7, the Circle Inspector of Police.

He went to the place of occurrence and prepared Ext.P6 scene

mahazer in the presence of PW5 and another. He seized Ext.P4

wedding photo and Exts.P1 and P2 letters as per Ext.P5 seizure

mahazer. He questioned     the witnesses and    recorded their

statements. After completion of the investigation, he submitted

final report before the Judicial First Class Magistrate Court,

Malappuram and that court has taken cognizance of the case as

C.C.No.156/1997 against the above three persons for the offence

under Section 498 A read with Section 34 of the Code.

        3. When the accused appeared before the court below,

after hearing the Assistant Public Prosecutor and the counsel

for the accused, the learned Magistrate framed charge against

the accused persons under Section 498A read with Section 34

of the Code and the same was read over and explained to

them and they pleaded not guilty. In order to prove the case

of the prosecution, Pws 1 to 7 were examined and Exts.P1 to

P7 were marked on the side of the prosecution. After closure of

the prosecution evidence, the accused were questioned under

Section 313 of the Code of Criminal Procedure and they denied

all the incriminating circumstances brought against them in

Crl.R.P.No.780 of 2003         3

the prosecution evidence. They have further stated that they

have not committed any offence and they are innocent of the

same.    In order to prove the defence case, the first accused,

the petitioner herein, was examined as DW1 and Exts.D1 and

D2 were marked on their side. After hearing the arguments of

both sides and after considering the evidence, the learned

Magistrate found the accused 2 and 3 not guilty of the offences

alleged and acquitted them of the charge under Section 248

(1) of the Criminal Procedure Code. But, the learned Magistrate

found the petitioner guilty under Section 498A of the Code and

convicted him thereunder and sentenced him to undergo

rigorous imprisonment for two years. Aggrieved by the order of

conviction and sentence passed by the court below, the

petitioner herein filed Crl.A.No.106/2001 before the Sessions

Court, Manjeri and dissatisfied with the order of acquittal of

accused      2     and 3,   the  defacto    complainant    filed

Crl.R.P.No.34/2001 before the same court. The learned Sessions

Judge heard both the criminal appeal and the criminal revision

petition and dismissed the same by a common judgment

confirming the order of conviction and sentence passed against

the petitioner and acquittal passed against accused Nos.2 and

Crl.R.P.No.780 of 2003           4

3. Dissatisfied with the order of the Sessions Judge, the

petitioner has filed this revision petition.

      4. Heard the counsel for the revision petitioner and the

learned Public Prosecutor.

       5. The counsel for the revision petitioner argued that the

evidence adduced on the side of the prosecution is not sufficient

to attract the offence under Section 498A of the Code against

the petitioner. Further, the lower court had given much reliance

on Exts.P1 and P2 letters sent by the petitioner to his mother

in the address of his sister in which certain mention had been

made     regarding the sale of the property belonging to the

defacto complainant. But, the courts below failed to note the

fact that thereafter the father and uncle of the defacto

complainant had sent Exts.D1 and D2 letters, which will go

to show that there was no demand as such of the property for

which the alleged cruelty was alleged was not there and in

fact they were happy about the transaction and even supported

the petitioner to go on with the construction of the residential

house at Ranipet. Further, in fact, the sale of the property was

done by PW2, the father of the defacto complainant, and the

consideration was obtained by him and there was no role for

Crl.R.P.No.780 of 2003           5

the petitioner for the same. The alleged        purchaser namely

Abdulla Koya, though cited as a witness,        was not examined

by the prosecution. That will go to show that the petitioner has

no role in the sale of the property. Further, the details of alleged

incidents of cruelty as narrated by PW1 were not mentioned in

the complaint or before the police. They were embellishment

and improvements made by PW1 before court. So, much value

should not have been given         by the courts below on that

evidence. If those evidence is removed, then even assuming

that the prosecution case is true, then that will only amount to

demanding money for construction of house for their residence

which was in fact admitted by PW1 and her father and they

supported the petitioner for that purpose and        that will not

amount to demand for dowry or cruelty as alleged in the

section. So, according to the learned counsel, the courts below

were not justified in convicting the appellant for the offence

under Section 498 A of the Code and he is entitled to get

acquittal of the charge levelled against him giving him the

benefit of doubt.

      6. On the other hand, the learned Public Prosecutor argued

that the evidence of PWs 1, 2 and 4 coupled with Exts.P1 and

Crl.R.P.No.780 of 2003            6

P2 will go to show that the petitioner had harassed the defacto

complainant demanding property and treated her cruelly both

physically and mentally for that purpose. PWs 1 and 2 have

explained the circumstances as well. Further PW2 had stated

that he had       agreed for  co-operating    with the sale of the

property because he wanted the life of his daughter to be

happy with the petitioner and he had no role in the sale of the

property and the sale was done by the petitioner and he had

not received the money as well. So, according to the learned

Public Prosecutor, the courts below were perfectly justified in

convicting the appellant for the offence alleged. Further,

both the courts below, being the courts on fact, have analysed

the evidence and      concurrently found that the petitioner had

committed the offence and being a revisional court, this Court

is not expected to interfere with the finding arrived at by the

courts below on evidence unless the appreciation is completely

perverse and against law.

      7. It is an admitted fact that the petitioner herein married

PW1 on 22.1.1990 and according to the prosecution, 35

soverings of gold ornaments and Rs.25,000/- cash was given

at the time of marriage and that was entrusted to the petitioner.

Crl.R.P.No.780 of 2003            7

It is also an admitted fact that at the time of marriage, the

petitioner was working at Ranipet and after some days of

stay in the house of the petitioner at Parappanangadi, she was

taken to his work place and they resided there together for

some time. Even during that time, the life was not happy and

PW1 came back to her house and the petitioner sent a notice

requesting her to come and after mediation, they started living

together at Ranipet in a rented house again. Even thereafter,

according to the prosecution, the ill treatment continued and

the petitioner was demanding the defacto complainant to get

more money and also wanted property. It was an admitted fact

that PW2, the      father of PW1, had obtained a property in the

name of PW1 having an extent of 30 cents. According to the

prosecution, that irritated the petitioner. Thereafter the gravity

of the ill treatment      increased and in order to avoid the ill

treatment, PW1 had assigned 8 cents of land out of the same in

favour of the petitioner. The fact of assignment of 8 cents in

favour of the petitioner by PW1 was an admitted fact. According

to the prosecution, the ill treatment continued for assignment

of the remaining portion as well. Thereafter         when the ill

treatment increased and due to the pressure exerted     on PW1,

Crl.R.P.No.780 of 2003               8

according to PW1, she had           executed     assignment    deed in

respect of the balance property also and the amount was

received     by the petitioner and that was misappropriated by

him. Till that document was executed, she was even confined

in a room in their Tharavad house and only after she agreed

to assign the property, she was released from the room in which

she was confined and thereafter          she was left in the house of

her parents and he did not         take her back later. According to

PW1, the petitioner had remarried and he is now living with

another     women.    But the allegations of cruelty alleged was

denied by the petitioner.

      8. It is settled law that in order to attract the offence

under Section 498A of the Code, the prosecution must prove

the cruelty as defined under that section and any other cruelty

will not be sufficient to attract such an offence. Section 498A

of the Code reads as follows:

            498A. Husband or relative of husband of a

            woman subjecting her to cruelty:-Whoever,

            being the husband or the relative of the husband

            of a woman, subjects such woman to cruelty shall

            be punished within imprisonment for a term which

            may extend to three years and shall also be liable

Crl.R.P.No.780 of 2003                9

            to fine.




                   Explanation:- For the purpose of this section,

            "cruelty" means -

                   (a) any wilful conduct  which is of such a

            nature as is likely to drive the woman to commit

            suicide or to cause grave injury or danger to life,

            limb or health (whether mental or physical) of the

            woman; or

                   (b) harassment of the woman where such

            harassment is with a view to coercing her or any

            person related to her to meet any unlawful demand

            for   any property or valuable    security or is on

            account of failure by her or any person related to

            her to meet such demand.]




      9. In the decision reported in           Manju Ram Kalita v.

State of Assam (2009 (13) SCC 330), after relying on the

decision reported in Mohd. Hoshan v. State of A.P (2002 (7)

SCC 414), Raj Rani v. State (Delhi Admn) (2000) 10 SCC

662), Sushil Kumar Sharma v. Union of India (2005 (6)

SCC 281) and Girdhar Shankar Tawade v. State of

Maharashtra (2002 (5) SCC 177), the Supreme Court has

Crl.R.P.No.780 of 2003               10

opined in paragraphs 21 of the judgment as follows:



         "Cruelty for the purpose of Section 498-A IPC is to be

         established in the context of Section 498 -A IPC as it

         may be different from other statutory provisions. It is to

         be   determined/inferred by considering the conduct of

         the man, weighing the gravity or seriousness of his acts

         and to find out as to whether it is likely to drive the

         woman to commit suicide, etc. It is to be established

         that the woman has       been   subjected    to   cruelty

         continuously/persistently or at least in close proximity

         of time   of  lodging   the  complaint.    Petty quarrels

         cannot be termed as "cruelty" to attract the provisions

         of Section 498-A IPC. Causing mental torture to the

         extent that it becomes unbearable may be termed as

         cruelty".

      10. The same view has been reiterated in the decision

reported in Shakson Belthissor v. State of Kerala and

Anr. (JT 2009 (8) SC 617) and Gopal v. State of Rajasthan

(JT 2009 (2) SC 419). So with this principles in mind, the case

in hand to be considered.

      11. In order to prove the case of the prosecution,             the

prosecution relied on the evidence of PWs 1, 2 and 4 and also

Crl.R.P.No.780 of 2003          11

Exts.P1 and P2 letters sent by the petitioner. Sending of Exts.P1

and P2 letters was admitted by the first accused namely the

petitioner. According to him, he had sent those letters not in

the way it was intended or understood, but those letters were

written by him under his mental tension caused on account of

the conduct of the defacto complainant. He had relied on

Exts.D1 and       D2 letters which were   admittedly sent   after

Exts.P1 and P2 to show that there was no pressure exerted

from his side as contended by the prosecution. In Ext.P1, it is

stated as follows:

      "                                             .   

       .                                        

                                              .   

                                         .        .

                   .                     .   

                .

      12. In Ext.P2 it was mentioned that:                

           .                                               

  .

      13. From this, it cannot be believed that those statements

Crl.R.P.No.780 of 2003         12

were made innocently by DW1, the first accused, as claimed

by him. If really he does not want to live with PW1 on account

of her conduct, then there is no necessity for insisting the

property to be obtained from the father of PW1. Further, the

evidence of PW1 will go      to show that   he was persistently

harassing her for getting the property transferred in his name.

He was not even satisfied by transferring 8 cents of land in his

favour earlier and he wanted the entire property to be

transferred in his name and for that purpose she was

continuously and persistently harassed both physically and

mentally by him. She was even go to the extent of saying that

he was not having sexual intercourse with her or performing

the obligation of an affectionate   husband    towards her   on

account of      this. She had also stated that she was     even

confined in a room without     giving food till she agreed for

assigning the balance property in favour of the petitioner and

accordingly she was taken to the registrar's office and

assignment deed was executed in his name. Though she was

cross examined at length, nothing was brought out to discredit

her evidence regarding this aspect. So, under the circumstances,

the courts below were perfectly justified in coming to the

Crl.R.P.No.780 of 2003        13

conclusion that Exts.P1 and P2 were not sent by the petitioner

under mental distress which he was undergoing on account

of the conduct of PW1 as claimed by him but it was really

intended in the manner in which it was written and they were

harassing PW1 for getting the property in his name.

      14. The defence relied on Exts.D1 and D2 letters sent by

PWs 2 and 4. PW2, who is the father of PW1, had categorically

stated that he had agreed to sell the property and co-operate

with the petitioner only because he wanted somehow to make

the living of PW1 with the petitioner happy. Further, he had

also deposed that PW1 had told him about the cruelty met by

her in the hands of the petitioner insisting for more money

and also for transferring the property in his name. He had also

stated that he had only written Ext.D1 letter to avoid

disharmony in the family and they will be happy if the house was

constructed and with that in mind he had mentioned those

things and agreed to help the petitioner. He had also deposed

that the petitioner had even told him when he came to know

about the sale of the property without his consent and asked

about the money that he wanted only money and property not

his daughter and get back the money by whatever means he

Crl.R.P.No.780 of 2003           14

wanted. PW4 also to some extent supported the case of PWs

1 and 2. The evidence of DW1 is not convincing at all.

      15. It is true that Abdulla Koya to him the property was

sold was not examined. But the investigating officer had stated

that he could not question him because he went abroad and he

was not available for interrogation. Both PWs 1 and 2 have

categorically stated that it was the petitioner who had made all

arrangements for sale of the property and       appropriated the

amount and if the petitioner had     case contra then,   it is for

him to examine Abdulla Koya to prove that the transaction was

done by PW2 on behalf of PW1 and he had no role in the

execution of the documents especially when PWs1 and 2 have

categorically stated that they did not know the said Abdulla

Koya and have not received the amount and it was the petitioner

who had received the amount. So under the circumstances, the

courts below were perfectly justified in coming to the conclusion

that the petitioner had treated PW1 cruelly as defined under

Section 498A of the Code       for the purpose of    getting the

property and sale of the property and appropriated the amount

for his purpose and rightly convicted the petitioner for the

offence under section 498A of the Code and there is no reason

Crl.R.P.No.780 of 2003          15

made out for interfering with the concurrent findings of the

courts below on this aspect.

      16. As regards the sentence is concerned, the counsel

for the petitioner submitted that the sentence imposed is harsh.

The appellant was sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment

for two years. The courts below were perfectly        justified in

not invoking the provisions of the Probation of Offenders Act

in this case. It is in a way admitted that the relationship was

strained and they are living separately for quite long time

now. It is true that the intention of the legislature in enacting

special provision like this is to avoid cruelty in the name of

dowry and provide severe sentence if it is found proved. But at

the same time, the circumstances of each case have to be

considered for this purpose as well. Considering the fact that

they are now living separately for quite long time and even

according to PW1, the petitioner had married another lady and

there is a child in that wedlock, this Court feels that, that can

be taken as a mitigating circumstance to show some leniency

on the question of sentence. So considering the circumstances,

sentencing the accused to undergo rigorous imprisonment for

six months will be sufficient and that will meet the ends of

Crl.R.P.No.780 of 2003             16

justice. So the sentence of two years rigorous imprisonment

imposed by the court below is set aside and the same is modified

as follows:

      The    petitioner  is   sentenced       to    undergo rigorous

imprisonment for six months. While confirming the conviction

of the petitioner under section 498 A of the Code, the sentence

imposed by the courts below is modified and reduced to six

months rigorous imprisonment.

      With the above modification of the sentence alone, this

revision petition is allowed in part.

      Office is directed to communicate this judgment to the

court below at the earliest.

                                                 Sd/-

                                   K. RAMAKRISHNAN, JUDGE.

cl

                           /true copy/
                                        P.S to Judge

Crl.R.P.No.780 of 2003    17



