
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                              PRESENT:

            THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE V.K.MOHANAN

   WEDNESDAY, THE 1ST DAY OF OCTOBER 2014/9TH ASWINA, 1936

                   Crl.Rev.Pet.No. 1698 of 2014 ()
    AGAINST THE--------------------------------
                 JUDGMENT IN CRA 198/2013 of I ADDL.DISTRICT &
                   SESSIONS COURT, KOZHIKODE
      AGAINST THE ORDER IN CC 194/2008 of J.M.F.C.,VADAKARA

REVISION PETITIONER(S):
-------------------

      RAHEEM, aged 41 ,
      S/O. UMMER, THURKEENTAVIDA HOUSE,
      IRINGAL AMSOM, KOTTAKKAL, PAYYOLI,
      KJOYILANDY TALUK, KOZHIKODE DISTRICT


      BY ADV. SRI.R.BINDU (SASTHAMANGALAM)

RESPONDENT(S):
-------------
      1.   STATE OF KERALA, REPRESENTED BY THE PUBLIC
           PROSECUTOR, HIGH COURT OF KERALA,
           ERNAKULAM, PIN - 682 031

       2.  MUNEERA, AGED 36, D/O. USMAN, KALATHIL VEEDU,
           CHOMBALA, VADAKARA, KOZHIKODE DISTRICT
           PIN - 673 101


             R2 BY ADV. SRI.G.RAJAGOPAL (KUMMANAM)
             BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SMT. R. REMA

ADMISSION ON 01-10-2014, THE COURT ONHAVING
       THIS CRIMINAL REVISION PETITION              COME UP FOR
                                              THE SAME DAY PASSED
THE FOLLOWING:


                        V.K. MOHANAN, J.

                ----------------------------
                   Crl.R.P. No. 1698 of 2014
              ------------------------------
            Dated this the Ist day of October, 2014
                              ORDER

      Petitioner who is the first accused in Crime No. 84 of 2008

of   Edachery Police Station, preferred this    Revision Petition,

challenging his conviction and sentence for offences punishable

under Sections 498 A and 406 read with Sec. 149 of IPC.

     2.     The prosecution allegation     is that  the marriage

between the de facto complainant and the           petitioner was

solemnized on 4-11-1994 as per the religious rites and while they

were residing together, all the accused (Accused Nos. 1 to 5) , on

different occasions, harassed the de facto complainant physically

as well as mentally demanding more gold ornaments and cash and

they misappropriated an amount of Rs. 1,10,000/- and 24 =

sovereign of gold ornaments belonging to the de facto

Crl.R.P. No. 1698 of 2014
                                     2

complainant. On 12-01-2008, the 1st accused came to the house of

the de facto complainant and beat her demanding dowry. Thus,

according to the prosecution,           accused have   committed the

aforesaid offences.

        3. The police, after investigation in Crime No. 84/2008 of

Edachery Police Station, laid charge for the aforesaid offences

upon which the learned Magistrate took cognizance and instituted

C.C. No. 194/2008 and trial was proceeded during which P.Ws 1

to 6      were examined and Exts. P1 to P4 were marked.           No

evidence, whatsoever, was adduced from the side of the defence.

By judgment dated 27-3-2013 in C.C. No. 194/2008, the learned

Magistrate, except the first accused/petitioner, all other accused

were found not guilty and accordingly,          A2 to A5 in the above

case were acquitted.          Whereas the petitioner, who is the first

accused,        was      found guilty under Sec. 498 A of IPC and

accordingly, he is sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for

three months and to pay a fine of Rs. 5,000/-. The above order of

conviction and sentence was unsuccessfully challenged by the

Crl.R.P. No. 1698 of 2014
                                   3

petitioner before the lower appellate court and by judgment dated

4-6-2014 in Crl.A. 198/2013           the learned Sessions Judge,

Kozhikode, dismissed the appeal confirming the conviction and

sentence. It is against the above judgment of the court below, the

petitioner who is the first accused in the above case preferred this

Revision Petition.

        4.    Heard the learned counsel for the petitioner, Sri. Bindu

Sasthamangalam, the learned counsel appearing for the 2nd

respondent and the learned Public Prosecutor.

        5.     Both the accused appearing for the petitioner as well as

the 2nd respondent submitted that during the pendency of the above

referred appeal, the entire dispute between the petitioner and the

2nd respondent who is the wife of the petitioner is settled and as

such the 2nd respondent has no surviving grievance against the

petitioner and she does not propose to prosecute the matter any

further against the petitioner. In the light of the settlement so

arrived at between the parties, a petition under Sec. 482 of Cr.P.C.

(Crl.M.A. No. 6184 of 2014) has already been filed and both the

Crl.R.P. No. 1698 of 2014
                                    4

counsel for the petitioner as well as the 2nd respondent submitted

that the entire dispute between them is settled.

        6.      In the light of the submission made by the learned

counsel for the petitioner and the 2nd respondent, I have carefully

perused Annexure - I affidavit wherein it is stated that          the

respondent/wife has no further grievance against the petitioner

who already by pronouncing talaq on 11-10-2013, divorced her

and she has no objection in quashing the criminal proceedings

pending against the petitioner.

        7.     A Division Bench of this Court in the decision reported

in Thankamani and Others v. State of Kerala - 2006 (3) KLT

846 has held that the High Court cannot exercise the powers

under Section 397 Cr.P.C., so as to compound                  a non-

compoundable offence under Sec. 320 Cr.P.C., but in appropriate

cases, the courts could exercise its inherent powers under Section

482 of Cr.P.C to save the institution of marriage. If that be so,

according to me, the above petition filed under Section 482 Cr.P.C

can be entertained in the above Revision Petition and in view of

Crl.R.P. No. 1698 of 2014
                                                5

the settlement arrived at,                  the    whole        criminal proceedings,

including the judgment of the trial Court as well as the appellate

Court can be quashed.

             8.       In this juncture, it is relevant to note the decisions of

the Honourable Apex Court reported in Gian Singh v. State of

Punjab [2012(4) KLT 108(SC)] and Jitendra Raghuvanshi and

Others v. Babita Raghuvanshi and another [2013 (1) KLD 817

(SC)]. In Gian Singh's case, the Supreme Court has held as

follows:-

                       "57.    The position that emerges from the above
            discussion can be summarised thus:         the power of the High
            Court in quashing a criminal proceeding or FIR or complaint in
            exercise of its inherent jurisdiction is distinct and different from
            the power given to a criminal court for compounding the
            offences under S.320 of the Code. Inherent power is of wide
            plenitude with no statutory limitation but it has to be exercised
            in accord with the guideline engrafted in such power viz;(i) to
            secure the ends of justice or (ii) to prevent abuse of the process
            of any Court.        In what cases power to quash the criminal
            proceeding or complaint or F.I.R. may be exercised where the
            offender and victim have settled their dispute would depend on
            the facts and circumstances of each case and no category can be
            prescribed..

It is further held as follows:-

             "......... But the criminal cases having overwhelmingly and pre-
             dominatingly civil flavour stand on different footing for the
             purposes of quashing, particularly the offences arising from
             commercial, financial,mercantile, civil, partnership or such like
             transactions or the offences arising out of matrimony relating to

Crl.R.P. No. 1698 of 2014
                                                 6

            dowry etc. or the family disputes where the wrong is basically
            private or personal in nature and the parties have resolved their
            entire dispute. In this category of cases, High Court may quash
            criminal proceedings if in its view, because of the compromise
            between the offender and victim, the possibility of conviction is
            remote and bleak and continuation of criminal case would put
            accused to great oppression and prejudice and extreme injustice
            would be caused to him by not quashing the criminal case despite
            full and complete settlement and compromise with the victim........"


Further, in Jitendra Raghuvanshi's case, the Apex Court has held as

follows:-

                    "7. It is not in dispute that matrimonial disputes have been
            on considerable increase in recent times resulting in filing of
            complaints under Sections 498A and 406 of I.P.C. not only against
            the husband but also against the relatives of the husband. The
            question is when such matters are resolved either by the wife
            agreeing to rejoin the matrimonial home or by mutual settlement of
            other pending disputes for which both the sides approached the
            High Court and jointly prayed for quashing of the criminal
            proceedings or the FIR or complaint by the wife under Sections
            498A and 406 of I.P.C., whether the prayer can be declined on the
            sole ground that since the offences are non-compoundable under
            Section 320 of the Code, it would be impermissible for the court to
            quash the criminal proceedings or FIR or complaint.
                    8. It is not in dispute that in the case on hand subsequent
            to the filing of the criminal complaint under Sections 498A and
            406 of IPC and Sections 3 and 4 of the Dowry Prohibition Act,
            1961, with the help and intervention of family members, friends
            and well-wishers, the parties concerned have amicably settled
            their differences and executed a compromise/settlement. Pursuant
            thereto, the appellants filed the said compromise before the Trial
            Court with a request to place the same on record and to drop the
            criminal proceedings against the appellants herein. It is also not
            in dispute that in additional to the mutual settlement arrived at by
            the parties, respondent/-wife has also filed an affidavit stating that
            she did not wish to pursue the criminal proceedings against the
            appellants and fully supported the contents of the settlement deed.
            It is the grievance of the appellants that no only the Trial Court
            rejected such prayer of the parties but also the High Court failed
            toe exercise its jurisdiction under Section 482 of the Code only on
            the ground that the criminal proceedings relate to the offences
            punishable under Sections 498A and 406 of IPC which are non-
            compoundable in nature."
                    "12. In our view, it is the duty of the Courts to encourage
            genuine settlements of matrimonial disputes, particularly, when
            the same are on considerable increase. Even if the offences are

Crl.R.P. No. 1698 of 2014
                                                 7

            non-compoundable, if they relate to matrimonial disputes and the
            Court is satisfied that the parties have settled the same amicably
            and without any      pressure, we hold that for the purpose of
            securing ends of justice, Section 320 of the Code would not be a
            bar to the exercise of power of quashing of FIR, complaint or the
            subsequent criminal proceedings.
                    13. There has been an outburst of matrimonial disputes
            in recent times.      The institution of marriage occupies an
            important place and it has an important role to play in the society.
            Therefore, every effort should be made in the interest of the
            individuals in order to enable them to settle down in life and live
            peacefully. If the parties ponder over their defaults and terminate
            their disputes amicably by mutual agreement instead of fighting it
            out in a Court of law, in order to do complete justice in the
            matrimonial matters, the Courts should be less hesitant in
            exercising its extraordinary jurisdiction. It is trite to state that
            the power under Section 482 should be exercised sparingly and
            with circumspection only when the Court is convinced, on the
            basis of material on record, that allowing the proceedings to
            continue would be an abuse of the process of the Court or that the
            ends of justice require that the proceedings ought to be quashed."


Considering the particular facts and circumstances in this case, it

can be seen further that the criminal proceedings are initiated

consequent to the matrimonial dispute arose among the parties and

both the disputes are now amicably settled between the parties.

According to me, in the light of the facts and circumstances

involved in the present case, and particularly in view of the

settlement arrived in the present case, the dictum laid in the above

decisions will be squarely applicable in the present case. Hence, I

am of the view that as the parties to the dispute settled the issues

amicably, it is the duty of this Court to promote such settlement,

Crl.R.P. No. 1698 of 2014
                                   8

instead of compelling the parties to go on with the dispute. It is

pertinent to note that since the matter is settled out of court, in the

event of proceeding with the trial, there would not have any

fruitful prosecution, resulting the conviction of the accused, rather

the net result would be sheer waste of judicial time and abuse of

process of the court and proceedings.

            9.      According to me, in the light of the facts and

circumstances involved in the present case, and particularly, in

view of the settlement arrived in the present case, the dictum laid

in the above decision will be squarely applicable in the present

case. According to me, as the parties to the dispute settled the

issues amicably, it is the duty of this Court to promote such

settlement, instead of compelling the parties to go on with the

dispute. It is pertinent to note that since the matter is settled out of

court, in the event of proceeding with the trial, there would not

have any fruitful prosecution resulting the conviction of the

accused, rather the net result would be sheer waste of judicial time

and abuse of process of the court and proceedings.                Thus,

Crl.R.P. No. 1698 of 2014
                                     9

according to me, following the decisions cited supra, this Crl.R.P.

can be allowed granting the relief as sought for.

            In the result, Crl.M.A. No. 6184 of 2014 is allowed and

consequently the Crl.R.P. is allowed       setting aside the judgment

passed by the JFCM, Vadakara in C.C. No. 194/2008 dated 27-3-

2014 as confirmed by the Ist Addl.Sessions Judge, Kozhikode in

Crl.Appeal No. 198 of 2013 dated 4-6-2014 and also           quashing

all further proceedings pending against the petitioner in Crime No.

84 of 2008 of Edachery Police Station .

            Dated this the 1st day of October, 2014.




                                       Sd/-V.K.MOHANAN, JUDGE.

Ani                             /truecopy/



                                      P.S.ToJudge



