
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                              PRESENT:

             THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE K.RAMAKRISHNAN

      FRIDAY, THE 14TH DAY OF NOVEMBER 2014/23RD KARTHIKA, 1936

                     CRL.A.No. 506 of 2004 ( )
                     --------------------------


  AGAINST THE ORDER/JUDGMENT IN SC 330/2003 of ADDL. SESSIONS JUDGE
       FAST TRACK COURT-II (ADHOC), THRISSUR DATED 23-03-2004

APPELLANTS/ACCUSED NOS 1 TO 4.:
---------------------------------

          1.  BASHEER, S/O.SYED, PUNNILATH HOUSE,
       VELLIKULANGARA VILLAGE, KATTIPOKKAM DESOM,
       MUKUNDAPURAM TALUK.

          2.  SYED, S/O.KUNHUMARAKKAR, PUNNILATH HOUSE,
       VELLIKULANGARA VILLAGE, KATTIPOKKAM DESOM,
       MUKUNDAPURAM TALUK.

          3.  PATHUMMA, W/O.SYED, PUNNILATH HOUSE,
       VELLIKULANGARA VILLAGE, KATTIPOKKAM DESOM,
       MUKUNDAPURAM TALUK.

          4.  SAIFUDEEN, S/O.SYED, PUNNILATH HOUSE,
       VELLIKULANGARA VILLAGE, KATTIPOKKAM DESOM,
       MUKUNDAPURAM TALUK.

       BY ADVS.SRI.P.VIJAYA BHANU
                        SMT.P.MAYA


RESPONDENT/COMPLAINANT.:
-------------------------

       STATE OF KERALA, REP. BY THE
       PUBLIC PROSECUTOR, HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM.

         BY  PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SMT.SEENA RAMAKRISHNAN

       THIS CRIMINAL APPEAL  HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD  ON
 10-10-2014, THE COURT ON 14.11.2014 DELIVERED THE FOLLOWING:


                    K. RAMAKRISHNAN, J.
                  .................................................
                        Crl.A.No.506 of 2004
                  ..................................................
          Dated this the 14th day of November, 2014.

                                O R D E R


     Accused 1 to 4 in S.C.No.330/2003 on the file of the

Additional Sessions Court, Fast Track Court-II, Thrissur are the

appellants herein. The appellants were charge sheeted by the

Sub Inspector of Police, Vellikulangara in Crime No.178/2002

under Section 304 B read with Section 34 of the Indian Penal

Code.

     2. The case of the prosecution in nutshell was that the

deceased Shamla married the first accused Basheer on 2.4.2000

and thereafter she was living with the first accused along with

the other accused persons in their house and while so, she was

subjected to cruelty, both physically and mentally, demanding

more dowry, which prompted her to commit suicide on

19.9.2002 at 11.30 a.m from the house of the accused and

thereby all of them have committed the                         offence punishable

under Section 304 B read with Section 34 of the Indian Penal

Code.

      3. After investigation, final report was filed before the

Crl.A.No.506 of 2004              2

Judicial First Class Magistrate Court, Chalakudy, where it was

taken on file as C.P.38/2003 and thereafter it was committed to

Sessions Court, Thrissur by the learned Magistrate under

Section 209 of the Code of Criminal Procedure and thereafter

it was made over to the Additional Sessions Court, Fast track-

II, Thrissur for disposal.

       4. When the appellants appeared before the court below,

the learned Additional Sessions Judge after hearing both sides,

framed charge under Section 304 B read with Section 34 of

the Indian Penal Code against all the accused. The same was

read over and explained to them and they pleaded not guilty.

       5. In order to prove the case of the prosecution, Pws 1 to

16 were examined, Exts.P1 to P12 and P12(a) and MOs 1 and

2 were marked on the side of the prosecution. After closure of

the prosecution evidence, the accused were questioned under

Section 313 of the Code and they denied all the incriminating

circumstances brought against them in the prosecution evidence.

The first accused had stated that on the previous day of the

incident, deceased Shamla was having cough and she went to

the doctor for consultation. Some days prior to the same, when

doctor was consulted, it was revealed that she was pregnant.

Crl.A.No.506 of 2004             3

The first accused purchased medicine at       9.45   a.m on that

day and then went to the work spot. A jeep driver came to the

work spot and wanted him to come to his house. There was no

circumstance for committing suicide. They were all residing

there happily and unitedly. The second accused had stated that

he had nothing more to say than what was stated by his son,

the first accused and he is an ill person.    The third accused

has stated that when she came, she saw flames and since she

was not able to open the door she came to the road side and

made hue and cry.       At that time, one young lady came and

she told her that flame is coming from the kitchen and she did

not know the reason. Immediately that lady poured water

through the window and she told to open the door somehow.

Accordingly, the door was opened. By the time, she lost her

consciousness. When water was poured, it was revealed that it

was Shamla, who died by setting fire to her. The 4th accused

has stated that they are innocent and the statement given by

the family members of the deceased are false and it was not a

case of suicide and it is an accidental death. Since the evidence

of the accused did not warrant an acquittal under Section 232

of the Code, the appellants were called upon to enter       their

Crl.A.No.506 of 2004              4

defence. But no oral or documentary evidence adduced on the

side of the appellants in defence except marking Ext.D1and D2,

the contradictions in the 161 statement of Pws1 and 4. After

considering the evidence on record, the learned Additional

Sessions Judge found the appellants guilty under Section 304

B read with Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code and convicted

them thereunder and sentenced accused 1 and 4 to undergo

rigorous imprisonment for 7 years each and accused 2 and 3

to undergo simple imprisonment for 7 years each. Aggrieved

by the same, the present appeal has been preferred by the

appellants/accused before the court below.

       6. Heard the learned counsel for the appellants and the

learned Public Prosecutor.

       7. The points that arise for consideration are:

       i. Whether the court below was justified in coming to the

conclusion that the prosecution has proved beyond reasonable

doubt that the accused have committed the offence punishable

under Section 304B of the Indian Penal Code and consequential

conviction for that offence is proper?

       ii. If so, the sentence imposed is proper and legal?

Crl.A.No.506 of 2004             5

       8. Point No.1:

       The learned counsel for the appellants      submitted that

except the evidence of Pws1 to 6, there is no other evidence to

connect the incident. PW1 is the person,      who rushed to the

spot immediately on seeing the incident and she did not support

the case of the prosecution except stating that on hearing the

hue and cry, she rushed to the spot and saw the third accused

brooming one of the rooms and at that time she saw some flames

coming from the kitchen side and immediately she rushed to the

spot and at that time the third accused also followed. Thereafter

she poured water through the window and opened the door

and again poured water to bring down the flame and only

thereafter they could see the body of Shamla in           flames.

Thereafter she sent a person to bring the first accused and at

that time, the 4th accused came there and they          took the

deceased to the hospital.     She had further stated that    the

deceased was residing happily and she is a moody person and

used to told that there was some quarrel between the deceased

and mother-in-law and she thought that it was the usual thing

in all the families. Except this, there is nothing spoken to by

PW1 regarding the incident and she is a neighbour as well.

Crl.A.No.506 of 2004             6

Pw3 is the brother of the deceased, who gave the First

Information Statement, PW4 is her first cousin, PW5        is the

mother of the deceased and PW6 is the sister of the deceased

and they were only said about the ill treatment        alleged to

have happened some months ago. There is nothing on record

to show that soon before the death, the deceased was subjected

to cruelty        demanding dowry, so as to  attract the offence

punishable under Section 304 B of the Indian Penal Code.

Further, the relative witnesses have improved their version

regarding the alleged cruelty      said to have been spoken to

them by the deceased which they have not stated before the

investigating officer.

        9. Further, the evidence of PW2, the doctor will go to

show that some days prior to the incident namely 4.9.2002,

the deceased along with her husband came for check up and it

was revealed at that time that she was pregnant and           on

19.9.2002 in the morning the deceased came to the hospital

and since she was in the labour room and she could not attend

the deceased personally and when enquired, it was understood

that she was having some cough and she advised to give

some medicine.        She proved  Ext.P2   prescription and  her

Crl.A.No.506 of 2004             7

evidence will go to show that there is a possibility of depression

during pregnancy.

       10. Further, the evidence of Pws 3 to 6 will go to show

that     the deceased did not disclose the factum of second

pregnancy to them and she was worried about the second

pregnancy and might have prompted her to commit suicide.

There is no evidence of any ill treatment except some vague

statement given by the witnesses. So, under the circumstances,

the courts below were not justified in convicting the appellants

for the offence alleged.

          11. On the other hand, the learned Public Prosecutor

submitted that the evidence of Pws 3 to 6 will go to show that

the deceased was being subjected to cruelty on the ground that

dowry given was not sufficient and even on certain occasions,

when the deceased came to the house along with the first

accused, he had beaten her in front of them.          Further, the

evidence will go to show that the ill treatment continued and

there is no possibility of the impact of the ill treatment  going

away from the mind of the deceased till her committing suicide.

So it can be taken that the deceased was subjected to cruelty

soon before her death and       the court below     was   perfectly

Crl.A.No.506 of 2004            8

justified in convicting the appellants for the said offence.

       12. The case of the prosecution as emerged from the

prosecution witnesses was as follows:

       Deceased Shamla was given in marriage to the first

accused Basheer, who is the son of accused 2 and 3 and brother

of the 4th accused on 2.4.2000 as per custom. The father of

the deceased was a deaf and dumb person. She was having two

brothers, one of whom is PW3 and two sisters Haseena Rukkiya

(PW6) and Seenath. The deceased Shamla was the youngest

daughter of her parents. According to the prosecution witnesses,

at the time of marriage 25 sovereigns of gold ornaments and

cash of Rs.50,000/- was given as dowry. The first accused

was engaged in the sale of clothes on instalment basis and also

doing business in bangles at     festival places. For one month,

their marital life was happy and thereafter all the accused

persons including her husband started ill treating her, both

physically and mentally stating that dowry given was less and

he would have got more dowry if he had married any other

person and asked      her to get more cash and also beaten her.

When she came to home, she used to tell about these things

to PW3, her brother and PW5 her mother. She used to go to

Crl.A.No.506 of 2004             9

the house of PW4, her cousin brother and PW6 her sister and

she used to tell about the ill treatment. Pws 3 and 5 had gone

to the house of first accused once and asked him not to treat

her cruelly and thereafter there was some change in the attitude,

but according to the prosecution, after some time they started

repeating the same. In the meantime, she became pregnant

and came home for delivery and       delivered the first child and

went back to her matrimonial home after delivery. Even

thereafter, the ill treatment continued. In the meantime, she

had some health problems and the first accused and the

deceased went to consult PW2, a Gynecologist and it was

revealed at that time that she was pregnant second time,

which is evidenced from Ext.P2 prescription given by PW2.

Thereafter they went home. According to the prosecution, that

was happened on       4.9.2002. Thereafter again on 19.9.2002

the deceased went to the hospital of PW2. But at that time,

PW2 was busy with her labour room engagement and she could

not     attend the deceased      personally and  thereafter she

enquired through the staff and came to understand that she

was having some cough problem and she advised the staff to

give medicine and      thereafter she came to   know about the

Crl.A.No.506 of 2004           10

death of the deceased. On 19.9.2002 at about 11.30 a.m while

PW1, who is a neighbour, was brooming the court yard of her

house, she heard some hue and cry from the house of the

accused and immediately she rushed to the spot and saw some

flames coming from the kitchen and she could not enter the

room as it was bolted from inside and thereafter she came to

the kitchen side of the house and saw flames coming from the

kitchen. She had seen the third accused, the mother of the

first accused brooming another room in that house. On seeing

PW1, she also accompanied her and PW1 took some water

and poured inside the kitchen to subside the fire. Since it was

not subsided, she broke open the room, went inside and

poured some more water.        At that time, she  found some

substance burning under the platform of the kitchen and after

subsiding of the fire, they could understand that it was the

deceased Shamla and she asked her why she had been done and

thereafter at her instance the 4th accused came there and took

the deceased to the hospital. The matter was informed to PW3

and family members of the deceased and PW3 came to the

house and then went to the hospital. He gave Ext.P3 statement

to the police which was recorded by PW11, the Assistant Sub

Crl.A.No.506 of 2004          11

Inspector of Police and he registered Ext.P8 First Information

Report as Crime 178/2002 of Vellikulangara police station

against the appellants under Section 304 B read with Section

34 of the Indian Penal Code. When she was taken to hospital, it

was revealed that she died. The Tahsildar came to the place

and conducted inquest of the body of the deceased and PW11

prepared Ext.P4 inquest report as instructed by the Tahsildar

and the inquest was conducted in the presence of PW7 and

others and it was revealed during inquest that the deceased

died due to ill treatment demanding dowry at the hands of the

accused. At the request of PW11, PW12,Dr. N.G. Ravi conducted

postmortem examination and issued Ext.P11 postmortem

certificate, in which he had opined that the deceased died due

to burn injuries. PW11 collected the articles seen at the place

of occurrence and also on the body of the deceased including

MO1 kannas with kerosene and MO2 gold ornaments found on

the body of the deceased and forwarded the same to the court

along with Ext.P9 property list. He seized Ext.P2 prescription

given by PW2 to the deceased as Per Ext.P10 seizure mahazer.

As requested by the investigating officer, PW9, the Village

Officer went to the place of occurrence and prepared Ext.P6

Crl.A.No.506 of 2004                12

sketch plan of the place of occurrence and also issued Ext.P5

ownership certificate of the house from where the deceased

committed suicide. The articles taken at the time of inquest

were produced before the police by PW13. Thereafter the

investigation       was   conducted       by   PW10,      the    Deputy

Superintendent of Police, Thrissur. He questioned the witnesses

and     recorded their statement.        He seized Ext.P12 marriage

register containing Ext.P12 (a) entry regarding the marriage of

the first accused and deceased Shamla as produced by PW14,

then Secretary of the Aduvassery Muslim Juma ath the as per

Ext.P7 mahazer in        the presence of PW10 and another.          He

completed the investigation and submitted final report

       13. Before going into the merits of the case on facts, this

Court felt that it is appropriate to consider the precedents to

understand law on the aspect and the ingredients of the offence

to be proved and the presumption to be drawn on the basis of

the amendment to the Evidence Act on this aspect.

       14. Section 304 B deals with dowry death, which reads as

follows:

                  34 B Dowry death :- (1) Where the death of   a

          woman is caused by any burns or bodily injury or occurs

Crl.A.No.506 of 2004                    13

          otherwise than under normal circumstances within seven

          years of her marriage and it is shown that soon before

          her death she was subjected to cruelty or harassment by

          her husband or any relative of her husband for, or in

          connection with, any demand for dowry, such death shall

          be called "dowry death", and such husband or relative

          shall be deemed to have caused her death.

                  Explanation:- For the purpose of this this sub-section,

          "dowry" shall have the same meaning as in section 2 of

          the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1962 (28 of 1961).

                  (2) Whoever    commits     dowry     death   shall be

          punished with imprisonment       for a term which shall not

          be less than seven years         but which may extend to

          imprisonment for life."

       15. The presumption to be drawn in the case of suicide

and dowry death were incorporated in the Evidence Act which

read as follows:

                113A. Presumption as to abetment of suicide by a

         married    woman:- When      the   question is   whether    the

         commission of suicide by a woman had been abetted by

         her husband or any relative of her husband and it is shown

         that she had committed suicide within a period of seven

         years from the date of her marriage and that her husband

         or such    relative of her husband had        subjected her to

Crl.A.No.506 of 2004                   14

         cruelty, the Court may presume, having regard to all the

         other circumstances of the case, that such suicide had

         been abetted by her husband or by such relative of her

         husband.

                Explanation:- For the    purposes    of this   section,

         "cruelty" shall have the same meaning as in section 498 A

         of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).




         113B. Presumption as to dowry death:- When the question

         is whether a person has committed the dowry death of a

         woman and it is shown that soon before her death such

         woman has been subjected      by such person to cruelty or

         harassment for, or in connection with, any demand for

         dowry, the Court shall presume that such person had

         caused the dowry death.

                Explanation:- For the purposes of this section, "dowry

         death" shall have the same meaning as in section 304B

         of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).




       16. In order to attract the presumption under Section 113

B of the Evidence Act in connection with dowry death

punishable under Section 304 B of the Indian Penal Code, what

are all the things to be established has been considered by the

Hon'ble Supreme Court in Kashmir Kaur v. State of Punjab

Crl.A.No.506 of 2004                    15

(2012 (4) KLT Suppl.90 SC)=(JT 2012 (12) SC 396) as follows:

                 "16. From the above        decisions   the    following

         principles can be culled out:

                 a. To attract the provisions of Section 304 B IPC

         the main ingredient of the offence to be established is that

         soon before the death of the deceased she was subjected to

         cruelty and harassment in connection with the demand of

         dowry.

                 b. The death of the deceased woman was caused by

         any burn or bodily injury or some other circumstance which

         was not normal.

                 c. Such death occurs within seven years from the

         date of her marriage.

                 d. That the   victim was   subjected     to cruelty or

         harassment      by her   husband    or   any relative of   her

         husband.

                 e. Such cruelty or harassment should be for or in

         connection with demand of dowry.

                 f. It should be established that such cruelty and

         harassment was made soon before her death.

                 g. The expression (soon before) is relative term and it

         would depend upon       circumstances of each case and no

         straightjacket formula can be laid down as to what would

         constitute a period of soon before the occurrence.

                 h. It would  be hazardous     to indicate    any fixed

Crl.A.No.506 of 2004                    16

         period and that brings in the importance of a proximity

         test both for the proof of an offence of dowry death as well

         as for raising a presumption under Section 113Bof the

         Evidence Act.

                 i. Therefore, the expression "soon before"    would

         normally imply that the interval should not be much

         between the concerned cruelty or harassment and the

         death in question. There must be existence of a proximate

         or life link between the effect of cruelty based on dowry

         demand and a the concerned death.         In other words, it

         should not be remote in point of time and thereby make it a

         stale one.

                 j. However, the expression "soon before" should not

         be given a narrow meaning which would otherwise defeat

         the very purpose of the provisions of the Act and should not

         lead to absurd results.

                 k. Section   304B is an    exception to the cardinal

         principles of criminal jurisprudence that a suspect in the

         Indian Law is entitled to the protection of Article 20 of the

         Constitution, as well as, a presumption of innocence in his

         favour.      The concept    of    deeming fiction is hardly

         applicable     to   criminal   jurisprudence        but    in

         contradistinction    to this aspect of     criminal law, the

         legislature applied the concept of deeming fiction to the

         provisions of Section 304B.

Crl.A.No.506 of 2004                     17

                 i. Such deeming fiction resulting in a presumption, is

         however a rebuttable presumption and the husband and

         his relatives, can, by leading their defence prove that the

         ingredients of Section 304 B were not satisfied.

                 m. The specific significance to be attached is to the

         time of the alleged cruelty and harassment to which the

         victim was subjected to, he time of her death and whether

         the alleged demand of dowry was in connection with the

         marriage. Once the said ingredients were satisfied it will be

         called dowry death and by deemed fiction of law the

         husband      or the relatives will be deemed        to have

         committed that offence".




       17. The same principle has been reiterated in the decisions

reported in Prem Singh v. State of Haryana (AIR 1998 SC

2628), K. Prema S. Rao & another v. Yadla Srinivasa Rao

and others (2003 (1) SCC 217), Kaliyaperumal & another

v. State of Tamil Nadu (2004 (9) SCC 157), Harjit Singh v.

State of Punjab (2006 (1) SCC 463), Ram Badan Sharma v.

State of Bihar ( 2006(10)SCC 115), Devi Lal v. State of

Rajasthan (2007(14) SCC 176), Hazarilal v. State of Madhya

Pradesh (2009 (13) SCC 783), Pathan Hussain Basha                        v.

State of        A.P. (JT 2012 (7) SC           432), State of Kerala v.

Crl.A.No.506 of 2004                  18

Rajayyan (1994 (2) KLT 700).

       18. It is clear from the above decisions that in order to

attract the presumption of dowry death, the prosecution has

to prove that :

       (1) the death of woman was caused by any burns or bodily

       injury or in some other circumstances which were not normal

       (2) such death occurs within seven years from the date of her

       marriage (3) that the victim was subjected to cruelty or

       harassment by her husband or any relatives of her husband (4)

       such cruelty or harassment should be for or in connection

       with the demand of dowry and (5) it is established that such

       cruelty and harassment was made soon before her death. It

       has been further observed in these decisions that 'soon before

       death' is a    relative term and it would depend upon the

       circumstances of each case and no straitjacket formula can

       be laid down as to what would constitute a period of soon

       before the occurrence. It would be hazardous to indicate any

       fixed period, and that brings in the importance of a proximity

       test both for the proof of an offence of dowry death as well as

       for    raising  a presumption under      Section 113 B of the

       Evidence Act. The expression 'soon before her death' used in

       the substantive Section 304 B IPC and Section 113 B of the

       Evidence Act is present with the idea of proximity test. No

       definite period has been indicated and the expression 'soon

Crl.A.No.506 of 2004                   19

       before' is not defined as well. It is clear from the above

       decisions that the determination of the period which can come

       within the term 'soon before' is left to be determined by the

       courts, depending upon facts and circumstances of each case.

       Suffice, however, to indicate that the expression 'soon before'

       would normally imply that the interval should not be much

       between the cruelty or harassment    concerned and the death

       in question.    There must be existence of a proximate and life

       link between the effect of cruelty based on dowry demand and

       the death concerned. If the     alleged incident of  cruelty is

       remote in time and has become stale enough not to disturb the

       mental equilibrium of the woman concerned, it would be of no

       consequence.

       19. Further in the decision reported in Manu Sao v. State

of Bihar (2010(12)SCC 310) the Hon'ble Supreme Court has

considered the scope of failure to explain incriminating

circumstances by the accused in his 313 examination and

observed that:

         The primary purpose is to establish a direct dialogue

       between the court and the accused and to put the accused

       every     important incriminating piece of    evidence  and

       grant him an opportunity to answer and explain. Once such

       a statement is recorded, the next question that has to be

       considered by the court   is to what extent and consequences

Crl.A.No.506 of 2004                    20

       such statement can be used during the enquiry and trial.

       The statement of the accused can be used to test the veracity

       of the    exculpatory nature of the admission, if any, made by

       the accused. It    can be   taken into consideration in    any

       enquiry or trial   but still it is not strictly evidence in the

       case.    The provisions of Section 313 (4) explicitly provide

       that the answers given by the accused may be         taken into

       consideration in such enquiry or trial and put as evidence

       against the accused in any other enquiry or trial for any other

       offence for which such answers may tend to show         he has

       committed. In other words, the use       is permissible as per

       the provisions of the Code but has its own limitations. The

       courts may rely on a portion of the statement of the accused

       and find him guilty in consideration of the other evidence

       against him led by the prosecution, however, such statements

       made under this section should not be considered in isolation


       in conjunction with the evidence adduced by the prosecution.

       Further in the same decision, it has been observed that :

       The object of recording the statement of the accused under

       Section 313 CrPC is to put all incriminating evidence against

       the accused so as to provide him an opportunity to explain

       such incriminating circumstances appearing against him        in

       the evidence of the prosecution.      At the same time, also to

       permit him    to put forward his own version or reasons, if he

       so chooses, in relation to his involvement or otherwise in the

Crl.A.No.506 of 2004                   21

       crime.     The court has been empowered to examine the

       accused but only      after the prosecution evidence has been

       concluded. It is mandatory obligation upon the court and

       besides ensuring the compliance therewith       the court has to

       keep in mind     that the accused gets a fair chance to explain

       his conduct.    The option lies with the accused to     maintain

       silence coupled with simpliciter denial or in the alternative  to

       explain     his versions and   reasons    can for his     alleged

       involvement in the commission of the crime.          This is the

       statement which the      accused makes without fear or right of

       the other party to cross examine him. However, if the

       statements made is false, the court is entitled to draw adverse

       inferences and pas consequential orders, as may be called for

       in accordance with law.




       20. In the decision reported in             Sharad Birdhichand

Sarda v. State of Maharashtra (AIR 1984 SC 1623) the

Hon'ble Supreme Court has held that statement given by the

deceased relating to her death is admissible under Section 32

(1) of the Evidence Act and it is applicable to both homicide

and suicide. Further in the same decision, it has been observed

that the evidence of close relatives should be examined by the

court with great care and caution as there is possibility of

Crl.A.No.506 of 2004                   22

tendency to exaggerate or add facts by them.

       21. In the decision reported in Arulvelu and another

v. State        represented by the             Public Prosecutor      and

another (2009 (10) SCC 206) the evidenciary value of the First

Information Statement has been considered by the Hon'ble

Apex Court and observed that the               First Information Report

should at least mention the broad story of the prosecution and

not mentioning the material and vital facts may affect credibility

of First Information Report. It has been observed that the First

Information Report cannot be an encyclopedia to contain all

the details of the history of the case but at least should mention

broad story of the prosecution.

       22. In the decision reported in Kans Raj v.State of

Punjab and others (2000 Crl.L.J 2993) it has been observed

that:

          For the fault of the husband, the in-laws or the other

          relations cannot, in all cases, be roped in only on ground

          of being close all cases be held to be involved in the

          demand of dowry. In cases where such accusations are

          made, the overt acts attributed to persons other than

          husband are required to be proved beyond reasonable

          doubt. By   mere conjectures     and   implications   such

Crl.A.No.506 of 2004                   23

          relations cannot be held   guilty for the offence relating

          to dowry deaths. A tendency has, however, developed

          for roping in all relations of the in-laws of the deceased

          wives in the matters of     dowry    death which,   if not

          discouraged,    is likely to     affect the case of the

          prosecution even against the real culprits. In their over

          enthusiasm and anxiety to seek conviction for maximum

          people the parents of the deceased have been found to be

          making    efforts for   involving other   relations which

          ultimately   weaken   the case of the prosecution even

          against the real accused.

Further in the same decision it has been held that:

            In order to admit  the evidence under Section 32 of

           the Evidence Act statement by the deceased           not

           required to have been made in imminent expectation of


           death so as to be admitted in evidence.

Further in the same decision the scope of 'soon before death'

occurring in Section 304 B has been considered and observed

that:

           Continuous harassment connected with        the demand of

          dowry shown to be in existence till date when deceased

          reported to have met parents two days before her death.

          There     was   no   intervening    circumstance    showing

          settlement    regarding   demand of     dowry   brought on

Crl.A.No.506 of 2004                    24

          record. Existence of harassment would be deemed to be

          'soon before death'.

It has been further observed that:

          In relation to dowry deaths, the circumstances showing the

         existence of cruelty or harassment to the deceased are not

         restricted to a particular   instance but normally refer to a

         course of   conduct. Such conduct may be        spread over a

         period of time. If the cruelty or harassment or demand for

         dowry is shown to have persisted, it shall be deemed to be

         'soon before death' if any other intervening circumstance

         showing the non existence of such treatment is not brought

         on record, before the alleged such treatment and the date of

         death. It does not, however, mean that such time can be


         stretched to any period.

In the same decision it has been observed that:

        Moreover, no presumption under Section 113 B of the Evidence

        Act would be drawn against the accused if it is shown that

        after the alleged demand, cruelty or harassment the dispute

        resolved and there is no evidence of    cruelty and harassment

        thereafter.   Mere lapse of some time      by itself would not

        provide to an accused a defence, if the course of a conduct

        relating to cruelty or harassment in connection with the dowry

        demand is shown to have existed earlier in time not too late

        and too stale before the date of death of the woman.

Crl.A.No.506 of 2004              25

With the above principle in mind, the facts and evidence in this

case has to be evaluated.

       23. In this case, there is no dispute regarding the fact that

the marriage between the deceased and the first accused was

conducted on 2.4.2000 and it is also an admitted fact that the

deceased died on 19.9.2002 from the house of the accused

persons due to burn injuries caused as a result of her committing

suicide by setting fire to herself. So it is clear from the above

that the death was not a natural one and this was happened

within seven years of marriage. In order to attract the offence

under Section 304 B of the Indian Penal Code the prosecution

has to further prove that there existed cruelty or harassment

met by the deceased at the hands of the accused in connection

with demand for dowry and that harassment or cruelty was

done or committed soon before the commission of suicide. So

unless these two links are proved by the prosecution beyond

releasable doubt, it cannot be said that the prosecution has

proved that the accused have committed the offence punishable

under Section 304 B of the Indian Penal Code.

       24. In order to prove the last two limbs of the offence, the

prosecution relies on the evidence of PWs 1 to 6. PW1 is a

Crl.A.No.506 of 2004           26

neighbour of the accused persons and it was she who had first

seen the deceased in flames     in the kitchen   of that house.

According to her, on the date of the alleged incident, at about

11.30 a.m while she was brooming her courtyard of the house,

she heard some sound from the house of the deceased and

immediately she rushed to the spot and she saw the front door

closed from inside. Thereafter she ran towards the kitchen side

and at that time she saw the third accused, the mother of the

first accused, Pathumma was brooming the neighboring rooms.

When she ran towards the kitchen, the third accused also

accompanied her and it was at that time she saw flames coming

from the kitchen and she poured water though the window to

put off the fire and thereafter she went inside and again

poured water and found somebody under the platform of the

kitchen slab and identified her as Shamla, the deceased and

she asked her j]j(V Rf:]RpK]sOU ^}v]\OWPRa? and at that time

the third accused asked j} IM!@>]sLeV CT kr4fV. Cv]Ra

IMO:Lp]YLeV j} kr4fV ? She had further stated that she had

not seen any dispute between the deceased and her husband and

she never complained about her husband to her. She had

Crl.A.No.506 of 2004             27

stated about her feelings in respect of the incident as follows:

AZLp]AZpOU oqOoWtOU fZ]sOg y~qS\!\p]sfLp]q](OU IPV

SfLPOPO. nLq|pOU n!>LvOU fZ]$ KqO vu(OU `L" W:]Y]sf.

AfORWL:LeV Rf:]RpK]sOU ^}v]\OWPRa IPO S\Lh]\fV. n!>Lv]

Rjkc] Av! KPOU kr4]sf. She had denied having stated in

Ext.P1        that  from the date of the marriage,   the accused

persons were finding fault with the work done by the deceased

and quarreling with her. She had further described the things

happened in the house as follows:

yz](L" vaLRf ^}v](L" kcL>fORWL:Ssf? Asf. CaR(K]sOU

vu(O:L(LrOS:L?. Ca`V DZpOU oWtOU WPa] vu(V WPaOPfV `L" W:]

YO:V. It is also seen from her evidence that the deceased was not

in the habit of      freely mingling  with others and she is    a

reserved type. When a question was put to her regarding the

reason for to commit suicide, she had stated as follows:

j]0tORa An]NkLp>]$ Av%(]v]Ra BDzf| R\aOvLjOg WLqeU

DS:L? BDzf| R\aLjOg WLqeU IsfL yLiLqe v}aOWt]$

D:LWOPfOSkLRs DZpOU oqOoWtOU \]sSUL% D:LWLrOS:L? Ij]`r]p]sf.

She further stated that she had       denied     having stated in

Ext.D1, as stated to the investigating officer that at the time

when she reached there, the third accused was coming towards

Crl.A.No.506 of 2004           28

her house with the child of Basheer from the northern side to

southern side and she denied that she did not state to the

police that at the time when she came to the house, the third

accused was brooming the room next to the kitchen from there

the incident occurred. These are the contradictions and

omissions brought in the evidence of PW1. She was declared

hostile     as she did not support the case of the prosecution

regarding the cruelty met by the deceased at the hands of the

accused person. Though her evidence will go to show that

there was some incidents that used to happen in the house of the

deceased such as quarrel between the mother-in-law and the

daughter-in-law and she had no case that the other accused

persons have got any ill will for committing any act of cruelty

against the deceased as according to her such things used to

happen in all houses. She had no case that the deceased ever

told that the accused persons had at any time assaulted her

physically or made any demand for dowry. But that will not

helpful to come to the conclusion that there was any demand

for dowry and the quarrel was on account of the same. Even

her evidence will go to show that such things or quarrel will

happen usually in all houses. Further she had improved in her

Crl.A.No.506 of 2004            29

evidence that the third accused was there inside the house at

the time when she came. But she had a different case before

the police that the third accused came along with the child of

the first accused from outside towards the house when she

ran towards the house and she joined her also. So it is very

difficult to believe the evidence of this witness on the

question of the third accused being inside the house when the

deceased set flame to herself with a view to commit suicide

and also to infer that she did not do anything to help her as

observed by the court below in the judgment.

       25. PW2 is the doctor, who examined the deceased on

4.9.2002 and detected her second pregnancy and she had

proved Ext.P2 prescription given by her. She had also stated

that     at that time the first accused also accompanied her.

Further she had also stated that on 19.9.2002, the deceased

came but she was in the operation theater and so she told

her staff to give some cough syrup and she came in the early

morning of that day. She did not personally examine her on

that day and she could not say as to whether her husband also

accompanied her on the second occasion. In the cross

examination, she had stated that during pregnancy, some

Crl.A.No.506 of 2004            30

woman may have depression. If it is unwanted pregnancy, the

depression will be more. But she had added that the deceased

did not want termination of pregnancy. So her evidence is

also not helpful to prove the mental status of the deceased at

the time when she came there on the second occasion. Further

she had also no case that the deceased was having any grievance

at the time when she came along with her husband on 4.9.2002,

when the second pregnancy was confirmed. But her evidence

also will go to show that some woman may have depression at

the time of pregnancy and if it is an unwanted pregnancy, the

depression will be more.

       26. PW3 is the brother of the deceased, who gave Ext.P3

statement, on the basis of which the crime was registered.

He had no direct knowledge about the incident. When he came

to know about the incident, he came to the house and then went

to the hospital and thereafter gave statement to the police, on

the basis of which, the case was registered. His case was that

at the time of marriage 25 sovereigns of gold ornaments and

cash worth Rs.50,000/- was given and after the marriage she

was residing with her husband in their house. He had also

stated that for one month after the marriage, her marital life

Crl.A.No.506 of 2004              31

was happy and thereafter it was miserable and she was being

harassed by the father, mother and brother of the first accused,

who were arrayed as accused 2 to 4 and they used to harass

her both physically and mentally. He had also stated that he

used to saw the deceased after one month of the marriage.

Whenever she came home, at that time she used to tell that

accused 2 to 4 used to tell that if Basheer had married any other

lady he would have got more dowry and Basheer also used to

tell the same to her. He had also stated that on one or two

occasions, the first accused had beaten the deceased from their

house as well. But he did not mention the reason for the same.

He had further stated that when the deceased told about the

same, he along with his paternal uncle's son and mother went

to the house of the accused after six months of the marriage

and apprised of the difficulties of the deceased and thereafter

for some time the same was not repeated and she became

pregnant and she was taken to their house during the 7th

month and after       delivery, she was taken back after three

months of delivery with the child and even thereafter, according

to PW3, the ill treatment continued by all the accused and the

deceased was tolerating all these things and living with them

Crl.A.No.506 of 2004              32

considering their financial difficulties in the house. He had also

stated that on account of the ill treatment met by her alleging

that the amount and gold ornaments were less, she committed

suicide. He had further stated that whatever written in Ext.P3

are correct. He had further stated that he had given Rs.50,000/-

which they received in connection with the marriage of their

brother and there is no document to prove this fact.           The

marriage of his brother was conducted 29 days after the

marriage of the deceased. He had further stated that he did not

make any complaint to the juma ath or to any authorities

about the ill treatment met by his sister in the house of the

accused persons and he filed complaints to several persons

only after her death. He had also stated that he did not make

any attempt         with the juma ath officials to interfere in the

matter. He had also deposed that the deceased          was three

months pregnant and the first accused insisted for abortion

and while they were returning from the hospital, they quarreled

on this and this was so stated by the persons, who were

present in the house of the accused, at the time when they

reached the house on hearing the death of the deceased. But

this was not stated to anyone either by the deceased or by

Crl.A.No.506 of 2004            33

the present witnesses. None were examined to prove this fact

as well. In fact, the evidence of PW3 will go to show that they

were not aware of the second pregnancy till they reached the

house after hearing the death. So this is an improvement

made by him at the time of evidence. He had also stated that

one month prior to the death, he had come to their house and

he along with PW5, the mother of the deceased, went to the

house of the accused to see Shamla two or three days prior to

the death. Even at that time, she did not disclose about the

pregnancy. So the allegation that she was harassed by the first

accused by insisting for abortion as stated by him appears to be

unbelievable especially when she did not even tell them about

the second pregnancy, which is quite abnormal in the case of

women becoming pregnant not disclosing the facts to her

own mother if she was really interested in that pregnancy or she

was not worried about the pregnancy at that time.       Even in

Ext.P3 this witness had not stated that she died on account of

the ill treatment    met by her both physically and mentally and

also due to the pressure exerted on her by the first accused to

abort the second pregnancy. Further he had also not mentioned

in Ext.P3 that the first accused had demanded further dowry

Crl.A.No.506 of 2004             34

or he had told him that the dowry given is not sufficient though

he had stated so before the court. He did not say that he had

gone to the house of the accused to see the deceased two or

three days prior to the death as well. So, it is clear from this

that he is trying to embellish his versions before court so as to

appear that it is a case of dowry death.

       27. PW4 is the first cousin of the deceased and PW3.

He was examined to prove that Rs.50,000/- cash and 25

sovereigns of gold ornaments were given at the time of marriage

and     also to prove that the deceased used to say about her

difficulties in the house of the accused when she used to come

to their house. He had stated that the deceased used to say

whenever she came to his house that all the accused persons

used to harass her stating that dowry given is not sufficient.

But when         he  wanted to interfere, she  told  that if they

interfere, it will be difficult to her to live there. He had also

stated that he along with the mother of the deceased and

brother went to the house of the accused to enquire about

the same earlier. Thereafter he had never interfered in the

matter. He had no case that the deceased died due to

harassment met by her at the hands of the accused.       But only

Crl.A.No.506 of 2004            35

when suggestive question was asked to the reason for the

same, he had stated that the accused were responsible for the

death.      Several statements stated by him before the court

were not stated when he was questioned by the police and he

had not made any complaint about non recording of the things

mentioned when he was questioned. He also had a case that

the    Dy.S.P, who conducted    the investigation had behaved

badly with them when they went for requesting for proper

investigation. It is also stated by him that they have formed

an action council to enquire about the death of the deceased

properly and made complaints to several authorities including

the Chief Minister in this regard. He had further stated that

he did not mention all things known to him when he was

questioned at the time of inquest. He had not stated before

the police that Shamla told him that if he made any complaint,

her position will be bad in the house of the accused. He had

further stated that he had only suspicion regarding the death

of the deceased at the time when he was questioned by the

police. He had also not stated as to when the deceased last

told about the alleged ill treatment. He had no case that the

accused demanded more dowry and on that basis she was ill

Crl.A.No.506 of 2004           36

treated as well. So it is not safe to rely on his evidence to

prove the ill treatment or that was soon before the death and

the ill treatment continued even thereafter

       28. PW5 is the mother of the deceased. She had also in a

way corroborated with the evidence of PWs 3 and 4 on the

question of deceased telling about her experience in the house

of the deceased. She had further stated that v}YO vu(O IsfL v}Y]

sOU `0tORa v}Y]sOU D:LWLrO:V. CSf SkLRs hOq]fRUYV D:LWOU IPV

WqOf]p]sf. So she also did not treat the instances narrated by

her daughter so seriously as she felt that it was only normal

things happening in all the houses. Though she had stated

before the court that the deceased had told her that she will

somehow manage to live there and she left the house, she did

not state to the police that the deceased was beaten by the

accused persons. She had also stated that she did not state to

the police that the deceased had told that all were married

and she was also given in marriage. It is also seen from the

evidence that the deceased was given in marriage at the time

when she was only 19 years. She had also stated that n!>Lv]

R# WPRa fLoy](LjLp]qOSPL Av%(]lU?ARf. oW% q:LofV Y!nU iq]

Crl.A.No.506 of 2004             37

\ v]vqU j]0%(r]pLSoL? Ij]`r]p]sf. She also did not state as

to when the deceased had last       told  about   the alleged ill

treatment.        She had also no case that the  accused   have

demanded          more dowry   and   that was disclosed  by the

deceased to them. She had also improved her case before the

court than what was stated by her before the police. She had

no consistent case regarding the manner in which the deceased

was ill treated by the accused persons and also what is the

nature of the ill treatment met by her.

       29. PW6 is the sister of the deceased. She was examined

to prove that the deceased used to come to her house frequently

and used to share her difficulties met by her in their house.

She had further stated that she came there last three months

prior to the death and even at that time the deceased had stated

that father and mother of the first accused always used to ill

treat her and the 4th accused had misbehaved with her when

the first accused was not in the house. She had no particular

complaint about the first accused with her. Further she never

told that the 4th accused had misbehaved with her when the

first accused was absent in the house to anyone including her

mother. She had also stated that the accused persons used to

Crl.A.No.506 of 2004              38

ill treat her stating that the amount of Rs.50,000/- and 25

sovereigns of gold ornaments given were not sufficient. She

had also no case that the accused have made any complaint of

making more demand. She had further stated that the

deceased had come to her house two or three times after her

marriage.        She had further stated that on the first occasion,

the deceased had come to her house along with her husband.

Thereafter, the first accused did not come. She had further

stated that the deceased used to come along with mother,

sister-in-law and sister. She came last during June and at that

time the mother and her younger sister were also present. She

wept by stating about the ill treatment met by the deceased in

the house of the accused. She had stated that she did not

state these things to her husband and she did not try to

interfere in the matter. They did not make any complaint

about the same to the mosque committee. She had further

stated that if the deceased had not died, she would not have

disclosed these facts to anyone. Her evidence will also go to

show that she is now trying to improve her version before

the court and it is not safe to rely on her evidence to come to the

conclusion that the accused have ill treated the deceased as

Crl.A.No.506 of 2004            39

claimed by the prosecution.

       30. A reading of the evidence of PWs 3 to 6, who are

the relatives of the deceased will go to show that they stated

about the version of ill treatment alleged to have stated by the

deceased to them. Further it will be seen from the evidence of

PW3 that once they interfered and thereafter there was some

change. Though they had stated that this continued even

thereafter, they did not interfere, such conduct of the family

members appears to be abnormal especially in a case where

she was said to have persistently making such allegations and

even wept on some occasions by stating these facts. Except

vaguely stating that they had ill treated her stating that the

amount and gold ornaments given is not sufficient, they have

not stated about any specific conduct with date or so or any

specific demand for dowry. None of them have a case that any of

the accused had made any demand for more dowry. Further

they did not speak about the time at which or the duration

of making such statement and the death as well. Unless it is

proved by the prosecution that the demand or ill treatment in

connection with the demand for dowry was made soon before

the death which resulted in her committing suicide, it cannot

Crl.A.No.506 of 2004              40

be said that the prosecution has proved that the death was due

to the ill treatment met by her soon before the death which is

the primary ingredient to be proved by the prosecution so as to

attract the offence under Section 304 B of the Indian Penal

Code. Mere vague statements of ill treatment without its

details is not sufficient to attract the ingredients of ill treatment

in connection with demand for dowry. If there is time lag

between the alleged statement given by the deceased to the

relatives and the death, then it cannot be said unless it is

proved by the prosecution that the time lag is not sufficient to

change the mind of the deceased            so as to prompt her to

commit suicide on account of such ill treatment, they have

proved the ill treatment soon before her death. Further it is

seen from the evidence that on 4.9.2002 both the first accused

and the deceased went to PW2 for consultation and at that

time it was revealed that she was pregnant by three months.

None of the relatives who had deposed before the court claimed

that the deceased used to disclose all the things to them were

not even aware of the second pregnancy till her death. If really

the first accused had quarreled with her regarding the second

pregnancy and insisted for abortion, then this would have been

Crl.A.No.506 of 2004               41

disclosed to her mother and sister, who were examined as PWs

5 and 6. But this was not happened. Further in the evidence

of PW2, the Doctor, also stated that neither the deceased

nor her husband had wanted her to terminate the pregnancy.

So that falsifies the case of the prosecution attempted to be

proved though PWs 3 to 6 that on the morning of the incident,

there was some quarrel between the deceased and the first

accused regarding the second pregnancy and that prompted

her to commit suicide.         These aspects were not     properly

appreciated by the court below before coming to the conclusion

that the prosecution has proved beyond reasonable doubt that

the deceased was subjected to cruelty soon before her death

any demand for dowry which prompted her to commit suicide

so as to attract the offence punishable under Section 304 B

of the Indian Penal Code as against the accused persons.

       31. It is settled law that mere vague allegations of cruelty

alone is not sufficient to convict the accused persons for the

offence under Section 304 B of the Indian Penal Code unless

specific instances of cruelty, demand for dowry, demand and

cruelty subsisted continuously soon before the incident etc have

to be proved by the prosecution, which they have failed to

Crl.A.No.506 of 2004             42

discharge in this case. In all the cases discussed above, there is

evidence to show that the ill treatment continued in spite of

intervention of the family members and that intervention

happened two or three days prior to the death in an abnormal

way that there is no time gap between the last instance and the

act of commission of suicide by the deceased. It was in those

circumstances, the Honourable Supreme Court has held that

any straight jacket formula can be given regarding the term

soon before death occurring in Section 304 B of the Indian

Penal Code and Section 113 B of the Evidence Act, which deals

with offence of dowry death and the presumption that can be

drawn by the court if the ingredients mentioned there are

proved. Further in all these decisions it was also mentioned

that if the time gap is so wide and it has become stale, then it

cannot be stated      that  the prosecution has proved beyond

reasonable doubt that the deceased was subjected to cruelty

soon before the death which was sufficient to attract the

offence under Section 304 B of the Indian Penal Code. So under

the circumstances and also     in view of the discussions made

above, the finding of the court below that the prosecution has

proved      beyond   reasonable  doubt that   the  4th ingredient

Crl.A.No.506 of 2004             43

which is the most important ingredient so as to attract the

offence under Section 304 of the Indian Penal Code against the

accused so as to convict the appellants for the offence under

Section 304 B of the Indian Penal Code is unsustainable in law

and the same is liable to be set aside. Further, the evidence is

not sufficient even to alter the offence to one under Section

306 or 498 A of the Indian Penal Code as well as the evidence is

not sufficient to prove that the deceased was subjected to cruelty

as defined under those sections as well.

       32. It is true that if evidence adduced is clinching and

the court below has appreciated the evidence properly, then the

appellate court will be slow in interfering the finding of the

court below unless it is perverse. Further if two view are

possible on the basis of the same set of facts and evidence and

one such view is favourable for the accused, then that benefit

will be given to the accused. So under the circumstances the

accused are entitled to get the benefit of doubt and entitled to

get acquittal of the charge levelled against them giving them

the benefit of doubt. So the finding of the court below that they

have committed the offence punishable under Section 304 B

read with Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code is unsustainable

Crl.A.No.506 of 2004               44

in law and the same is liable to be set aside and the accused are

entitled to get acquittal of the charge levelled against them

giving them the benefit of doubt.           Point No.1 is answered

accordingly.

       33. Point No.2: In view of my findings on Point No.1, the

sentence imposed by the court below is illegal and the same is

liable to be set aside. Point No.2 is answered accordingly.

       In the result, the appellants succeed and the appeal is

allowed.      The order of conviction and sentence passed by the

court below against the appellants under Section 304 B read

with Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code are set aside and the

appellants are acquitted of the charge levelled against them

giving them the benefit of doubt.       They are set at liberty. The

bail bond executed by them will stand cancelled.

       Office is directed to communicate this judgment to the

court below at the earliest.

                                               SD/-

                                   JUSTICE K.RAMAKRISHAN

cl

                       /true copy/


                                   P.S to Judge

Crl.A.No.506 of 2004    45



