
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                    PRESENT:

                  THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE ALEXANDER THOMAS

            TUESDAY, THE 14TH DAY OF OCTOBER 2014/22ND ASWINA, 1936

                                          Crl.MC.No.5763 of 2014
                                          ----------------------------------

SC NO.399/2013 of ADDITIONAL DISTRICT AND SESSIONS COURT - I,
KASARAGOD
CRIME NO.182/2008 OF NILESWAR POLICE STATION,KASARGOD

PETITIONER/ACCUSED:
-----------------------------------

          A.SHEFEEQUE,AGED 36 YEARS,S/O.C.H.IBRAHIM,
          R/ATAFSAL MANSIL,THAIKKADAPPURAM,
          NILESHWAR VILLAGE,KASARAGOD DISTRICT.

           BY ADV. SRI.K.P.HARISH

RESPONDENTS/STATE AND DEFACTO COMPLAINANT (CW1):
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

1.        STATE OF KERALA,REPRESENTED BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR,
          HIGH COURT OF KERALA,ERNAKULAM-682031.

2.        RASHEETHA T.K.,AGED 34 YEARS,D/O.P.ISMAIL,
          PANDRANDIL HOUSE, P.O.MAVILAKKADAPPURAM,
          CHERUVATHUR,KASARAGOD DISTRICT-671312.

           R1 BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SRI.DHANESH MATHEW MANOORAN.
           R2 BY ADV.SRI.AJEESH K.SASI


          THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE HAVING COME UP FOR ADMISSION
          ON 14-10-2014, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE
          FOLLOWING:




pk

Crl.MC.No.5763 of 2014
---------------------------------

                                            APPENDIX

PETITIONERS ANNEXURES:
----------------------------------------

ANNEXURE A1:THE TRUE COPY OF THE FIR IN CRIME NO.182/2008
                      DATED 2-06-2008 OF NILESHWAR POLICE STATION.

ANNEXURE A2:A TRUE COPY OF THE CHARGE SHEET DATED 20-07-2008 IN
                      CP.NO.68 OF 2011 JUDICIAL FIRST CLASS MAGISTRATE COURT-II,
                      HOSDURG IN CRIME NO.182/2008 OF NILSESHWAR POLICE
                      STATION.

ANNEXURE A3:THE TRUE COPY OF THE JUDGMENT DATED 5-08-2014 IN S.C.
                      NO.373/2011 OF THE COURT OF ADDITIONAL SESSIONS JUDGE-I,
                      KASARAGOD.

ANNEXURE 3(a):THE TRUE COPY OF THE SUMMONS IN S.C.NO.399 OF 2013 OF
                      THE ADDITIONAL DISTRICT AND SESSIONS COURT-I,
                      KASARAGOD.

ANNEXURE 4:THE TRUE COPY OF THE AGREEMENT DATED 01-03-2014 SIGNED
                     BY THE DEFACTO COMPLAINANT.

ANNEXURE 5:A TRUE COPY OF THE AFFIDAVIT SIGNED BY THE 2ND
                    RESPONDENT BEFORE AN ADVOCATE NOTARY.

RESPONDENTS ANNEXURES:                               NIL
------------------------------------------


                                                          //TRUE COPY//




                                                          P.S.TO JUDGE




pk


                   ALEXANDER THOMAS, J.
                   -----------------------------
                   Crl.M.C.No.5763 of 2014
                 ---------------------------------
           Dated this the 14th day of October, 2014.

                            O R D E R

      The prayer in the above captioned Criminal Miscellaneous

Case is to quash all further proceedings pending against the

petitioners in S.C.No.399/2013 on the file of the Additional

Sessions Court-I, Kasaragod for offences alleged under

Sections 313, 498(A) r/w 34 Indian Penal Code.               The

prosecution version is that after the marriage of the defacto

complainant/2nd respondent with the petitioner/accused both of

them had lived together and she was forced to abort

pregnancy and thereafter the accused ill-treated and harassed

her by demanding more money. A private criminal complaint

of the 2nd respondent was initiated by the Magistrate concerned

to the Nileshwar Police Station consequent to which Crime

No.182/2008 as per Annexure-A1 FIR was registered for the

aforesaid offences.   After investigation, Final Report/Charge

Sheet was submitted as per Annexure-A2 pursuant to which

the matter is now pending before the Judicial First Class

Magistrate     Court-II,     Hosdurg       as     C.P.No.68/2011.

Subsequently, the matter has been settled amicably between

                               ::2::

Crl.M.C.No.5763 of 2014

the parties and accused and defacto complainant had dissolved

their marriage and started to reside separately by mutual

consent. The petitioner had obtained employment abroad and

left India. Thereafter, the case against accused 2 & 3 (father &

mother of the petitioner) committed to the Additional Sessions

Court-I, Kasaragod for trial and disposal pursuant to which

they were acquitted as per Annexure-A3 judgment dated

5.8.2014 in S.C.No.373/2011 of Additional Sessions Court-I,

Kasaragode. Later, the petitioner appeared before the Judicial

First Class Magistrate Court-II, Hosdurg and the case against

him was committed to the Sessions Court and is numbered as

S.C.No.399/2013 on the file of the Additional Sessions court-I,

Kasaragode.        Annexure-A3(a)     is   the   summons      in

S.C.No.399/2013 of the court below. Later, both parties to the

dispute have settled the entire dispute amicably due to the

intervention of the mediators. Annexure-A4 is the agreement

dated 1.3.2014 in this regard. Annexure-A5 is the affidavit

dated 4.10.2014 sworn to by the 2nd respondent wherein she

submits that she has no existing grievance in S.C.No.399/013

pending against the petitioner and that the continuation of the

                              ::3::

Crl.M.C.No.5763 of 2014

impugned criminal proceedings would seriously affect the

settlement arrived at between the petitioner and            2nd

respondent.    It is also submitted that she has no personal

grievance existing against the petitioner and the matter has

been settled due to the intervention of the mediators and that

the 2nd respondent does not want to prosecute the petition any

further and that the affidavit may be accepted and the

impugned criminal proceedings pending against the petitioner

in S.C.No.399/2014 pending before the Additional Sessions

Court-I, Kasaragod may be quashed in the interest of justice

etc. It is in the background of these facts and circumstances,

the Crl.M.C has been instituted with the prayer to quash the

impugned criminal proceedings.

      2.   The Crl.M.C. has been admitted and Sri.Ajeesh

K.Sasi has taken notice for the 2nd respondent and the learned

Public Prosecutor has taken notice for the 1st respondent State

of Kerala.

      3.   Heard Sri.K.P.Harish, learned counsel for the

petitioner, Sri.Ajeesh K.Sasi, learned counsel for the 2nd

respondent and the learned Public Prosecutor appearing for the

1st respondent State of Kerala.

                               ::4::

Crl.M.C.No.5763 of 2014

      4.   The learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted

that during the pendency of the aforementioned criminal

proceedings, the matter has been settled amicably between

the parties, and that the continuation of the proceedings in the

above case/crime will cause miscarriage of justice to both

parties as the real disputants to the controversy have arrived

at an amicable settlement and any further continuation of the

criminal proceedings will amount to sheer wastage of time and

money     and    would   unnecessarily    strain  the  judicial,

administrative and financial resources of the State.

      5.   Sri.Ajeesh K.Sasi, learned counsel appearing for the

2nd respondent has submitted, on the basis of the specific

instructions furnished by the 2nd respondent, that the 2nd

respondent has amicably settled the disputes with the

petitioner as stated above and that she has no objection in the

quashment of the impugned criminal proceedings and that the

complainant/victim/injured does not intend to proceed any

further against the petitioner as she has no grievance against

him and that she will not raise any dispute/complaint in future

if the prayer for quashing the impugned criminal proceedings is

                              ::5::

Crl.M.C.No.5763 of 2014

allowed.

      6.   The learned Public Prosecutor also was heard, who

also has not raised any serious objections and submitted that

the court may consider the prayer in this case in the light of

the law well settled by the Apex Court in that regard.

      7.   After having carefully considered the submissions of

the parties and after having perused the pleadings as well as

the documents and materials placed in this matter, it can be

seen that the offences alleged are more or less personal in

nature and not much element of public interest is involved.

The crucial aspect of the matter is that though such offences

are involved, the real disputants to the controversy, which has

led to the impugned criminal proceedings, have actually

arrived at an amicable settlement of the matter. From the

submissions made by the learned counsel for the 2nd

respondent,    it   is   clear   to   the   Court    that   the

injured/victim/defacto complainant has no further grievance

against the petitioner/accused in the light of the settlement

arrived at by them. In this connection, it is relevant to note

the decision of the Apex Court in the case between Gian

                                   ::6::

Crl.M.C.No.5763 of 2014

Singh v. State of Punjab reported in 2013 (1) SCC (Cri)

160, para 61 = (2012) 10 SCC 303 = 2012(4) KLT 108(SC),

wherein the Supreme Court has held as follows in para 61

thereof [ See SCC (Cri)]:

              "61. The position that emerges from the above
       discussion can be summarised thus: the power of the
       High Court in quashing a criminal proceeding or FIR or
       complaint in exercise of its inherent jurisdiction is
       distinct and different from the power given to a criminal
       court for compounding the offences under S.320 of the
       Code.     Inherent power is of wide plenitude with no
       statutory limitation but it has to be exercised in accord
       with the guideline engrafted in such power viz;(i) to
       secure the ends of justice or (ii) to prevent abuse of
       the process of any Court.        In what cases power to
       quash the criminal proceeding or complaint or F.I.R.
       may be exercised where the offender and victim have
       settled their dispute would depend on the facts and
       circumstances of each case and no category can be
       prescribed..

It is further held as follows:-

       "......... But the criminal cases having overwhelmingly
       and pre-dominatingly civil flavour stand on different
       footing for the purposes of quashing, particularly the
       offences arising from commercial, financial, mercantile,
       civil, partnership or such like transactions or the
       offences arising out of matrimony relating to dowry
       etc. or the family disputes where the wrong is basically
       private or personal in nature and the parties have
       resolved their entire dispute. In this category of cases,
       High Court may quash criminal proceedings if in its
       view, because of the compromise between the offender
       and victim, the possibility of conviction is remote and
       bleak and continuation of criminal case would put
       accused to great oppression and prejudice and
       extreme injustice would be caused to him by not
       quashing the criminal case despite full and complete

                                  ::7::

Crl.M.C.No.5763 of 2014

      settlement and compromise with the victim........"

Further, in the case Jitendra Raghuvanshi and Others v.

Babita Raghuvanshi and another reported in (2013) 4 SCC

58 [see 2013 (1) KLD 817 (SC)], the Apex Court has held as

follows:-

            "8. It is not in dispute that matrimonial disputes
      have been on considerable increase in recent times
      resulting in filing of complaints under Sections 498A
      and 406 of I.P.C. not only against the husband but also
      against the relatives of the husband. The question is
      when such matters are resolved either by the wife
      agreeing to rejoin the matrimonial home or by mutual
      settlement of other pending disputes for which both
      the sides approached the High Court and jointly prayed
      for quashing of the criminal proceedings or the FIR or
      complaint by the wife under Sections 498A and 406 of
      I.P.C., whether the prayer can be declined on the sole
      ground that since the offences are non-compoundable
      under Section 320        of the Code, it would be
      impermissible for the court to quash the criminal
      proceedings or FIR or complaint.
            9. It is not in dispute that in the case on hand
      subsequent to the filing of the criminal complaint under
      Sections 498A and 406 of IPC and Sections 3 and 4 of
      the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961, with the help and
      intervention of family members, friends and well-
      wishers, the parties concerned have amicably settled
      their   differences   and   executed    a   compromise/
      settlement. Pursuant thereto, the appellants filed the
      said compromise before the Trial Court with a request
      to place the same on record and to drop the criminal
      proceedings against the appellants herein. It is also
      not in dispute that in additional to the mutual
      settlement arrived at by the parties, respondent/-wife
      has also filed an affidavit stating that she did not wish
      to pursue the criminal proceedings against the
      appellants and fully supported the contents of the
      settlement deed. It is the grievance of the appellants

                                 ::8::

Crl.M.C.No.5763 of 2014

      that no only the Trial Court rejected such prayer of the
      parties but also the High Court failed toe exercise its
      jurisdiction under Section 482 of the Code only on the
      ground that the criminal proceedings relate to the
      offences punishable under Sections 498A and 406 of
      IPC which are non-compoundable in nature.
            15. In our view, it is the duty of the Courts
      to encourage genuine settlements of matrimonial
      disputes, particularly, when the same are on
      considerable increase.      Even if the offences are
      non-compoundable, if they relate to matrimonial
      disputes and the Court is satisfied that the parties
      have settled the same amicably and without any
      pressure, we hold that for the purpose of securing
      ends of justice, Section 320 of the Code would not
      be a bar to the exercise of power of quashing of
      FIR,    complaint   or   the    subsequent     criminal
      proceedings.
            16.      There has been an outburst of
      matrimonial disputes in recent times.               The
      institution of marriage occupies an important place
      and it has an important role to play in the society.
      Therefore, every effort should be made in the
      interest of the individuals in order to enable them
      to settle down in life and live peacefully. If the
      parties ponder over their defaults and terminate
      their disputes amicably by mutual agreement
      instead of fighting it out in a Court of law, in order
      to do complete justice in the matrimonial matters,
      the Courts should be less hesitant in exercising its
      extraordinary jurisdiction. It is trite to state that
      the power under Section 482 should be exercised
      sparingly and with circumspection only when the
      Court is convinced, on the basis of material on
      record, that allowing the proceedings to continue
      would be an abuse of the process of the Court or
      that   the   ends   of   justice   require   that   the
      proceedings ought to be quashed."

      8.    Considering the facts and circumstances of this

                                ::9::

Crl.M.C.No.5763 of 2014

case, it is seen further that the impugned criminal proceedings

have arisen consequent to the matrimonial disputes between

the disputants and the disputes have been settled amicably

between the parties. Accordingly, this Court is inclined to hold

that in the light of the facts and circumstances involved in the

present case and particularly in view of the settlement arrived

at between the parties, the principles laid down in the

aforementioned decisions of the Apex Court will be squarely

applicable in the present case. Moreover, since the real

disputants to the controversy have amicably settled the

disputes, which led to these impugned criminal proceedings, it

is also the duty of the court to promote such settlement,

instead of compelling the parties to go on with the dispute. It

is also pertinent to note that since the matter is settled out of

court, in the event of proceeding with the trial, there may not

be any fruitful prosecution and the chances of conviction of the

accused is rather negligible and therefore, the net result of

continuance of criminal proceedings would be sheer waste of

judicial time rather meaningless and therefore would amount

to abuse of the process of court proceedings in the larger

                              ::10::

Crl.M.C.No.5763 of 2014

sense. Hence following decisions of the Apex Court cited supra,

this Court is inclined to hold that the Crl.M.C. can be allowed

by granting the prayers sought for.

      In the result, Crl.M.C is allowed and the impugned

Annexure-A2     criminal  proceedings   pending    against  the

petitioner  in   S.C.No.399/2013     (arising  out   of  Crime

No.182/2008 of Nileswar Police Station) on the file of the

Additional Sessions Court-I, Kasaragod and all further

proceedings arising therefrom stands quashed. The petitioner

shall produce certified copies of this order before the court

below concerned as well as before the Station House Officer,

Nileswar Police Station.



                                         ALEXANDER THOMAS,
                                                  Judge.

bkn/-



