
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                      PRESENT:

                       THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE K.RAMAKRISHNAN

                    FRIDAY, THE 23RD DAY OF MAY 2014/2ND JYAISHTA, 1936

                                           Crl.MC.No. 2185 of 2014 ()
                                                ---------------------------
CC.NO. 861/2014 OF JUDICIAL FIRST CLASS MAGISTRATE COURT -I,HOSDURG
    CRIME NO. 391/2010 OF HOSDURG POLICE STATION , KASARAGOD DISTRICT
                                                    --------------------------------

PETITIONER/ACCUSED 3:
-----------------------------------------

            NASEEM.M.,
            S/O.LATE HUSSAIN, KOVVALA PALLI, KANHANGAD,
            KASARAGOD DISTRICT.

            BY ADVS.SRI.K.R.AVINASH (KUNNATH)
                          SRI.ABDUL RAOOF PALLIPATH

RESPONDENT(S)/DEFACTO COMPLAINANT AND STATE:
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

        1. C.H.ASHRAF,
            S/O.C.H.IBRAHIM HAJI, AGED 36 YEARS,
            BAITHUL AHAMED HOUSE,
            KOVVALA PALLI, KANHANGAD-671 315.

        2. C.H.ISHAQ,S/O.C.H.IBRAHIM HAJI,AGED 32 YEARS,
            BAITHUL AHAMED HOUSE,
            KOVVALA PALLI, KANHANGAD-671 315.

        3. THE STATE OF KERALA,
            REPRESENTED BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR,
            HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM-682 031.

             R1 & R2 BY ADV. SRI.C.H.ABDUL RASAC
             R3 BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SMT. P.MAYA

            THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE HAVING COME UP FOR ADMISSION
            ON 23-05-2014, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE FOLLOWING:




sts

CRMC.NO.2185/2014


                              APPENDIX

PETITIONER'S ANNEXURES:


ANNEX A1    COPY OF THE FIR AND FINAL REPORT IN CRIME NO.391/2010

ANNEX A2    COPY OF THE AFFIDAVIT SWORN IN BY THE RESPONDENT NOS.1 & 2


RESPONDENT'S ANNEXURES:             NIL




                                          /TRUE COPY/


                                          P.A.TO.JUDGE


sts


                     K. Ramakrishnan, J.
    ==============================
                  Crl.M.C.No.2185 of 2014
    ==============================
         Dated this, the 23rd day of May, 2014.


                           O R D E R


      This is an application filed by the sole accused in

C.C.No.861/14 (third accused in Crime No.391/2010 of

Hosdurg Police Station) on the file of the Judicial First Class

Magistrate Court, No-I, Hosdurg for quashing the proceedings

on the basis of settlement under Section 482 of Code of

Criminal Procedure.

      2.   It is alleged in the petition that the petitioner is the

sole accused in C.C.No.861/14 now pending before Judicial

First Class Magistrate Court, No-I, Hosdurg.       The case was

originated on the basis of the statement given by the de facto

complainant who is the first respondent herein against the

petitioner and two others as Crime No.391/2010 of Hosdurg

police station alleging offences under Section 324 read with

Section 34 of Indian Penal Code.        After investigation, final

report was filed and the case was originally taken as file as

C.C.No.805/2010. Since the present petitioner did not appear,

the learned magistrate proceeded the case as against accused

Nos.1 and 2 and after trial, they were acquitted and the case

Crl.M.C.No.2185 of 2014       :  2 :

against the present petitioner was split up and refiled as

C.C.No.861/2014 and the same is now pending before that

court. Respondents 1 and 2 are the injured in the case. Now,

the matter has been settled between the petitioner and the

respondents 1 and 2. Since the offence is non-compoundable,

they cannot file an application before the court below for

record compounding. No purpose will be served by proceeding

with the case as well in view of the settlement and conviction

will be remote in such cases. So, the petitioner has no other

remedy except to approach this court seeking the following

relief:

           "To call for the records in CC 861/14 on the file of

    the Judicial First Class Magistrate Court-I, Hosdurg and

    quash all the proceedings against the petitioner."



      3.     Respondents 1 and 2 appeared though Counsel and

submitted that the matter has been settled between the

parties and they have no grievance against the petitioner now

and they have filed Annexure 2 affidavit stating these facts.

      4.     The Counsel for the petitioner submitted that in

view of the settlement, there is no possibility of conviction.

      5.     The learned Public Prosecutor, on instructions, as

Crl.M.C.No.2185 of 2014      :  3 :

directed by this court submitted that, except this case, there is

no other case against the petitioner and he has no criminal

background but opposed the application.

      6.     Heard both sides.

      7.     It is an admitted fact that on the basis of the

statement given by the first respondent herein as de facto

complainant, Hosdurg police has registered Annexure I First

Information Report as Crime No.391/10 of that police station

against the petitioner and two others alleging offences under

Section 324 read with Section 34 of Indian Penal Code and the

petitioner was shown as third accused in the case. It is also an

admitted fact that after investigation, the investigating officer

filed the final report and the case was originally taken as file as

C.C.No.805/10 on the file of Judicial First Class Magistrate

Court, No-I, Hosdurg. It is alleged in the petition that accused

Nos.1 and 2 were tried and they were acquitted as the

respondents 1 and 2 have settled the claim with them also. It

is also an admitted fact that case against the present petitioner

was split up and refiled as C.C.No.861/14 and the same is

pending before that court.       The matter has been settled

between the parties in view of the settlement and also in view

Crl.M.C.No.2185 of 2014        :  4 :

of the fact that other accused persons were acquitted on the

basis of the settlement earlier, there is no possibility of

conviction being entered against the present petitioner arises.

Further, on account of the settlement, the relationship between

the parties have been restored. Respondents 1 and 2 have

filed affidavit stating that the matter has been settled and they

have no grievance against the present petitioner as well. The

fact that case against accused Nos.1 and 2 was settled and

they were acquitted was also mentioned in the affidavit filed by

respondents 1 and 2.

      8.     Further, in the decision reported in Gian Singh V.

State of Punjab [2012 (4) KLT 108 (SC)], it is held as

follows:

            "The position that emerges from the above
      discussion can be summarised thus: the power of the
      High Court in quashing in criminal proceeding or F.I.R.
      or complaint in exercise of its inherent jurisdiction is
      distinct and different from the power given to a criminal
      court for compounding the offences under S.320 of the
      Code.    Inherent power is of wide plenitude with no
      statutory limitation but it has to be exercised in accord
      with the guideline engrafted in such power viz;(i) to
      secure the ends of justice or (ii) to prevent abuse of the
      process of any Court. In what cases power to quash the
      criminal proceeding or complaint or F.I.R may be
      exercised where the offender and victim have settled
      their   dispute   would   depend     on  the   facts  and
      circumstances of each case and no category can be
      prescribed.    However, before exercise of such power,
      the High Court must have due regard to the nature and

Crl.M.C.No.2185 of 2014         :  5 :

      gravity of the crime. Heinous and serious offences of
      mental depravity or offences like murder, rape, dacoity,
      etc., cannot be fittingly quashed even though the victim
      or victim's family and the offender have settled the
      dispute.    Such offences are not private in nature and
      have serious impact on society.             Similarly, any
      compromise between the victim and offender in relation
      to the offences under special statutes like Prevention of
      Corruption Act or the offences committed by public
      servants while working in that capacity etc; cannot
      provide for any basis for quashing criminal proceedings
      involving such offences. But the criminal cases having
      overwhelmingly and pre-dominatingly civil flavour stand
      on different footing for the purposes of quashing,
      particularly the offences arising from commercial,
      financial, mercantile, civil,    partnership or such like
      transactions or the offences arising out of matrimony
      relating to dowry, etc; or the family disputes where the
      wrong is basically private or personal in nature and the
      parties have resolved their entire dispute.         In this
      category of case, High Court may quash criminal
      proceedings if in its view, because of the compromise
      between the offender and victim, the possibility of
      conviction is remote and bleak and continuation of
      criminal case would put accused to great oppression and
      prejudice and extreme injustice would be caused to him
      by not quashing the criminal case despite full and
      complete settlement and compromise with the victim.
      In other words, the High Court must consider whether it
      would be unfair or contrary to the interest of justice to
      continue with the criminal proceeding or continuation of
      the criminal proceeding would tantamount to abuse of
      process of law despite settlement and compromise
      between the victim and wrongdoer and whether to
      secure the ends of justice, it is appropriate that criminal
      case is put to end and if the answer to the above
      question(s) is in affirmative, the High Court shall be well
      within its jurisdiction to quash the criminal proceeding."




      9.     In view of the dictum laid down in the decision and

also considering the fact that the matter has been settled

Crl.M.C.No.2185 of 2014     :  6 :

between the parties and other accused persons were were

already acquitted after trial on the basis of the settlement and

no purpose will be served by proceeding with the case as

conviction in such cases will be remote and on account of the

settlement, the friendship between the parties have been

restored, this court feels that it is a fit case where power under

Section 482        of the Code of Criminal Procedre has to be

invoked to quash the proceedings in order to promote the

settlement and restoration of relationship between the parties

and the pendency of this case will not be a hurdle for the

same.

      10. So, the petition is allowed and further proceedings

in    C.C.No.861/14 (Crime No.391/2010 of Hosdurg Police

Station)    pending before the Judicial First Class Magistrate

Court, No-I, Hosdurg as against the petitioner is quashed.

      Office is directed to communicate this order to the

concerned court immediately.

                                          Sd/-
                             K.Ramakrishnan, Judge.


Bb
                                               [True copy]

                                                    P.A to Judge



