
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                PRESENT:

                THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE K.RAMAKRISHNAN

          FRIDAY, THE 7TH DAYOF MARCH 2014/16TH PHALGUNA, 1935

                                      Crl.MC.No. 1294 of 2014
                                          ---------------------------
CC NO. 2027/2011 OF JUDICIAL FIRST CLASS MAGISTRATE COURT,KASARAGOD
  CRIME NO. 204/2011 OF BEDAKAM POLICE STATION , KASARAGOD DISTRICT
                                             .....


     PETITIONER(S)/ACCUSED NO.2:
     ------------------------------------------------

      A.K.ROOPESH,AGED 21 YEARS,
      S/O.KALATHIL RAMAN, KALATHIL HOUSE, BEDADUKA,
      BEDAKAM, KASARAGOD.

      BY ADV. SRI.V.TEKCHAND

     RESPONDENTS:COMPLAINANT & STATE:
     ----------------------------------------------------------------

   1. PRAJITH,
      S/O. NARAYANAN, KAKKOTAMMA HOUSE,
      PALLATHINGAL, MUNNAD POST, KASARAGOD 671 586.

   2. STATE OF KERALA,
      THROUGH S I OF POLICE, BEDAKAM POLICE STATION,
      REPRESENTED BY THE PUBLIC PROSECUTOR,
      HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM, KOCHI - 31.

      R1 BY ADV. SRI. RAJESH.N.
      R2 BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SMT. S. HYMA


      THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE HAVING COME UP FOR ADMISSION
      ON 07-03-2014, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE
      FOLLOWING:

Kss

Crl.MC.No. 1294 of 2014
-----------------------------------

                                               APPENDIX

PETITIONER(S)' ANNEXURES:
---------------------------------------------

ANNEX A1:-CERTIFIED COPY OF THE CHARGE SHEET IN CC NO. 2027/2011 ON THE
FILE OF JFCM, KASARAGOD.

ANNEX A2:-AN AFFIDAVIT SWORN TO BY THE DEFACTO COMPLAINANT.


RESPONDENT(S)' ANNEXURES:
----------------------------------------------          N I L




                                                                 /TRUE COPY/




                                                                 P.A.TO JUDGE


Kss


                            K. RAMAKRISHNAN, J.
            ------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Crl. M.C. No.1294 of 2014
          ---------------------------------------------------------------------
               Dated this the 7th day of March, 2014


                                     O R D E R




          This criminal miscellaneous case is filed by the 2nd

accused in C.C. No.2027/2011 on the file of the Judicial

First Class Magistrate Court, Kasaragod, to quash the case

against him, on the basis of the settlement arrived at

between the parties under Section 482 of the Code of

Criminal Procedure (hereinafter called the `Code').

          2.      It is alleged in the petition that, the

petitioner is the 2nd accused in C.C.No.2027/2011 on the file

of the Judicial First Class Magistrate Court, Ksaragod. The

case was registered on the basis of the statement given by

the first respondent as defacto-complainant in Crime

No.204/2011 against the present petitioner and another

alleging offences under Section 323, 324 read with Section

34 of the Indian Penal Code.                          After investigation, the

investigating officer filed Annxure-A1 final report before

the court and that was taken on file as C.C.2027/2011 and

Crl. M.C. No.1294 of 2014
                               2

that is now pending before the Judicial First Class

Magistrate Court, Ksaragod.       Now the matter has been

settled between the petitioner and the defacto-complainant.

The defacto-complainant has no complaint against him now.

Further he has got an employment in a bank and on account

of the pendency of this case, he is likely to loose his

employment. No purpose will be served in proceeding with

the case, as against the petitioner in view of the settlement.

Since, the offence alleged are non-compoundable in nature,

the petitioner has no other remedy except to approach this

court, seeking the following relief:

            "It is therefore humbly prayed that this
      Hon'ble Court may be pleased to quash Annex-
      A1 charge sheet in Crime No.204/2011 of
      Bedakam Police Station, Kasaragod District and
      all further proceedings in CC No.2027/11 of
      JFCM, Kasaragod as against the petitioner."

            3.    First respondent appeared through counsel

and submitted that, the matter has been settled between

the parties and he has no objection in quashing the

proceedings as against the petitioner.

Crl. M.C. No.1294 of 2014
                                 3

            4.    The leaned Public Prosecutor on instructions,

as directed by this court submitted that, except this case

there is no other case against the petitioner and he has no

other criminal background as well, but opposed the

application to quash the proceedings..

            5.    The learned counsel for the petitioner

submitted that, in view of the pendency of this case, his

employment prospect in the bank will be affected.

            6.    It is an admitted fact that, on the basis of the

statement given by the first respondent as defacto-

complainant, Crime No.204/2011 of Badakam Police Station

of Kasaragod District was registered against the petitioner

and another, alleging offence under Section 323, 324 read

with Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code.          It is also seen

from the records that, apart from the petitioner and another

accused two juveniles were also involved in the commission

of the crime and case against them was split up and now

pending before the Juvenile Justice Board, Kasaragod. Now

the matter has been settled between the petitioner and the

Crl. M.C. No.1294 of 2014
                                       4

defacto-complainant.           He has filed Annexure-A2 affidavit

stating that, the matter has been settled between them and

the case itself was originated on the basis of some mis-

understanding due to political enmity. Further, in the

decision reported Gian Singh v. State of Punjab [2012

(4) KLT 108 (SC)], it reads as follows:

      "The position that emerges from the above discussion can be
      summarised thus: the power of the High Court in quashing a
      criminal proceedings or FIR or complaint in exercise of its
      inherent jurisdiction is distinct and different from the power
      given to a criminal court for compounding the offences under
      S.320 of the Code. Inherent power is of wide plenitude with
      no statutory limitation but has to be exercised in accord with
      the guideline engrafted in such power viz; (i) to secure the
      ends of justice or (ii) to prevent abuse of the process of any
      Court. In what cases power to quash the criminal proceeding
      or complaint or FIR may be exercised where the offender and
      victim have settled their dispute would depend on the facts
      and circumstances of each case an no category can be
      prescribed. However, before exercise of such power, the High
      Court must have due regard to the nature and gravity of the
      crime. Heinous and serious offences of mental depravity or
      offences like murder, rape, dacoity, etc., cannot be fittingly
      quashed even though the victim or victim's family and the
      offender have settled the dispute.       Such offences are not
      private in nature and have serious impact on society.
      Similarly, any compromise between the victim and offender in
      relation to the offences under special statutes like Prevention
      of Corruption Act or the offences committed by public servants
      while working in that capacity etc; cannot provide for any
      basis for quashing criminal proceedings involving such
      offences. But the criminal cases having overwhelmingly and
      pre-dominatingly civil flavour stand on different footing for the
      purposes of quashing, particularly the offences arising from
      commercial, financial mercantile, civil, partnership or such
      like transactions or the offences arising out of matrimony
      relating to dowry, etc., or the family disputes where the wrong
      is basically private or personal in nature and the parties have

Crl. M.C. No.1294 of 2014
                                       5

      resolved their entire dispute. In this category of cases, High
      Court may quash criminal proceedings if in its view, because
      of the compromise between the offender and victim, the
      possibility of conviction is remote and bleak and continuation
      of criminal case would put accused to great oppression and
      prejudice and extreme injustice would be caused to him by not
      quashing the criminal case despite full and complete
      settlement and compromise with the victim. In other words,
      the High Court must consider whether it would be unfair or
      contrary to the interest of justice to continue with the criminal
      proceedings or continuation of the criminal proceedings would
      tantamount to abuse of process of law despite settlement and
      compromise between the victim and wrongdoer and whether
      to secure the ends of justice, it is appropriate that criminal
      case is put to an end and if the answer to the above question
      (s) is in affirmative, the High Court shall be well within its
      jurisdiction to quash the criminal proceeding."


             7.     Normally this court will not be inclined to

quash the proceedings in a peace meal manner, in respect

of some of the accused alone as it will not serve the purpose

and it will only multiply the work of the court, on the basis

of settlement. But, considering the peculiar circumstances

of the case, and the petitioner has no other criminal

background and on account of the pendency of this case is

right to get employment is likely to be affected, this court is

inclined to exercise the power under Section 482 of the

Code of Criminal Procedure to quash the proceedings as

against him alone, as an exceptional case. In view of the

Crl. M.C. No.1294 of 2014
                                  6

settlement arrived at between the partis, there is no

possibility of conviction being entered into against the

petitioner as the defacto-complainant will not support the

case of the prosecution and that will be only a wastage of

time for the court to proceed with the case, under the

peculiar circumstances, this court feels that, the power

under Section 482 of the 'Code' can be invoked to quash the

proceedings, as against the petitioner. So the petition is

allowed and further proceedings in C.C.No.2027/2011

(Crime No.204/11 of Badakam Police Station of Kasaragod

District) pending before the Judicial First Class Magistrate

Court, Kasaragod, as against the petitioner, who is shown

as 2nd accused in the case is quashed. Office is directed to

communicate this order to the concerned court for

necessary further action.

                                               Sd/-

                                         K. Ramakrishnan, Judge

                           // True Copy //

                                                   P.A. to Judge

ss



