
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                    PRESENT:

                        THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE V.K.MOHANAN

              THURSDAY, THE 24TH DAY OF JULY 2014/2ND SRAVANA, 1936

                                          Crl.MC.No. 3921 of 2014
                                              ---------------------------
CC NO.1242/2013 OF JUDICIAL FIRST CLASS MAGISTRATE COURT, VAIKOM
  CRIME NO. 209/2012 OF VELLOOR POLICE STATION , KOTTAYAM
                                                  ......

PETITIONERS/ACCUSED:
------------------------------------------

        1. SABIN, AGED 33 YEARS,
           S/O.GOVINDAN NAIR, SAPIN NIVAS, MEVALLOOR POST,
           VELLOOR VILLAGE AND KARA, KOTTAYAM DT.

        2. GOVINDAN NAIR, AGED 64 YEARS,
           S/O.KUNJAN NAIR, SAPIN NIVAS, MEVALLOOR POST,
           VELLOOR VILLAGE AND KARA, KOTTAYAM DT.

        3. PRASANNA KUMARI, AGED 57 YEARS,
           W/O.GOVINDAN NAIR, SAPIN NIVAS, MEVALLOOR POST,
           VELLOOR VILLAGE AND KARA, KOTTAYAM DT.

           BY ADV. SRI.T.M.RAMAN KARTHA

RESPONDENTS/COMPLAINANT & STATE:
--------------------------------------------------------------------

        1. STATE OF KERALA,
           REPRESENTED BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR,
           HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM, KOCHI - 682 031.

        2. SUB INSPECTOR OF POLICE,
           VELLOOR POLICE STATION, KOTTAYAM DISTRICT,
           PIN: 686 609.

        3. NITHA DAS,AGED 25 YEARS,
           D/O.HARIDASAN NAIR, NIDHISH BHAVAN, KARIKODE KARA,
           MULAKULAM VILLAGE, PIN: 686 610, KOTTAYAM DT.


          R1 & R2 BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SRI.DHANESH MATHEW MANJOORAN
                 R3 BY ADV. SMT.M.LALITHADEVI

           THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE HAVING COME UP FOR ADMISSION
           ON 24-07-2014, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE
           FOLLOWING:

Kss

Crl.MC.No. 3921 of 2014
------------------------------------

                                                APPENDIX

PETITIONER(S)' ANNEXURES:
---------------------------------------------

ANNEX.A - TRUE COPY OF THE FINAL REPORT FILED IN CRIME NO. 209/2012 OF
VELLOOR POLIC3E STATION.

ANNEX.B- TRUE COPY OF THE PETITION IN OP 30/14 PENDING BEFORE THE
FAMILY COURT, ETTUMANOOR FILED BY THE 1ST PETITIONER AND THE 3RD
RESPONDENT.


RESPONDENT(S)' ANNEXURES:
-----------------------------------------------          N I L




                                                                  /TRUE COPY/




                                                                  P.A.TO JUDGE


Kss


                        V.K.MOHANAN, J
               ===========================
                     Crl.M.C No.3921 of 2014
              ============================
               Dated this the 24th day of July, 2014

                              ORDER


       The above petition is filed under Section 482 of the Criminal

Procedure Code (for short 'Cr.P.C.') at the instance of the petitioners,

who are accused in C.C.No.1242/2013 of the Judicial First Class

Magistrate Court, Vaikom, which is a case instituted upon the police

report in Crime No. 209/2012 of Velloor Police Station for the offences

punishable under Sections 498(A) r/w Section 34 of Indian Penal Code

and Sections 66(E), 67 and 67(A) of the Information Technology Act

with a prayer to quash Annexure A final report as the matter is settled

out of court.

         2. The allegation in the above case is that the de facto

complainant was married by the first accused on 08.05.2011. The

de facto complainant and the first accused stayed together for about

Crl.M.C No.3921/2014                  2



one month. Thereafter, he left for gulf. A complaint was filed by the

de facto complainant before N.S.S Karayogam on 20.01.2012. As the

1st petitioner got employment in Kerala State Financial Enterprises, he

came from gulf on 02.05.2012 and joined K.S.F.E on 14.05.2012. The

allegation against the 1st petitioner is that he had taken nude photos of

the de facto complainant and it was shown to others.                He also

threatened her that the same will be exhibited in public in case she fails

to satisfy the demands for more dowry etc. In addition to that, he

demanded her to take identical photos, save the same in memory card

and forward it to him through some of his friends who had come to

Kerala on leave and thereby committed the aforesaid offences.          Now,

the case of the petitioners is that the matter is settled out of court.

          3. Heard the learned counsel for the petitioners as well as the

counsel for 3rd respondent.       I have also heard the learned Public

Prosecutor.

          4.   The learned counsel for the petitioners submitted that during

the pendency of the above crime, the matter is settled amicably between the

Crl.M.C No.3921/2014                   3



parties to the dispute which is the subject matter of the above crime/case.

Therefore, the continuation of the proceedings in the above case/crime is

abuse of process of law and proceedings.

          5. The learned counsel for the 3rd respondent who on the basis of

specific instruction received from the respondent submitted that the above

respondent, who is the de facto complainant does not intend to proceed any

further against the petitioners and she has no grievance against them.

          6. I have carefully considered the above submissions of the

respective counsel. I have verified the documents and materials produced

along with the above petition. In the given facts and circumstances of the

case and especially in the light of the settlement arrived between the parties

to the dispute, the learned Public Prosecutor has also no objection in

allowing the above petition.

          7. Having regard to the facts and circumstances involved in the

case, it can be seen that the offences involved in the above case are more or

less personal in nature and no public interest is involved. It is pertinent to

note that though such offences are involved, the real parties to the dispute

approached this Court after having amicably settled the matter. From the

Crl.M.C No.3921/2014                            4



submission made by the counsel for the 3rd respondent, it appears to me that

the injured/the victim/the de facto complainant has no further grievance

against the petitioners/accused in the light of the settlement arrived by them.

In this juncture, it is relevant to note the decisions of the Honourable Apex

Court reported in Gian Singh v. State of Punjab [2012(4) KLT 108(SC)]

and Jitendra Raghuvanshi and Others v. Babita Raghuvanshi and

another [2013 (1) KLD 817 (SC)]. In Gian Singh's case, the Supreme Court

has held as follows:-

                       "57.    The position that emerges from the above
            discussion can be summarised thus:         the power of the High
            Court in quashing a criminal proceeding or FIR or complaint in
            exercise of its inherent jurisdiction is distinct and different from
            the power given to a criminal court for compounding the
            offences under S.320 of the Code. Inherent power is of wide
            plenitude with no statutory limitation but it has to be exercised
            in accord with the guideline engrafted in such power viz;(i) to
            secure the ends of justice or (ii) to prevent abuse of the process
            of any Court.        In what cases power to quash the criminal
            proceeding or complaint or F.I.R. may be exercised where the
            offender and victim have settled their dispute would depend on
            the facts and circumstances of each case and no category can be
            prescribed..

It is further held as follows:-

             "......... But the criminal cases having overwhelmingly and pre-
             dominatingly civil flavour stand on different footing for the
             purposes of quashing, particularly the offences arising from
             commercial, financial,mercantile, civil, partnership or such like
             transactions or the offences arising out of matrimony relating to

Crl.M.C No.3921/2014                            5



          dowry etc. or the family disputes where the wrong is basically
          private or personal in nature and the parties have resolved their
          entire dispute. In this category of cases, High Court may quash
          criminal proceedings if in its view, because of the compromise
          between the offender and victim, the possibility of conviction is
          remote and bleak and continuation of criminal case would put
          accused to great oppression and prejudice and extreme injustice
          would be caused to him by not quashing the criminal case despite
          full and complete settlement and compromise with the victim........"


Further, in Jitendra Raghuvanshi's case, the Apex Court has held as

follows:-


                   "7. It is not in dispute that matrimonial disputes have been
          on considerable increase in recent times resulting in filing of
          complaints under Sections 498A and 406 of I.P.C. not only against
          the husband but also against the relatives of the husband.        The
          question is when such matters are resolved either by the wife
          agreeing to rejoin the matrimonial home or by mutual settlement of
          other pending disputes for which both the sides approached the High
          Court and jointly prayed for quashing of the criminal proceedings or
          the FIR or complaint by the wife under Sections 498A and 406 of
          I.P.C., whether the prayer can be declined on the sole ground that
          since the offences are non-compoundable under Section 320 of the
          Code, it would be impermissible for the court to quash the criminal
          proceedings or FIR or complaint.
                   8. It is not in dispute that in the case on hand subsequent to
          the filing of the criminal complaint under Sections 498A and 406 of
          IPC and Sections 3 and 4 of the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961, with
          the help and intervention of family members, friends and well-
          wishers, the parties concerned have amicably settled their
          differences and executed a compromise/settlement.             Pursuant
          thereto, the appellants filed the said compromise before the Trial
          Court with a request to place the same on record and to drop the
          criminal proceedings against the appellants herein. It is also not in
          dispute that in additional to the mutual settlement arrived at by the
          parties, respondent/-wife has also filed an affidavit stating that she
          did not wish to pursue the criminal proceedings against the
          appellants and fully supported the contents of the settlement deed. It
          is the grievance of the appellants that no only the Trial Court
          rejected such prayer of the parties but also the High Court failed toe
          exercise its jurisdiction under Section 482 of the Code only on the

Crl.M.C No.3921/2014                          6



          ground that the criminal proceedings relate to the offences
          punishable under Sections 498A and 406 of IPC which are non-
          compoundable in nature."
                  "12. In our view, it is the duty of the Courts to encourage
          genuine settlements of matrimonial disputes, particularly, when the
          same are on considerable increase. Even if the offences are non-
          compoundable, if they relate to matrimonial disputes and the Court
          is satisfied that the parties have settled the same amicably and
          without any pressure, we hold that for the purpose of securing ends
          of justice, Section 320 of the Code would not be a bar to the exercise
          of power of quashing of FIR, complaint or the subsequent criminal
          proceedings.
                  13. There has been an outburst of matrimonial disputes in
          recent times.    The institution of marriage occupies an important
          place and it has an important role to play in the society. Therefore,
          every effort should be made in the interest of the individuals in order
          to enable them to settle down in life and live peacefully.       If the
          parties ponder over their defaults and terminate their disputes
          amicably by mutual agreement instead of fighting it out in a Court of
          law, in order to do complete justice in the matrimonial matters, the
          Courts should be less hesitant in exercising its extraordinary
          jurisdiction. It is trite to state that the power under Section 482
          should be exercised sparingly and with circumspection only when
          the Court is convinced, on the basis of material on record, that
          allowing the proceedings to continue would be an abuse of the
          process of the Court or that the ends of justice require that the
          proceedings ought to be quashed."


          Considering the particular facts and circumstances in this case, it

can be seen further that the criminal proceedings are initiated consequent to

the matrimonial dispute arose among the parties and both the disputes are

now amicably settled between the parties. According to me, in the light of

the facts and circumstances involved in the present case and particularly in

view of the settlement arrived in the present case, the dictum laid in the

above decisions will be squarely applicable in the present case. I am of the

Crl.M.C No.3921/2014                    7



view that as the parties to the dispute settled the issues amicably, it is the

duty of this Court to promote such settlement, instead of compelling the

parties to go on with the dispute. It is pertinent to note that since the matter

is settled out of court, in the event of proceeding with the trial, there would

not have any fruitful prosecution, resulting the conviction of the accused,

rather the net result would be sheer waste of judicial time and abuse of

process of the court and proceedings. Thus, according to me, following the

decisions cited supra, this Crl.M.C.can be allowed granting the relief as

sought for.

          In the result, following the dictum laid in the above decisions,

this Crl.M.C. is allowed, quashing Annexure -A final report and all

further proceedings pending against the petitioners in C.C.No.

1242/2013 of the Judicial First Class Magistrate Court, Vaikom.




                                                           Sd/-
                                                 V.K.MOHANAN, JUDGE


vdv                        //True Copy//              P.A to Judge



