
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                        PRESENT:

               THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE ALEXANDER THOMAS

      WEDNESDAY, THE 29TH DAY OF OCTOBER 2014/7TH KARTHIKA, 1936

                              Crl.MC.No. 6120 of 2014 ()
                                ---------------------------
              CC 509/2012 of JUDL.MAG.OF FIRST CLASS-I, MANJERI
   CRIME NO.147/2009 OF KARUVARAKUNDU POLICE STATION, MALAPPURAM


PETITIONER/IST ACCUSED:
--------------------------------

         SHAMSUDHEEN, AGED 33 YEARS
         S/O MUHAMMED, THUMBAKUZHIYAN HOUSE, KARUVARAKUNDU
         MALAPPURAM.

         BY ADV. SRI.T.PRASAD

RESPONDENTS/COMPLAINANT AND STATE:
------------------------------------------------

       1. STATE, REP.BY THE STATION HOUSE OFFICER
         KARUVARAKUNDU POLICE STATION, MALAPPURAM DISTRICT
         THROUGH THE PUBLIC PROSECUTOR, HIGH COURT OF KERALA
         ERNAKULAM.

       2. SMT. SHAMEENA
         D/O. SHOUKATHALI, THEKKARATHODIKA VEEDU, MUTHALAKUZHI
         CHANDAKKUNNU P.O., MALAPPURAM DISTRICT.

         R2 BY ADV. SRI.A.HAROON RASHEED
         R1 BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SRI.R.GITHESH

         THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD ON 29-10-
       2014, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE FOLLOWING:

Crl.MC.No. 6120 of 2014 ()
---------------------------

                                  APPENDIX

PETITIONER(S)' EXHIBITS:
-------------------------------

ANNEXURE A1: THE TRUE COPY OF THE FIR IN CRIME NO.147/2009 OF
KARUVARAKUNDU POLICE STATION PENDING BEFORE THE JUDICIAL FIRST
CLASS MAGISTRATE COURT-I, MANJERI.

ANNEXURE A2: THE TRUE COPY OF THE FINAL REPORT IN CRIME NO.147/2009
OF KARUVARAKUNDU POLICE STATION PENDING BEFORE THE JUDICIAL FIRST
CLASS MAGISTRATE COURT-I, MANJERI IN C.C.NO.509/2012.

ANNEXURE A3: THE TRUE COPY OF THE JUDGMENT IN C.C.NO.127/2010 ON THE
FILE OF THE JUDICIAL FIRST CLASS MAGISTRATE COURT-I, MANJERI.

ANNEXURE A4: THE NOTORIZED COPY OF THE AFFIDAVIT EXECUTED BY THE 2ND
RESPONDENT DATED 23.9.2014.


RESPONDENTS' EXHIBITS:           NIL
------------------------------




                                                      // TRUE COPY //




                                                      P.A TO JUDGE.


                     ALEXANDER THOMAS, J.
                     -----------------------------
                     Crl.M.C.No.6120 Of 2014
                   ---------------------------------
           Dated this the 29th day of October, 2014.

                              O R D E R


      The   above     captioned    Criminal    Miscellaneous Case

(Crl.M.C), invoking the inherent powers conferred on this Court

under Section 482 Cr.P.C, has been filed with the prayer to

quash     Annexure-A1      FIR     in   Crime     No.147/2009   of

Karuvarakundu Police Station and the impugned Annexure-A2

Final Report in the above said Crime which has led to the

institution of C.C.No.509/2012 on the file of the Judicial First

Class Magistrate Court-I, Manjeri and all further proceedings

arising therefrom. Petitioner is the 1st accused in Annexure-A1

FIR in Crime No.147/2009 of Karuvarakundu Police Station

registered for offences under Sections 342, 324, 498A r/w

Section 34 IPC.       After investigation, police submitted the

impugned Annexure-A2 Final Report in the above said Crime,

which has led to the pendency of C.C.No.509/2012 on the file

of the Judicial First Class Magistrate Court-I, Manjeri. The brief

of the prosecution case is that the petitioner married the 2nd

respondent on 11.11.2007 as per the customary rites of

                              ::2::

Crl.M.C.No.6120 Of 2014

Muslim Community and lived together as husband and wife in

the matrimonial home and the petitioner misused 25

sovereigns of gold ornaments and Rs. 1 Lakh entrusted by

parents of the 2nd respondent and later, demanded more dowry

and money. Accused Nos.2 to 6 in the Crime are the parents

and in-laws of the petitioner and that the accused have

mentally and physically harassed the 2nd respondent and

thereby committed the aforementioned offences. On the basis

of the First Information Statement lodged by the 2nd

respondent, the police registered Annexure-A1 Crime and after

investigation, police submitted Annexure-A2 Final Report which

led to the institution of the calender case before the

jurisdictional Magistrate concerned.     The petitioner went

abroad during 2009 and in his absence the trial against all the

other accused had proceeded and the jurisdictional Magistrate

acquitted all the other accused due to lack of evidence as per

Annexure-A3 judgment dated 22.11.2012 in C.C.No.127/2010.

The case against the petitioner was split up and re-filed as

C.C.No.509/2012 on the file of the jurisdictional Magistrate

concerned. It is stated that the 2nd respondent had filed the

                                 ::3::

Crl.M.C.No.6120 Of 2014

complaint against the petitioner which led to the registration of

the crime, only on the basis of some personal disputes

between the spouses and that the matter has been amicably

settled between the petitioner and the 2nd respondent and that

the 2nd respondent does not intend to prosecute the case any

further and has agreed for lawful termination of the impugned

criminal    proceedings    against    the  petitioner.   The     2nd

respondent has filed an affidavit dated 23.9.2014, produced as

Annexure-A4 in this Crl.M.C. The 2nd respondent has stated in

Annexure-A4 affidavit that due to difference of opinion she had

filed O.P.No.149/2010 before the Family Court, Malappuram

for recovery of gold ornaments and M.C.No.20/2010 has also

been filed under Section 125 Cr.P.C for grant of maintenance

and had also initiated the impugned criminal proceedings

against the petitioner and other relatives. That the Magistrate

Court had acquitted all the other accused and that the

impugned criminal proceedings as per C.C.No.509/2012 on the

file of the Judicial First Class Magistrate Court-I, Manjeri is now

pending against the petitioner (husband), that due to the

intervention of mediation the disputes between the spouses

                               ::4::

Crl.M.C.No.6120 Of 2014

have been settled and that both parties have decided to live

separately. Due to temperamental differences they cannot live

together and that resolution of the marriage is necessary in

the interest of both parties and that the petitioner had lawfully

divorced the 2nd respondent by pronouncing talak.        On this

basis O.P.No.149/2010 & M.C.No.20/2010 pending before the

Court below have been withdrawn by the 2nd respondent that

none of the accused has committed any mental or physical

cruelty on her demanding more dowry and that she has no

complaint against the petitioner and that the impugned

criminal proceedings against the petitioner may be terminated

etc. It is in the background of these facts and circumstances,

this Crl.M.C has been filed.

      2.   The Crl.M.C. has been admitted and Sri.Haroon

Rasheed has taken notice for the 2nd respondent and the learned

Public Prosecutor has taken notice for the 1st respondent-State of

Kerala.

      3.   Heard    Sri.Prasad  T.,  learned    counsel  for  the

petitioner, Sri.Haroon Rasheed, learned counsel for the 2nd

respondent and the learned Public Prosecutor appearing for the

1st respondent-State of Kerala.

                                ::5::

Crl.M.C.No.6120 Of 2014

      4.    The learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted

that during the pendency of the aforementioned criminal

proceedings, the matter has been settled amicably between the

parties, and that the continuation of the proceedings in the above

case/crime will cause miscarriage of justice to both parties as the

real disputants to the controversy have arrived at an amicable

settlement and any further continuation of the criminal

proceedings will amount to sheer wastage of time and money

and would unnecessarily strain the judicial, administrative and

financial resources of the State.

      5.    Sri.Haroon Rasheed, learned counsel appearing for

the 2nd respondent has submitted, on the basis of the specific

instructions furnished by the 2nd respondent, that the 2nd

respondent has amicably settled the disputes with the petitioner

as stated above and that she has no objection in the quashment

of   the   impugned     criminal    proceedings   and   that   the

complainant/victim/injured does not intend to proceed any

further against the petitioner as she has no grievance against

him and that she will not raise any dispute/complaint in future if

the prayer for quashing the impugned criminal proceedings is

allowed.

                               ::6::

Crl.M.C.No.6120 Of 2014

      6.   The learned Public Prosecutor also was heard, who

also has not raised any serious objections and submitted that the

court may consider the prayer in this case in the light of the law

well settled by the Apex Court in that regard.

      7.   After having carefully considered the submissions of

the parties and after having perused the pleadings as well as the

documents and materials placed in this matter, it can be seen

that the offences alleged are more or less personal in nature and

not much element of public interest is involved.      The crucial

aspect of the matter is that though such offences are involved,

the real disputants to the controversy, which has led to the

impugned criminal proceedings, have actually arrived at an

amicable settlement of the matter. From the submissions made

by the learned counsel for the 2nd respondent, it is clear to the

Court that the injured/victim/defacto complainant has no further

grievance against the petitioner/accused in the light of the

settlement arrived at by them. In this connection, it is relevant

to note the decision of the Apex Court in the case between Gian

Singh v. State of Punjab reported in 2013 (1) SCC (Cri) 160,

para 61 = (2012) 10 SCC 303 = 2012(4) KLT 108(SC), wherein

the Supreme Court has held as follows in para 61 thereof [ See

                                   ::7::

Crl.M.C.No.6120 Of 2014

SCC (Cri)]:

              "61. The position that emerges from the above
       discussion can be summarised thus: the power of the
       High Court in quashing a criminal proceeding or FIR or
       complaint in exercise of its inherent jurisdiction is
       distinct and different from the power given to a criminal
       court for compounding the offences under S.320 of the
       Code.     Inherent power is of wide plenitude with no
       statutory limitation but it has to be exercised in accord
       with the guideline engrafted in such power viz;(i) to
       secure the ends of justice or (ii) to prevent abuse of
       the process of any Court.        In what cases power to
       quash the criminal proceeding or complaint or F.I.R.
       may be exercised where the offender and victim have
       settled their dispute would depend on the facts and
       circumstances of each case and no category can be
       prescribed..

It is further held as follows:-

       "......... But the criminal cases having overwhelmingly
       and pre-dominatingly civil flavour stand on different
       footing for the purposes of quashing, particularly the
       offences arising from commercial, financial, mercantile,
       civil, partnership or such like transactions or the
       offences arising out of matrimony relating to dowry
       etc. or the family disputes where the wrong is basically
       private or personal in nature and the parties have
       resolved their entire dispute. In this category of cases,
       High Court may quash criminal proceedings if in its
       view, because of the compromise between the offender
       and victim, the possibility of conviction is remote and
       bleak and continuation of criminal case would put
       accused to great oppression and prejudice and
       extreme injustice would be caused to him by not
       quashing the criminal case despite full and complete
       settlement and compromise with the victim........"

Further, in the case Jitendra Raghuvanshi and Others v.

Babita Raghuvanshi and another reported in (2013) 4 SCC

                                  ::8::

Crl.M.C.No.6120 Of 2014

58 [see 2013 (1) KLD 817 (SC)], the Apex Court has held as

follows:-

            "8. It is not in dispute that matrimonial disputes
      have been on considerable increase in recent times
      resulting in filing of complaints under Sections 498A
      and 406 of I.P.C. not only against the husband but also
      against the relatives of the husband. The question is
      when such matters are resolved either by the wife
      agreeing to rejoin the matrimonial home or by mutual
      settlement of other pending disputes for which both
      the sides approached the High Court and jointly prayed
      for quashing of the criminal proceedings or the FIR or
      complaint by the wife under Sections 498A and 406 of
      I.P.C., whether the prayer can be declined on the sole
      ground that since the offences are non-compoundable
      under Section 320        of the Code, it would be
      impermissible for the court to quash the criminal
      proceedings or FIR or complaint.

            9. It is not in dispute that in the case on hand
      subsequent to the filing of the criminal complaint under
      Sections 498A and 406 of IPC and Sections 3 and 4 of
      the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961, with the help and
      intervention of family members, friends and well-
      wishers, the parties concerned have amicably settled
      their   differences   and   executed    a   compromise/
      settlement. Pursuant thereto, the appellants filed the
      said compromise before the Trial Court with a request
      to place the same on record and to drop the criminal
      proceedings against the appellants herein. It is also
      not in dispute that in additional to the mutual
      settlement arrived at by the parties, respondent/-wife
      has also filed an affidavit stating that she did not wish
      to pursue the criminal proceedings against the
      appellants and fully supported the contents of the
      settlement deed. It is the grievance of the appellants
      that no only the Trial Court rejected such prayer of the
      parties but also the High Court failed toe exercise its
      jurisdiction under Section 482 of the Code only on the
      ground that the criminal proceedings relate to the
      offences punishable under Sections 498A and 406 of

                                 ::9::

Crl.M.C.No.6120 Of 2014

      IPC which are non-compoundable in nature.
            15. In our view, it is the duty of the Courts to
      encourage    genuine    settlements    of   matrimonial
      disputes,  particularly,  when    the   same    are   on
      considerable increase. Even if the offences are non-
      compoundable, if they relate to matrimonial disputes
      and the Court is satisfied that the parties have settled
      the same amicably and without any pressure, we hold
      that for the purpose of securing ends of justice,
      Section 320 of the Code would not be a bar to the
      exercise of power of quashing of FIR, complaint or the
      subsequent criminal proceedings.
            16. There has been an outburst of matrimonial
      disputes in recent times. The institution of marriage
      occupies an important place and it has an important
      role to play in the society.    Therefore, every effort
      should be made in the interest of the individuals in
      order to enable them to settle down in life and live
      peacefully.  If the parties ponder over their defaults
      and terminate their disputes amicably by mutual
      agreement instead of fighting it out in a Court of law,
      in order to do complete justice in the matrimonial
      matters, the Courts should be less hesitant in
      exercising its extraordinary jurisdiction. It is trite to
      state that the power under Section 482 should be
      exercised sparingly and with circumspection only when
      the Court is convinced, on the basis of material on
      record, that allowing the proceedings to continue
      would be an abuse of the process of the Court or that
      the ends of justice require that the proceedings ought
      to be quashed."


      8.   Considering the facts and circumstances of this case,

it is seen further that the impugned criminal proceedings have

arisen consequent to the matrimonial disputes between the

disputants and the disputes have been settled amicably between

the parties. Accordingly, this Court is inclined to hold that in the

                                ::10::

Crl.M.C.No.6120 Of 2014

light of the facts and circumstances involved in the present case

and particularly in view of the settlement arrived at between the

parties, the principles laid down in the aforementioned decisions

of the Apex Court will be squarely applicable in the present case.

Moreover, since the real disputants to the controversy have

amicably settled the disputes, which led to these impugned

criminal proceedings, it is also the duty of the court to promote

such settlement, instead of compelling the parties to go on with

the dispute. It is also pertinent to note that since the matter is

settled out of court, in the event of proceeding with the trial,

there may not be any fruitful prosecution and the chances of

conviction of the accused is rather negligible and therefore, the

net result of continuance of criminal proceedings would be sheer

waste of judicial time rather meaningless and therefore would

amount to abuse of the process of court proceedings in the larger

sense. Hence following decisions of the Apex Court cited supra,

this Court is inclined to hold that the Crl.M.C. can be allowed by

granting the prayers sought for.

      In the result, Crl.M.C is allowed and the impugned

Annexure-A2 Final Report/Charge Sheet in Annexure-A1 FIR in

Crime No.147/2009 of Karuvarakundu Police Station which has

                               ::11::

Crl.M.C.No.6120 Of 2014

led to the institution of C.C.No.509/2012 on the file of the

Judicial First Class Magistrate Court-I, Manjeri and all further

proceedings arising therefrom stand quashed.        The petitioner

shall produce certified copies of this order before the Magistrate

Court concerned as well as before the Station House Officer

concerned.




                                           ALEXANDER THOMAS,
                                                    Judge.

bkn/-



