
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                        PRESENT:

               THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE ALEXANDER THOMAS

        TUESDAY, THE 28TH DAY OF OCTOBER 2014/6TH KARTHIKA, 1936

                             Crl.MC.No.5007 of 2014 (D)
                                ---------------------------
         CRIME NO.941/2014 OF PAYYANNUR POLICE STATION, KANNUR


PETITIONER(S)/ACCUSED:
------------------------------

         NEETHU, AGED 22 YEARS
         W/O.SREEJITH P.P., PEROOL, M.M.BAZARM 670306
         KANNUR DISTRICT.

         BY ADV. SRI.RILGIN V.GEORGE

RESPONDENT(S)/COMPLAINANT AND STATE:
---------------------------------------------------

       1. STATE OF KERALA
         REPRESENTED BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR
         HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM-682031.

       2. BEENA BENNY, AGED 44 YEARS
         W/O.BENNY, KAIRALI NAGAR, PILATHIRA P.O.
         KANNUR-670501.

       3. TOMIN PAUL, AGED 32 YEARS
         K.K.HOUSE, KIZHAKKEBAGHAM, KADAVOOR
         MOOVATTUPUZHA P.O.-686673.

         R2 & R3 BY ADV. SRI.ANEESH JOSEPH
         R1 BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SRI.DHANESH MATHEW MANJOORAN

         THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD ON 28-10-
2014, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE FOLLOWING:

Crl.MC.No.5007 of 2014 (D)


                               APPENDIX


PETITIONER'S EXHIBITS:


ANNEXURE-A1:       PHOTOCOPY OF THE FIR IN CRIME NO.941/2014 OF
PAYYANNUR POLICE STATION.


ANNEXURE-A2:       THE ORIGINAL OF THE AFFIDAVIT SWORN BY R3.


RESPONDENTS' EXHIBITS:        NIL




                                                 // TRUE COPY //




                                                 P. A TO JUDGE.


                   ALEXANDER THOMAS, J.
                   -----------------------------
                   Crl.M.C.No.5007 Of 2014
                 ---------------------------------
           Dated this the 28th day of October, 2014.

                            O R D E R


      The petitioner is the accused in Crime No.941/2014 of

Payyannur Police Station, Kannur District for offences alleged

under Secs.465 and 500 of IPC and under Sec.67 of the IT Act,

2000.    The above said crime was registered based on the

information preferred on behalf of the 2nd respondent herein.

The brief of the prosecution case is that before 18.2.2014, the

petitioner had created a fake face book account by misusing

the details of the defacto complainant and posted porn photos

and thus committed the above said offences.

      2.   The 3rd respondent, who is the brother of the 2nd

respondent-defacto complainant, had submitted Annexure-A1

(5) petition before the Sub Inspector of Police, Cyber Cell,

Ernakulam Rural, Aluva on 18.2.2014 complaining that face

book account of the 2nd respondent herein (who is the sister of

the 3rd respondent) was misused by creating a false face book

account and that porn photos were posted therein etc.

Pursuant to this, Crime No.597/2014 of Pothanikad Police

                              ::2::

Crl.M.C.No.5007 Of 2014

Station was forwarded by the the District Police Chief,

Ernakulam to the Office of the District Police Chief, Kannur

since it was informed that the place of occurrence of the crime

falls within the jurisdiction of Payyannur Police Station.

Accordingly, as per Annexure-A1(7), the District Police Chief,

Kannur, directed the Station House Officer, Payyannur to re-

register the crime and investigate the same expeditiously. It is

thereafter, that the case has been re-registered as impugned

Crime No.941/2014 of Payyannur Police Station. It is stated

that due to intervention of mediators and other respectable

persons the matter in dispute between the petitioner and the

contesting respondents 2 & 3 have been amicably settled. The

2nd respondent who is the defacto complainant has sworn to

affidavit dated 26.8.2014 produced as Annexure-A2 in this

Crl.M.C stating that the disputes which arose out the Crime

No.941/2014 of Payyannur Police Station involving offence

under Secs.465 and 500 IPC and Sec.67 of the IT Act have

been amicably settled and that the contesting respondents

have no objection in quashing the entire impugned proceedings

arising out of Crime No.941/2014 of Payyannur Police Station

                                ::3::

Crl.M.C.No.5007 Of 2014

etc. It is in the conspectus of these facts and circumstances,

the instant Crl.M.C has been filed with the prayer to quash the

proceedings impugned in Crime No.941/2014 of Payyannur

Police Station and all further proceedings arising therefrom.

      3.   The Crl.M.C has been admitted and Sri.Aneesh

Joseph, Advocate, has taken notice for the respondent Nos.2 & 3

and the learned Public Prosecutor has taken notice for the 1st

respondent-State of Kerala.

      3.   Heard Sri.Rilgin V.George, learned counsel appearing

for the petitioner, Sri.Aneesh Joseph, learned counsel appearing

for the respondent Nos.2 & 3 and the learned Public Prosecutor

appearing for the 1st respondent-State of Kerala.

      4.   The learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted

that during the pendency of the aforementioned criminal

proceedings, the matter has been settled amicably between the

parties, and that the continuation of the proceedings in the above

case/crime will cause miscarriage of justice to both parties as the

real disputants to the controversy have arrived at an amicable

settlement and any further continuation of the criminal

proceedings will amount to sheer wastage of time and money

and would unnecessarily strain the judicial, administrative and

                                 ::4::

Crl.M.C.No.5007 Of 2014

financial resources of the State.

      5.    Sri.Aneesh Joseph, learned counsel appearing for the

respondent No.2 & 3 has submitted on the basis of the specific

instructions furnished by the respondent Nos.2 & 3 that the

respondent Nos.2 & 3 have amicably settled the disputes with the

petitioner and have no objection in the quashment of the

impugned        criminal     proceedings      and      that     the

complainant/victim/injured does not intend to proceed any

further against the petitioner as they have no grievance against

her and that they will not raise any dispute/complaint in future if

the prayer for quashing the impugned final report is allowed.

Learned counsel appearing for the respondent Nos.2 & 3 would

also submit that the contesting respondents have prudently

decided to settled the matter and that they do not wish to

proceed any further with the impugned criminal proceedings.

      6.    The learned Public Prosecutor also was heard and

submitted that this Court may consider the prayer in this case in

the light of the law well settled by the Apex Court in that regard.

      7.    After having carefully considered the submissions of

the parties and after having perused the pleadings as well as the

documents and materials placed in this matter, it can be seen

                                    ::5::

Crl.M.C.No.5007 Of 2014

that the offences alleged are more or less personal in nature.

The crucial aspect of the matter is that though such offences are

involved, the real disputants to the controversy, which has led to

the impugned criminal proceedings, have actually arrived at an

amicable settlement of the matter. From the submissions made

by the learned counsel for the contesting respondents, it is clear

to the Court that the injured/victim/defacto complainant has no

further grievance against the petitioner/accused in the light of

the settlement arrived at by them.

       8.     In this connection, it is relevant to note the decision

of the Apex Court in the case between Gian Singh v. State of

Punjab reported in 2013 (1) SCC (Cri) 160, para 61 = (2012)

10 SCC 303 = 2012(4) KLT 108(SC), wherein the Supreme Court

has held as follows in para 61 thereof [ See SCC (Cri)]:

              "61.    The position that emerges from the above
       discussion can be summarised thus: the power of the High
       Court in quashing a criminal proceeding or FIR or complaint in
       exercise of its inherent jurisdiction is distinct and different
       from the power given to a criminal court for compounding the
       offences under S.320 of the Code. Inherent power is of wide
       plenitude with no statutory limitation but it has to be
       exercised in accord with the guideline engrafted in such
       power viz;(i) to secure the ends of justice or (ii) to prevent
       abuse of the process of any Court. In what cases power to
       quash the criminal proceeding or complaint or F.I.R. may be
       exercised where the offender and victim have settled their
       dispute would depend on the facts and circumstances of each
       case and no category can be prescribed..

It is further held as follows:-

                                    ::6::

Crl.M.C.No.5007 Of 2014

      "......... But the criminal cases having overwhelmingly and
      pre-dominatingly civil flavour stand on different footing for
      the purposes of quashing, particularly the offences arising
      from commercial, financial, mercantile, civil, partnership or
      such like transactions or the offences arising out of
      matrimony relating to dowry etc. or the family disputes
      where the wrong is basically private or personal in nature
      and the parties have resolved their entire dispute. In this
      category    of   cases,  High   Court  may     quash   criminal
      proceedings if in its view, because of the compromise
      between the offender and victim, the possibility of conviction
      is remote and bleak and continuation of criminal case would
      put accused to great oppression and prejudice and extreme
      injustice would be caused to him by not quashing the
      criminal case despite full and complete settlement and
      compromise with the victim........"

In the decision reported in the case Yogendra Yadav & others

v. The State of Jharkhand & another reported in 2014 (8)

Scale 634 = III (2014) Current Criminal Reports CCR 426 (SC),

the Apex Court has held as follows:

              "When the High Court is convinced that the offences
      are entirely personal in nature and, therefore, do not affect
      public peace or tranquility and where it feels that quashing of
      such proceedings on account of compromise would bring
      about peace and would secure ends of justice, it should not
      hesitate to quash them".

The Apex Court in the above case was dealing with a case

involving offences under Sections 341, 323, 324, 504 & 307 r/w

Section 34 Indian Penal Code.

      9.      Considering the facts and circumstances of this case,

it is seen further that the impugned criminal proceedings have

arisen consequent to the personal disputes between the

                                ::7::

Crl.M.C.No.5007 Of 2014

disputants and the disputes have been settled amicably between

the parties. Accordingly, this Court is inclined to hold that in the

light of the facts and circumstances involved in the present case

and particularly in view of the settlement arrived at between the

parties, the principles laid down in the aforementioned decisions

of the Apex Court will be squarely applicable in the present case.

Moreover, since the real disputants to the controversy have

amicably settled the disputes, which led to these impugned

criminal proceedings, it is also the duty of the court to promote

such settlement, instead of compelling the parties to go on with

the dispute. It is also pertinent to note that since the matter is

settled out of court, in the event of proceeding with the trial,

there may not be any fruitful prosecution and the chances of

conviction of the accused is rather negligible and therefore, the

net result of continuance of criminal proceedings would be sheer

waste of judicial time rather meaningless and therefore would

amount to abuse of the process of court proceedings in the larger

sense. Hence following decisions of the Apex Court cited supra,

this Court is inclined to hold that the Crl.M.C. can be allowed by

granting the prayers sought for.

                             ::8::

Crl.M.C.No.5007 Of 2014

      In the result, Crl.M.C is allowed and the impugned

proceedings in Crime No.941/2014 of Payyannur Police Station

and all further proceedings arising therefrom against the

accused in the said Crime stand quashed. The petitioner shall

forward certified copies of this order to the Station House

Officer concerned as well as to the jurisdictional Magistrate

concerned.



                                      ALEXANDER THOMAS,
                                               Judge.

bkn/-



