
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                      PRESENT:

                       THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE K.RAMAKRISHNAN

                MONDAY,THE 31ST DAY OF MARCH 2014/10TH CHAITHRA, 1936

                                           Crl.MC.No. 1842 of 2014 ()
                                                ---------------------------
      CC.NO.1006/2013 OF JUDICIAL FIRST CLASS MAGISTRATE COURT -II, KANNUR
         CRIME NO. 124/2013 OF MAYYIL POLICE STATION , KANNUR DISTRICT
                                          ------------------------------------

PETITIONER/ACCUSED:
-------------------------------------

            THAIKANDI PUSHPAJAN,
            S/O.KERAT KUNHAMBU, AGED 45 YEARS,
            THAIKANDI HOUSE, ADICHERI,
            MALAPPATTAM P.O., KANNUR, PIN-670 631.

              BY ADV. SRI.LIJIN THAMBAN

RESPONDENT(S)/STATE AND DEFACTO COMPLAINANT:
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

        1. STATE OF KERALA,
            REPRESENTED BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR,
            HIGH COURT OF KERALA.

        2. KERAT KUNHAMBU,AGED 77 YEARS,
            THAIKANDI HOUSE, ADICHERI, MALAPPATTAM P.O.,
            KANNUR, PIN-670 631.

             R1 BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SMT. S.HYMA
             R2 BY SRI.M.RETHEESHKUMAR

            THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE HAVING COME UP FOR ADMISSION
            ON 31-03-2014, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE FOLLOWING:




sts

Crl.MC.No. 1842 of 2014 ()
-----------------------------------------

                                              APPENDIX

PETITIONER(S)' ANNEXURES:
--------------------------------------------


ANNEX 1 :            CERTIFIED COPY OF THE FIR NO.124/13 DT. 25-2-2013 FILED BY
                     MAYYIL POLICE.

ANNEX 2 :            CERTIFIED COPY OF THE FINAL REPORT IN CRIME NO.124/13 FILED
                     BY MAYYIL POLICE.

ANNEX 3 :            AFFIDAVIT SWORN BY THE 2ND RESPONDENT.




RESPONDENT(S)' ANNEXURES:                          NIL




                                                            /TRUE COPY/


                                                            P.A.TO.JUDGE




sts


                            K. RAMAKRISHNAN, J.
            ------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Crl. M.C. No.1842 of 2014
           ---------------------------------------------------------------------
               Dated this the 31st day of March, 2014


                                      O R D E R




          This criminal miscellaneous case is filed by the

sole accused in C.C.No.1006/2013 on the file of the Judicial

First Class Magistrate Court-II, Kannur, to quash the

proceedings on the basis of settlement under Section 482 of

the Code of Criminal Procedure (hereinafter called the

'Code').

          2.      It is alleged in the petition that, the

petitioner is the son of 2nd respondent, who is the defacto-

complainant in Crime No.124/2013 of Mayyil Police Station,

which was registered on the basis of the statement given by

the 2nd respondent, against the petitioner, alleging offences

under Section 452 and 324 of the Indian Penal Code. After

investigation, final report has been filed and the case was

taken on file as C.C.No.1006/2013 on the file of the Judicial

Crl. M.C. No.1842 of 2014
                                  2

First Class Magistrate Court-II, Kannur. Now the matter

has been settled between the parties and the differences of

opinion between the father and son has been resolved and

he is now looking after the father. So he does not want to

proceed against the petitioner. In view of the settlement,

no purpose will be served by proceeding with the case as

well. Since the offences are non-compoundable in nature,

they cannot file an application before the courts below for

compounding and the petitioner has no other remedy,

except to approach this court, seeking the following relief:

             "For these and other grounds to be urged at the
      time of hearing it is humbly prayed that this Hon'ble
      Court may be pleased to quash Annexure-A1 FIR
      No.124/2013 dated 25.02.2013, registered by Mayyil
      Police, Annexure-A2 Final Report in Crime No.124/2013
      and consequential proceedings in C.C.No.1006/2013
      pending    before  the  Hon'ble  Judicial First Class
      Magistrate Court-II, Kannur and allow this Criminal
      Miscellaneous Case."

            3.    2nd respondent appeared through counsel

and submitted that, the difference of opinion between them

has been resolved due to the intervention of mediators and

now he has been given care and protection by his son, who

Crl. M.C. No.1842 of 2014
                               3

is the petitioner herein and also his wife, who is aged and

bedridden due to illness.     He does not want to proceed

against his son. He has filed Annexure-A3 affidavit to that

effect. The counsel for the petitioner also submitted that, in

view of the fact that, the differences of opinion between

them has been settled and now they are living in harmony.

He prayed for allowing the application.

            4.    Learned Public Prosecutor, on instructions,

as directed by this court, submitted that, there is no other

case against the petitioner, but opposed the application.

            5.    It is an admitted fact that, the petitioner

herein is the son of 2nd respondent, who is the defacto-

complainant in the above case. It is also an admitted fact

that, on the basis of statement given by the 2nd respondent,

Mayyil police registered Annexure-A1 First Information

Report, as Crime No.124/2013 against the petitioner,

alleging offences under Section 452 and 324 of the Indian

Penal Code. After investigation, Annexure-A2 final report

Crl. M.C. No.1842 of 2014
                               4

was field and it was taken on file as C.C.No.1006/2013 and

it is pending before the Judicial First Class Magistrate

Court-II, Kannur. Now the matter has been settled between

the parties. It is also mentioned in the affidavit that, the

petitioner is aged 77 years and the incident occurred due to

some mis-understanding between himself and his son and

now that has been resolved and harmony has been restored

in the family and he is now looking after them

affectionately. He does not want to proceed with the case.

He had also filed Annexure-A3 report stating these facts.

Considering the fact that, it was a dispute between the

father and son, which resulted in this incident and

ultimately in the registration of the cime and filing of the

final report. Due to the intervention of family members, the

matter has been settled and son has realised his fault and

also realised his responsibility to look after his aged parents

and he is looking after them and parents are satisfied with

this subsequent change of character as well. So considering

Crl. M.C. No.1842 of 2014
                                       5

the circumstances, even if the prosecution is allowed to

continue, the defacto-complainant or his witnesses will not

support the prosecution and conviction in such cases is

remote.      Further, since it is a family dispute, which has

been settled due to the intervention of mediators and

brought harmony in the family, this court has to honour the

same as well.

            6.    In the decision reported in Gian Singh v.

State of Punjab [2012(4) KLT 108 (SC)], it has been

held that:

      "The position that emerges from the above discussion can be
      summarised thus: the power of the High Court in quashing a
      criminal proceedings or FIR or complaint in exercise of its
      inherent jurisdiction is distinct and different from the power
      given to a criminal court for compounding the offences under
      S.320 of the Code. Inherent power is of wide plenitude with
      no statutory limitation but has to be exercised in accord with
      the guideline engrafted in such power viz; (i) to secure the
      ends of justice or (ii) to prevent abuse of the process of any
      Court. In what cases power to quash the criminal proceeding
      or complaint or FIR may be exercised where the offender and
      victim have settled their dispute would depend on the facts
      and circumstances of each case an no category can be
      prescribed. However, before exercise of such power, the High
      Court must have due regard to the nature and gravity of the
      crime. Heinous and serious offences of mental depravity or
      offences like murder, rape, dacoity, etc., cannot be fittingly
      quashed even though the victim or victim's family and the
      offender have settled the dispute.     Such offences are not
      private in nature and have serious impact on society.
      Similarly, any compromise between the victim and offender in

Crl. M.C. No.1842 of 2014
                                       6

      relation to the offences under special statutes like Prevention
      of Corruption Act or the offences committed by public
      servants while working in that capacity etc; cannot provide
      for any basis for quashing criminal proceedings involving such
      offences. But the criminal cases having overwhelmingly and
      pre-dominatingly civil flavour stand on different footing for the
      purposes of quashing, particularly the offences arising from
      commercial, financial mercantile, civil, partnership or such
      like transactions or the offences arising out of matrimony
      relating to dowry, etc., or the family disputes where the wrong
      is basically private or personal in nature and the parties have
      resolved their entire dispute. In this category of cases, High
      Court may quash criminal proceedings if in its view, because
      of the compromise between the offender and victim, the
      possibility of conviction is remote and bleak and continuation
      of criminal case would put accused to great oppression and
      prejudice and extreme injustice would be caused to him by not
      quashing the criminal case despite full and complete
      settlement and compromise with the victim. In other words,
      the High Court must consider whether it would be unfair or
      contrary to the interest of justice to continue with the criminal
      proceedings or continuation of the criminal proceedings would
      tantamount to abuse of process of law despite settlement and
      compromise between the victim and wrongdoer and whether
      to secure the ends of justice, it is appropriate that criminal
      case is put to an end and if the answer to the above question
      (s) is in affirmative, the High Court shall be well within its
      jurisdiction to quash the criminal proceeding."


             7.     In view of the dictum laid down in the above

decision and also considering the fact that, it is a family

dispute, which resulted in the registration of crime and

filing of final report, and father has forgiven his son, who is

now looking after them and does not want to proceed with

the prosecution and the possibility of conviction in such

circumstances is remote and proceeding the case will be

Crl. M.C. No.1842 of 2014
                                  7

only a wastage of judicial time, this court feels that, it is a

fit case where the power under Section 482 has to be

invoked to quash the proceedings, in order to promote the

settlement and harmony that has been restored in the

family on account of the settlement. So the application is

allowed and further proceedings in C.C.No.1006/2013

(Crime No.124/2013 of Mayyil Police Station) pending

before the Judicial First Class Magistrate-II, Kannur, is

quashed as against the petitioner. Office is directed to

communicate this order to the concerned court immediately

for necessary further action.




                                               Sd/-

                                        K. Ramakrishnan, Judge

                           // True Copy //


                                                    P.A. to Judge

ss



