
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                     PRESENT:

                       THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE K.RAMAKRISHNAN

                  MONDAY,THE 2ND DAY OF JUNE 2014/12TH JYAISHTA, 1936

                                          Crl.MC.No. 2358 of 2014 (E)
                                           ------------------------------------

          CRIME NO. 699/2013 OF VIDYANAGAR POLICE STATION, KASARAGOD
                                                   DISTRICT

PETITIONERS/ACCUSED:
------------------------------------

        1. SHIVAPRASAD, AGED 19 YEARS,
            S/O.MOHANAN, PUTHIYAPURA HOUSE, PADY,
            EDANEER P O, KASARAGOD DISTRICT

        2. SUBHASH. K., AGED 20 YEARS,
            S/O.P. V. KRISHNAN, VALIYAKANDAM, BELLUR NAGER,
            PADY, EDANEER P O, KASARAGOD DISTRICT

        3. SHYJU,
            S/O.GOPALAN, AYAROTU MOOLA HOUSE, PADY,
            EDANEER P O, KASARAGOD DISTRICT

            BY ADV. SRI.KODOTH SREEDHARAN


RESPONDENT/COMPLAINANT:
--------------------------------------------

        1. STATE OF KERALA
            THROUGH THE STATION HOUSE OFFICER,
            VIDYANAGAR POLICE STATION,
            REP. BY ITS PUBLIC PROSECUTOR, HIGH COURT OF KERALA
            ERNAKULAM- 682 031

        2. PRASHANTH K.N.,
            S/O.LATE NARAYANA, AYAROTU MOOLA HOUSE, PADY,
            EDANEER P. O., KASARAGOD DISTRICT - 671 121

            BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SMT.S.HYMA

            R2 BY ADV. SMT.C.B.SUMA DEVI

            THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE HAVING COME UP FOR ADMISSION ON
             02-06-2014, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE FOLLOWING:

Crl.MC.No. 2358 of 2014 (E)
-----------------------------------

                                            APPENDIX


PETITIONERS' ANNEXURES:
-----------------------------------------

ANNEXURE I:- TRUE COPY OF THE FIR IN CRIME NO. 699/2013 DATED 22/11/2013 OF
                     VIDYANAGAR POLICE STATION, KASARAGOD


RESPONDENTS' ANNEXURES: NIL




                                                     /TRUE COPY/




                                                     P ATO JUDGE




MJL


                 K.RAMAKRISHNAN, J.
                 ---------------------------
               Crl.M.C.No.2358 of 2014
              -------------------------------
        Dated this the 2nd day of June, 2014

                          ORDER




     This is an application filed by the petitioners who

are the accused in Crime No.699/2013 of Vidyanagar

Police Station of Kasaragod District to quash the

proceedings on the basis of settlement under Section

482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (hereinafter

called as the 'Code').

     2. It is alleged in the petition that the petitioners

are accused numbers 1 to 3 in Crime No.699/2013 of

Vidyanagar    Police   Station   registered  against  the

petitioners on the basis of the statement given by the

second     respondent/de-facto      complainant   alleging

commission of offences under Section 294(b) of the

Indian Penal Code and Section 3(1)(x) of Schedule

Castes and Schedule Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities)

Act.   The petitioners and the accused are students.

Due to some misunderstanding, they were on enemical

Crl.M.C.No.2358 of 2014        2

terms and now the matter has been settled between the

parties and old relationship has been restored. The de

facto complainant has no grievance against the petitioners

now and he does not want to prosecute the         petitioners

in view of the settlement. Since the offences alleged are

of non compoundable nature and also it is in the Crime

stage, neither the police nor the court will drop further

proceedings in view of the settlement. So they have no

other remedy except to approach this Court seeking the

following relief:

              to call for   records of the entire

        proceedings in FIR in Crime No.699/2013 of

        the Vidyanagar Police Station, Kasaragod and

        quash the same.

      3. The second respondent appeared through counsel

and submitted that the matter has been settled between

the parties due to the intervention of well wishers and

friends of the parties and their friendship has been

restored as before and he does not want to prosecute the

petitioners any longer.     He had also filed an affidavit

stating these facts.

Crl.M.C.No.2358 of 2014       3

      4. The Counsel for the petitioners also submitted

that in view of he settlement the possibility of conviction

in such cases is very remote. So he prayed for allowing

the application.

      5. The learned Public Prosecutor on instructions as

directed by this Court submitted that there is no other

case against the petitioners but opposed the application

on the ground that it is an offence against a down trodden

society, it cannot be quashed at this stage.

      6. Heard both sides.

      7. It is an admitted fact that the petitioners and

second respondent are students. It is also an admitted

fact that in respect of incident happened on a faithful day

on the basis of the statement given by the second

respondent, Annexure I FIR was registered as Crime No.

699/2013 of Vidyanagar Police Station of Kasaragod

District against the petitioners alleging offences under

Sections 294(b) of the Indian Penal Code and Section 3

(1)(x)of Schedule Castes and Schedule Tribes (Prevention

of Atrocities) Act. The allegation was that the second

Crl.M.C.No.2358 of 2014         4

respondent      belongs    to   Scheduled  Caste    and   the

petitioners have called his caste name with a view to

humiliate him while they were playing foot ball. Now the

matter has been settled between the parties. It is true

that Schedule Castes and Schedule Tribes (Prevention of

Atrocities) Act has been       enacted by the Parliament to

protect     the interest of the persons belonging those

communities from unnecessary exploitation by the upper

class people.      It is seen from the allegation in the First

Information Report itself that the incident occurred at the

time when both the petitioners and second respondent

were playing foot ball in the foot ball ground. However,

the petitioners and second respondent were students

even if any incident happened, that would          happened

without knowing the consequences of the their act due to

their tender age.         Now the matter has been settled

between the parties and the old relationship between the

petitioners and second respondent        has been restored.

The settlement has been effected due to the intervention

of friends and well wishers of both parties. On account

Crl.M.C.No.2358 of 2014              5

of    the    settlement        the    relationship     between two

communities have been restored.                    In view of the

settlement,       neither the de facto complainant nor his

witnesses are likely to support the investigating officer to

proceed with the investigation and if at all final report is

filed later on the basis of the evidence so far collected, it

is not likely to end in conviction as they will not support

the case of prosecution.

      8. In the decision reported in Gian Singh V. State

of Punjab [2012(4) KLT 108 (SC)] the Hon'ble

Supreme Court has held as follows:

             "The position that emerges from the above
       discussion can be summarised thus: the power of
       the High Court in quashing in criminal proceeding
       or F.I.R. or complaint in exercise of its inherent
       jurisdiction is distinct and different from the power
       given to a criminal court for compounding the
       offences under S.320 of the Code.            Inherent
       power is of wide plenitude with no statutory
       limitation but it has to be exercised in accord with
       the guideline engrafted in such power viz;(i) to
       secure the ends of justice or (ii) to prevent abuse
       of the process of any Court. In what cases power
       to quash the criminal proceeding or complaint or
       F.I.R may be exercised where the offender and
       victim have settled their dispute would depend on
       the facts and circumstances of each case and no
       category can be prescribed.         However, before
       exercise of such power, the High Court must have
       due regard to the nature and gravity of the crime.
       Heinous and serious offences of mental depravity

Crl.M.C.No.2358 of 2014            6

      or offences like murder, rape, dacoity, etc., cannot
      be fittingly quashed even though the victim or
      victim's family and the offender have settled the
      dispute. Such offences are not private in nature
      and have serious impact on society. Similarly, any
      compromise between the victim and offender in
      relation to the offences under special statutes like
      Prevention of Corruption Act or the offences
      committed by public servants while working in
      that capacity etc; cannot provide for any basis for
      quashing criminal proceedings involving such
      offences.      But   the   criminal  cases    having
      overwhelmingly and pre-dominatingly civil flavour
      stand on different footing for the purposes of
      quashing, particularly the offences arising from
      commercial,      financial,    mercantile,     civil,
      partnership or such like transactions or the
      offences arising out of matrimony relating to
      dowry, etc; or the family disputes where the
      wrong is basically private or personal in nature
      and the parties have resolved their entire dispute.
      In this category of case, High Court may quash
      criminal proceedings if in its view, because of the
      compromise between the offender and victim, the
      possibility of conviction is remote and bleak and
      continuation of criminal case would put accused to
      great oppression and prejudice and extreme
      injustice would be caused to him by not quashing
      the criminal case despite full and complete
      settlement and compromise with the victim.        In
      other words, the High Court must consider
      whether it would be unfair or contrary to the
      interest of justice to continue with the criminal
      proceeding    or   continuation   of   the  criminal
      proceeding would tantamount to abuse of process
      of   law   despite  settlement    and   compromise
      between the victim and wrongdoer and whether to
      secure the ends of justice, it is appropriate that
      criminal case is put to end and if the answer to the
      above question(s) is in affirmative, the High Court
      shall be well within its jurisdiction to quash the
      criminal proceeding."



      9. In view of the dictum laid down in the above case,

Crl.M.C.No.2358 of 2014         7

and also considering the fact that the matter has been

settled between the parties both the petitioners and the

second     respondent    were     students,  and   their old

relationship and friendship has been restored on account

of the     settlement and no purpose will be served by

allowing the case to continue in view of the settlement,

this Court feels that it is a fit case where the power under

Section 482 of the Code has to be invoked to quash the

proceedings in order to promote the settlement and

restoration of harmony between two community people

and also considering the fact that both the petitioners and

the second respondent were students at the time when

the incident alleged to have been happened as well as

the pendency of the case should not be an hurdle for their

harmony that has been restored on account of the

settlement.

      So the petition is allowed and further proceedings in

Crime No.699/2013 of Vidyanagar Police Station of

Kasaragod District as against the the petitioners is

quashed.

Crl.M.C.No.2358 of 2014       8

      Office is directed to communicate this order to the

Judicial First Class Magistrate's Court, Kasaragod so as to

inform the same to the concerned Police Station for

further necessary action in this regard.




                           Sd/-K.RAMAKRISHNAN
                                      JUDGE




MJL



