
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                             PRESENT:

                THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE P.BHAVADASAN

    WEDNESDAY, THE 8TH DAY OF JANUARY 2014/18TH POUSHA, 1935

                                    Crl.MC.No. 767 of 2013
                                        --------------------------
CRL.A.NO. 339/2011 OF IST ADDL.SESSIONS COURT,KOLLAM DATED 16-11-2012
MC NO. 110/2011 OF JUDICIAL FIRST CLASS MAGISTRATE COURT III, PUNALUR
                                            DATED 28-07-2011
                                                      ...

    PETITIONER(S)/ACCUSED:
    ------------------------------------------

      ANIL @ ANILKUMAR, S/O.SRI.RAJAN, AGED 42 YEARS,
      MUKKAMBALAVILA VEEDU, VAZHATHOOR, HOSPITAL JUNCTION,
      NEYYATTINKARA P.O., THIRUVANANTHAPURAM DIST.

      BY ADVS.SRI.T.RAVIKUMAR
                   SMT.ANJU P.NAIR

    RESPONDENT(S)/RESPONDENTS:
    ------------------------------------------------------

   1. STATE OF KERALA, REP. BY THE PUBLIC PROSECUTOR,
      HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM.

   2. BIJIMOL, D/O.SRI.JOHN, AGED 30 YEARS,
      CHARUVILAPUTHEN VEEDU,
      MELILA KIZHAKKU MURI, MELILA VILLAGE,
      KOTTARAKKARA - 691 508.


      R1 BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SRI.DHANESH MATHEW MANJOORAN
      R2 BY ADV. SRI.ALEXANDER GEORGE


      THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD
      ON 19/12/2013,THE COURT ON 08/01/2014 PASSED THE
      FOLLOWING:

Kss


                       P. BHAVADASAN, J.
                  - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                    Crl.M.C No. 767 of 2013
                  - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
            Dated this the 8th day of January, 2014.

                                  ORDER


          Aggrieved by the order dated                     28.7.2011 in M.C.

No. 110 of 2011 before the Judicial First Class Magistrate-III,

Punalur, which was confirmed in Crl.Appeal No. 339 of 2011

by the Additional Sessions Court, Kollam by order dated

16.11.2012, the respondent before the JFCM Court has come

up with this petition filed under Section 482 of the Code of

Criminal Procedure.

          2. The petitioner before the JFCM Court invoked the

provisions of the        Protection of Woman from Domestic

Violence    Act    claiming          maintenance,            residence  and

compensation order.

          3.    According to the claim put forward by the

petitioner in the original proceedings, the respondent married

Crl.M.C.767/2013.              2

her at the Sub Registrar's Office in the presence of some

relatives and neighbours.    Two days they resided with the

family of the petitioner and then they took up residence in the

house of the respondent. The marriage was preceded by an

engagement ceremony at Mar Aprem Parish Hall, Koippuram

and it is claimed that at the time of marriage a fridge was

given and at the time of engagement a sum of Rs.1,50,000/-

was given by the petitioner's father. In addition 15 sovereigns

of gold were also given. The allegation is that on the fourth

day of marriage, the respondent began to ill-treat the

petitioner and he had utilized the gold ornaments and money

given for discharging his debts. Soon thereafter, he started

manhandling the petitioner demanding more dowry.            On

6.11.2008, the respondent, his mother and sister, demanding

more dowry brutally manhandled the petitioner and she had to

return to her house unable to bear the torture any more. The

respondent is alleged to have gone over to the house of the

Crl.M.C.767/2013.               3

petitioner and demanded that she should return with him and

also stated that she should bring more dowry.         When she

refused to go along with him, she was assaulted. As a result

of the mediation, petitioner's parents agreed to give Rs. One

Lakh more within one year and also that the couple should

take up a rented residence. It was do done. Suffice to say,

things did not improve       and she was again ill-treated for

which she had to undergo treatment in the hospital. Petitioner

before the court below contended that the respondent is

bound to maintain her and provide her with the necessities of

life. On the basis of these allegations, the petition was laid

for various reliefs.

             4. The petition was resisted by the respondent who

denied having any sort of relationship with the victim and it is

also contended that there is no marriage between them. He

disputed that he had received any amount as dowry or gold

ornaments as claimed by the petitioner and he denied that any

Crl.M.C.767/2013.              4

engagement much less than any marriage had taken place as

alleged. The respondent was an employee of the Government

Hospital       at Neyyattinkara   and  he   had     undergone

de-addiction treatment at Vellanadu. He happened to meet

one Biju, a distant relative of the petitioner and Biju and his

wife Susheela proposed that the respondent should marry the

petitioner and he was taken to the petitioner's house. The

respondent would say that later on under a fraud played on

him, his signature was obtained on a document.          It was

pointed out that the petitioner had invoked the jurisdiction of

the Family Court by filing M.C. 77 of 2009 and O.P. 231 of

2009 for various reliefs and the M.C. was dismissed by the

Family Court finding that there is no legal marriage between

the petitioner and the respondent. Another O.P. is pending

consideration. The order of the Family Court holding that the

petitioner is not entitled to maintenance as there was no valid

marriage has become final and to get over the said order of

Crl.M.C.767/2013.                 5

the Family Court, the present proceedings have been initiated.

Contending that the petitioner was not entitled to any relief

under the Act, he prayed for a dismissal of the petition.

             5.    The evidence in the case consists of the

testimony of P.W.1 and documents marked as Exts. P1 to P6

marked from the side of the petitioner. Ext.D1 was marked

from the side of the respondent.            No oral evidence was

adduced by the respondent. The trial court mainly relying on

the decision reported in Velusami v. Patchaiammal (2010(4)

K.L.T. 384) came to the conclusion that there was domestic

relationship in the nature of marriage and therefore the

petitioner was entitled to the reliefs under the Act and the

petition was allowed giving the following reliefs :

             "1) Respondent is restrained from committing any
      act of domestic violence in the form of physical torture
      of the petitioner.
             2) Respondent is directed to pay Rs.1,500/- per
      month to the petitioner as maintenance from the date of
      filing of this petition.

Crl.M.C.767/2013.                 6



             3) Respondent is directed to pay a compensation
      of Rs.25,000/- to the petitioner for the domestic
      violence suffered.
             The maintenance amount is to be paid on or before
      the 5th day of every month and the petitioner is entitled
      to get 6% interest per annum if any default in payment is
      made. The amount of compensation is to be paid within
      three months from today and the respondent is to pay
      an interest @ 6% per annum if he fails to pay it within
      time.
             The SHO, Kunnikode Police Station is directed to
      ensure the execution of this order. ..."

             6. The aggrieved respondent carried the matter in

appeal as Crl.Appeal No. 339 of 2011 before the First

Additional Sessions Court, Kollam. The said court by a cryptic

order dismissed the appeal approving the decision of the trial

court based on the decision relied on by the trial court.

             7.  Learned counsel appearing for the petitioner

before this Court contended that the courts below have erred

both on facts and in law in granting relief to the petitioner.

Crl.M.C.767/2013.                7

According to the petitioner, Ext.P1 agreement on which

considerable reliance is placed on is only an agreement to

marry and is not a contract of marriage.        Learned counsel

pointed out that the petitioner has no consistent case

regarding the marriage. At one point of time the respondent

herein has stated that the marriage had taken place in the

Registrar's office, while in another place she would say that the

marriage had taken place at her house. It is also pointed out

that as on the date of marriage, i.e., 20.10.1997, there was no

church known as CSI         Town Church, Neyyattinkara.      The

betrothal ceremony as claimed was not conducted. Learned

counsel for the petitioner had pointed out that the Family

Court has specifically found that there was no legal marriage

and that has become final. Inspite of the fact that there was

such a finding, the courts below have gone on to hold that

there was a relationship in the nature of marriage so as to

invoke the provisions of Protection of Women from Domestic

Crl.M.C.767/2013.                8

Violence Act.     It is significant to notice, according to the

learned counsel for the petitioner before this Court that except

for the interested testimony of P.W.1, there is no independent

evidence to show that there was either a marriage or living in

relationship between the two.      Learned counsel went on to

point out that the decision relied on by the court below cannot

improve the case of the petitioner, since there is nothing to

show that they had lived together as husband and wife at any

point of time. The allegations before the courts below have

been specifically controverted and there was no attempt from

the side of the petitioner to adduce independent evidence

either regarding the marriage or regarding living together at

any point of time at any place.

             8. Learned counsel for the petitioner went on to

point out that viewed in the light of the decision reported in

Indra Sarma v. Sarma (2013(4) K.L.T. 763), the test laid down

to ascertain as to whether there is a live-in relationship or

Crl.M.C.767/2013.               9

marriage is not satisfied in the case on hand and therefore the

finding of the courts below cannot stand.         At any rate,

according to the learned counsel, there was no proper

appreciation of the evidence and the contentions raised by the

respondent before the lower appellate court and that the lower

appellate court disposed of the appeal by a cryptic order by

merely accepting the decision reported in Velusami v.

Patchaiammal (2010(4) K.L.T. 384).

             9. Learned counsel appearing for the respondent

on the other hand contended that the documents produced by

the petitioner before the trial court would show that there was

an engagement ceremony and there was a proposal for

marriage.     Even if there was no marriage as such, there is

evidence to show that the couple had lived together as

husband and wife and there was a live-in relationship as

contemplated by Act 43 of 2005.        The courts below have

rightly relied on the decision reported in Velusami v.

Crl.M.C.767/2013.               10

Patchaiammal      (2010(4) K.L.T. 384) and the principle laid

down by the said decision applies to the facts of the case.

Accordingly, it is contended that there is no ground to

interfere with the orders of the courts below.

             10. It is not disputed before this Court that the

Family Court in a proceedings before it for maintenance found

that there was no valid legal marriage between the petitioner

and the respondent. Even though the petitioner before the

trial court would say that she was married to the respondent,

except her interested version, there is no evidence at all in

that regard.     Ext.P1, as rightly pointed out by the learned

counsel for the respondent before the trial court, is only an

agreement to marry.       There is considerable  inconsistency

regarding the     marriage as claimed by the petitioner.   As

rightly pointed out by the learned counsel for the petitioner

before this court, the petitioner before the trial court would

say that the marriage was conducted in the Registrar's office,

Crl.M.C.767/2013.              11

while in another place, she would say that it was conducted in

the Church and in yet another place she would say that it was

conducted in her house.       There is no consistency in this

regard. A reading of her evidence would show that she had

never gone to the Registrar's office at all.

             11.   Whatever that     be, there seems to be

considerable force in the submission of the learned counsel

for the petitioner before this Court that there was want of

evidence to show that there was a legal marriage between the

two.

             12.  Coming now to the question regarding the

live-in relationship, both the courts below relied on the

decision reported in Velusami      v. Patchaiammal (2010 (4)

K.L.T. 384).     However, the Apex Court in a recent decision

reported in Indra Sarma v. Sarma (2013(4) K.L.T.763) had

occasion to consider the same issue. After referring to the

decision reported in Velusami v. Patchaiammal       (2010 (4)

Crl.M.C.767/2013.                   12

K.L.T. 384) , the Apex Court in paragraph 55 laid down some

guidelines for deciding under what circumstances a live-in

relationship falls within the definition of 'relationship in the

nature of marriage'. Paragraph 55 reads as follows:

             "55. We may, on the basis of above discussion cull
      out    some    guidelines     for   testing   under   what
      circumstances, a live-in relationship will fall within the
      expression "relationship in the nature of marriage" under
      S.2(f) of the D.V. Act. The guidelines, of course, are not
      exhaustive, but will definitely give some insight to such
      relationships.
             1) Duration of period of relationship.
             Section 2(f) of the D.V. Act has used the expression
      "at any point of time", which means a reasonable period
      of time to maintain and continue a relationship which
      may vary from case to case, depending upon the fact
      situation.
             2) Shared household
             The expression has been defined under Section 2
      (s) of the D.V. Act and, hence, need no further
      elaboration.
             (3)     Pooling     of  Resources    and   Financial
      Arrangements

Crl.M.C.767/2013.                   13

             Supporting each other, or any one of them,
      financially, sharing bank accounts, acquiring immovable
      properties in joint names or in the name of the woman,
      long term investments in business, shares in separate
      and joint names, so as to have a long standing
      relationship, may be a guiding factor.
             (4) Domestic Arrangements
             Entrusting the responsibility, especially on the
      woman to run the home, do the household activities like
      cleaning, cooking, maintaining or upkeeping the house,
      etc. is an indication of a relationship in the nature of
      marriage.
             (5) Sexual Relationships
             Marriage like relationship, for procreation of
      children,    so    as    to   give   emotional   support,
      companionship and also material affection, caring etc.
             (6) Children
             Having children is a strong indication of a
      relationship in the nature of marriage.           Parties,
      therefore, intend to have a long standing relationship.
      Sharing    the   responsibility   for  bringing  up   and
      supporting them is also a strong indication.
             (7) Socialization in Public
             Holding out to the public and socializing with
      friends, relations and others, as if they are husband and

Crl.M.C.767/2013.                 14

      wife is a strong circumstance to hold the relationship is
      in the nature of marriage.
             (8) Intention and conduct of the parties
             Common intention of parties as to what their
      relationship is to be and to involve, and as to their
      respective     roles   and   responsibilities,  primarily
      determines the nature of that relationship."




             13. In the light of the guidelines of the Apex Court

in the above decision,          merely residing together will not

constitute live-in-relationship and such a live-in-relationship

will have to satisfy the standards set out by the Apex court in

order to fall within the ambit of Act 43 of 2005.

             14. As rightly pointed out by the learned counsel

for the petitioner, there is no consideration of the merits of

the case by the lower appellate court and the lower appellate

court has simply mentioned that the issue involved in the

proceedings is covered by the decision reported reported in

Velusami v. Patchaiammal (2010(4) K.L.T. 384).           The lower

Crl.M.C.767/2013.                 15

appellate court has not bothered to find out whether the

allegation regarding the live-in-relationship are true, whether

there is evidence to show that the couple had resided

together or whether the claim of the petitioner satisfies the

requirements of law.

             15. As rightly noticed by the learned counsel for the

petitioner, the order of the lower appellate court is very

cryptic.    Moreover, in the light of the decision reported in

Indra Sarma v. Sarma (2013(4) K.L.T. 763), the matter

requires reconsideration at the hands of the appellate court.

             In the result, this petition is allowed, the order of

the lower appellate court        is set aside and the matter is

remanded to the lower appellate court for fresh consideration

in accordance with law       and in the light of what has been

stated above.      The parties shall appear before the      lower

appellate court on 5.2.2014. The lower appellate court may

make every endeavour to dispose of the case as expeditiously

Crl.M.C.767/2013.             16

as possible, at any rate, before the closure of the courts for

Summer holidays, 2014.




                                          P. BHAVADASAN,
                                                JUDGE

sb.



