
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                        PRESENT:

               THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE ALEXANDER THOMAS

       THURSDAY, THE 30TH DAY OF OCTOBER 2014/8TH KARTHIKA, 1936

                              Crl.MC.No.6142 of 2014 ()
                                ---------------------------
                          CMP 3216/2013 of C.J.M.,MANJERI
        CRIME NO.745/2013 OF MANJERI POLICE STATION, MALAPPURAM


PETITIONER/ACCUSED:
--------------------------

         HAMSA, AGED 46 YEARS,
         S/O.VELU, KIZHAKKETHIL HOUSE, ULLATTPPADI
         VELLILA, MALAPPURAM DISTRICT.

         BY ADV. SRI.K.DILIP

RESPONDENTS/DEFACTO COMPLAINANT & STATE:
-------------------------------------------------------

       1. FATHIMA SUHARA, AGED 41 YEARS
         D/O.MUHAMMAD, PUTHUKKUDI HOUSE, PALLIAYARAPADI
         PULPATTA, MALAPPURAM DISTRICT.

       2. THE SUB INSPECTOR OF POLICE
         MANJERI POLICE STATION.

         R1 BY ADV. SRI.MAHESH V RAMAKRISHNAN
         R2 BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SRI.R.GITHESH

         THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE HAVING COME UP FOR ADMISSION ON
       30-10-2014, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE FOLLOWING:

Crl.MC.No.6142 of 2014 ()
---------------------------

                                  APPENDIX

PETITIONER(S)' EXHIBITS:
-------------------------------

ANNEXURE I- A TRUE COPY OF THE COMPLAINT FILED AS C.M.P.3216/2013
BEFORE THE CHIEF JUDICIAL MAGISTRATE COURT, MANJERI DATED 15.07.2013.

ANNEXURE II- A TRUE COPY OF THE FIR FILED IN CRIME NO.745/2013 DATED
18.07.2013.

ANNEXURE III- A TRUE COPY OF THE FINAL REPORT FILED IN C.M.P.3216/13 ON
THE FILE OF THE CHIEF JUDICIAL MAGISTRATE COURT, MANJERI DATED
05.09.2013.

ANNEXURE IV- A TRUE COPY OF THE AGREEMENT ATTESTED BY NOTARY PUBLIC
AND ENTERED IN TO BETWEEN THE PETITIONER AND THE 1ST RESPONDENT
DATED 28.05.2014.

ANNEXURE V- THE AFFIDAVIT SWORN BY THE DE-FACTO COMPLAINANT/1ST
RESPONDENT HEREIN AND ATTESTED BY A NOTARY PUBLIC DATED 28.05.2014.


RESPONDENT(S)' EXHIBITS:              NIL
--------------------------------




                                                 // TRUE COPY //




                                                 P.A TO JUDGE.


                     ALEXANDER THOMAS, J.
                     -----------------------------
                     Crl.M.C.No.6142 Of 2014
                   ---------------------------------
           Dated this the 30th day of October, 2014.

                              O R D E R


      The   above     captioned    Criminal    Miscellaneous  Case

(Crl.M.C), invoking the inherent powers conferred on this Court

under Section 482 Cr.P.C, has been filed with the prayer to

quash the impugned Annexure-III Final Report/Charge Sheet

in Annexure-II FIR in Crime No.745/2013 of Manjeri Police

Station   and   all   further   proceedings      arising therefrom.

Petitioner is the sole accused in Crime No.745/2013 of Manjeri

Police Station for offences alleged under Sections 498A, 406, &

323 of IPC. The matter arose out of a complaint filed by the

1st respondent herein as C.M.P.No.3216/2013 before the Chief

Judicial Magistrate Court, Manjeri, in which the said Magistrate

by order dated 15.7.2013 directed investigation of the case as

per Section 156(3) Cr.P.C. Accordingly, impugned Annexure-II

FIR in Crime No.745/2013 of Manjeri Police Station was

registered for the aforementioned offences. The police after

investigation    filed   the     impugned       Annexure-III   Final

Report/Charge Sheet in the aforesaid crime. It is stated that

                               ::2::

Crl.M.C.No.6142 Of 2014

the matter is now amicably settled between the parties due to

the intervention of the mediators and well wishers of both

parties   and   that  the   1st    respondent   herein  (defacto

complainant) has no intention to proceed with the case and

has prayed for quashing of the impugned criminal proceedings

and all further proceedings arising therefrom. Annexure-IV is

the copy of the agreement entered into between the petitioner

and 1st respondent on 28.5.2014. The agreement entered into

between the parties settling various disputes between the

parties has been dealt with therein. It is stated in Annexure-IV

that both parties have agreed for termination of the impugned

criminal proceedings. The 1st respondent has also sworn to an

affidavit dated 28.5.2014, which is produced as Annexure-V in

the Crl.M.C. In Annexure-V affidavit, the 1st respondent stated

that the matter is settled out of court and she is not interested

to proceed with the criminal proceedings and she has no

complaint against the accused that she is a Muslim Orthodox

Pardanashin lady and she is not in a position to appear before

the court that the spouses executed an agreement stating that

they are not interested to maintain the marriage life and she

                                ::3::

Crl.M.C.No.6142 Of 2014

has no complaint against the petitioner and that she has no

objection in quashing the entire impugned criminal proceedings

which is now pending as C.C.No.284/2013 on the file of the

Chief Judicial Magistrate Court, Manjeri etc.        It is in the

background of these facts and circumstances, this Crl.M.C has

been filed.

      2.   The Crl.M.C. has been admitted and Sri.Mahesh

V.Ramakrishnan has taken notice for the 1st respondent and the

learned Public Prosecutor has taken notice for the 2nd

respondent-State of Kerala.

      3.   Heard Sri.K.Dilip, learned counsel for the petitioner,

Sri.Mahesh    Ramakrishnan,     learned   counsel   for   the    1st

respondent and the learned Public Prosecutor appearing for the

2nd respondent-State of Kerala.

      4.   The learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted

that during the pendency of the aforementioned criminal

proceedings, the matter has been settled amicably between the

parties, and that the continuation of the proceedings in the above

case/crime will cause miscarriage of justice to both parties as the

real disputants to the controversy have arrived at an amicable

settlement and any further continuation of the criminal

                                ::4::

Crl.M.C.No.6142 Of 2014

proceedings will amount to sheer wastage of time and money

and would unnecessarily strain the judicial, administrative and

financial resources of the State.

      5.    Sri.Mahesh Ramakrishnan, learned counsel appearing

for the 1st respondent has submitted, on the basis of the specific

instructions furnished by the 2nd respondent, that the 2nd

respondent has amicably settled the disputes with the petitioner

as stated above and that she has no objection in the quashment

of   the    impugned    criminal    proceedings and     that   the

complainant/victim/injured does not intend to proceed any

further against the petitioner as she has no grievance against

him and that she will not raise any dispute/complaint in future if

the prayer for quashing the impugned criminal proceedings is

allowed.

      6.    The learned Public Prosecutor also was heard, who

also has not raised any serious objections and submitted that the

court may consider the prayer in this case in the light of the law

well settled by the Apex Court in that regard.

      7.    After having carefully considered the submissions of

the parties and after having perused the pleadings as well as the

documents and materials placed in this matter, it can be seen

                                  ::5::

Crl.M.C.No.6142 Of 2014

that the offences alleged are more or less personal in nature and

not much element of public interest is involved.          The crucial

aspect of the matter is that though such offences are involved,

the real disputants to the controversy, which has led to the

impugned criminal proceedings, have actually arrived at an

amicable settlement of the matter. From the submissions made

by the learned counsel for the 1st respondent, it is clear to the

Court that the injured/victim/defacto complainant has no further

grievance against the petitioner/accused in the light of the

settlement arrived at by them. In this connection, it is relevant

to note the decision of the Apex Court in the case between Gian

Singh v. State of Punjab reported in 2013 (1) SCC (Cri) 160,

para 61 = (2012) 10 SCC 303 = 2012(4) KLT 108(SC), wherein

the Supreme Court has held as follows in para 61 thereof [ See

SCC (Cri)]:

            "61. The position that emerges from the above
      discussion can be summarised thus: the power of the
      High Court in quashing a criminal proceeding or FIR or
      complaint in exercise of its inherent jurisdiction is
      distinct and different from the power given to a criminal
      court for compounding the offences under S.320 of the
      Code.    Inherent power is of wide plenitude with no
      statutory limitation but it has to be exercised in accord
      with the guideline engrafted in such power viz;(i) to
      secure the ends of justice or (ii) to prevent abuse of
      the process of any Court.        In what cases power to
      quash the criminal proceeding or complaint or F.I.R.

                                   ::6::

Crl.M.C.No.6142 Of 2014

       may be exercised where the offender and victim have
       settled their dispute would depend on the facts and
       circumstances of each case and no category can be
       prescribed..

It is further held as follows:-

       "......... But the criminal cases having overwhelmingly
       and pre-dominatingly civil flavour stand on different
       footing for the purposes of quashing, particularly the
       offences arising from commercial, financial, mercantile,
       civil, partnership or such like transactions or the
       offences arising out of matrimony relating to dowry
       etc. or the family disputes where the wrong is basically
       private or personal in nature and the parties have
       resolved their entire dispute. In this category of cases,
       High Court may quash criminal proceedings if in its
       view, because of the compromise between the offender
       and victim, the possibility of conviction is remote and
       bleak and continuation of criminal case would put
       accused to great oppression and prejudice and
       extreme injustice would be caused to him by not
       quashing the criminal case despite full and complete
       settlement and compromise with the victim........"

Further, in the case Jitendra Raghuvanshi and Others v.

Babita Raghuvanshi and another reported in (2013) 4 SCC

58 [see 2013 (1) KLD 817 (SC)], the Apex Court has held as

follows:-

              "8. It is not in dispute that matrimonial disputes
       have been on considerable increase in recent times
       resulting in filing of complaints under Sections 498A
       and 406 of I.P.C. not only against the husband but also
       against the relatives of the husband. The question is
       when such matters are resolved either by the wife
       agreeing to rejoin the matrimonial home or by mutual
       settlement of other pending disputes for which both
       the sides approached the High Court and jointly prayed
       for quashing of the criminal proceedings or the FIR or

                                  ::7::

Crl.M.C.No.6142 Of 2014

      complaint by the wife under Sections 498A and 406 of
      I.P.C., whether the prayer can be declined on the sole
      ground that since the offences are non-compoundable
      under Section 320        of the Code, it would be
      impermissible for the court to quash the criminal
      proceedings or FIR or complaint.

            9. It is not in dispute that in the case on hand
      subsequent to the filing of the criminal complaint under
      Sections 498A and 406 of IPC and Sections 3 and 4 of
      the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961, with the help and
      intervention of family members, friends and well-
      wishers, the parties concerned have amicably settled
      their   differences   and   executed    a   compromise/
      settlement. Pursuant thereto, the appellants filed the
      said compromise before the Trial Court with a request
      to place the same on record and to drop the criminal
      proceedings against the appellants herein. It is also
      not in dispute that in additional to the mutual
      settlement arrived at by the parties, respondent/-wife
      has also filed an affidavit stating that she did not wish
      to pursue the criminal proceedings against the
      appellants and fully supported the contents of the
      settlement deed. It is the grievance of the appellants
      that no only the Trial Court rejected such prayer of the
      parties but also the High Court failed toe exercise its
      jurisdiction under Section 482 of the Code only on the
      ground that the criminal proceedings relate to the
      offences punishable under Sections 498A and 406 of
      IPC which are non-compoundable in nature.
            15. In our view, it is the duty of the Courts to
      encourage     genuine    settlements    of   matrimonial
      disputes,   particularly,  when    the   same    are  on
      considerable increase. Even if the offences are non-
      compoundable, if they relate to matrimonial disputes
      and the Court is satisfied that the parties have settled
      the same amicably and without any pressure, we hold
      that for the purpose of securing ends of justice,
      Section 320 of the Code would not be a bar to the
      exercise of power of quashing of FIR, complaint or the
      subsequent criminal proceedings.
            16. There has been an outburst of matrimonial
      disputes in recent times. The institution of marriage
      occupies an important place and it has an important

                                ::8::

Crl.M.C.No.6142 Of 2014

      role to play in the society.   Therefore, every effort
      should be made in the interest of the individuals in
      order to enable them to settle down in life and live
      peacefully.  If the parties ponder over their defaults
      and terminate their disputes amicably by mutual
      agreement instead of fighting it out in a Court of law,
      in order to do complete justice in the matrimonial
      matters, the Courts should be less hesitant in
      exercising its extraordinary jurisdiction. It is trite to
      state that the power under Section 482 should be
      exercised sparingly and with circumspection only when
      the Court is convinced, on the basis of material on
      record, that allowing the proceedings to continue
      would be an abuse of the process of the Court or that
      the ends of justice require that the proceedings ought
      to be quashed."


      8.    Considering the facts and circumstances of this case,

it is seen further that the impugned criminal proceedings have

arisen consequent to the matrimonial disputes between the

disputants and the disputes have been settled amicably between

the parties. Accordingly, this Court is inclined to hold that in the

light of the facts and circumstances involved in the present case

and particularly in view of the settlement arrived at between the

parties, the principles laid down in the aforementioned decisions

of the Apex Court will be squarely applicable in the present case.

Moreover, since the real disputants to the controversy have

amicably settled the disputes, which led to these impugned

criminal proceedings, it is also the duty of the court to promote

such settlement, instead of compelling the parties to go on with

                                ::9::

Crl.M.C.No.6142 Of 2014

the dispute. It is also pertinent to note that since the matter is

settled out of court, in the event of proceeding with the trial,

there may not be any fruitful prosecution and the chances of

conviction of the accused is rather negligible and therefore, the

net result of continuance of criminal proceedings would be sheer

waste of judicial time rather meaningless and therefore would

amount to abuse of the process of court proceedings in the larger

sense. Hence following decisions of the Apex Court cited supra,

this Court is inclined to hold that the Crl.M.C. can be allowed by

granting the prayers sought for.

      In the result, Crl.M.C is allowed and the impugned

Annexure-III Final Report/Charge Sheet in the impugned

Annexure-II FIR in Crime No.745/2013 which has led to the

institution of C.C.No.284/2013 on the file of the Chief Judicial

Magistrate Court, Manjeri and all further proceedings arising

therefrom stand quashed. The petitioner shall produce certified

copies of this order before the Magistrate Court concerned as well

as before the Station House Officer concerned.



                                            ALEXANDER THOMAS,
                                                    Judge.

bkn/-



