
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                             PRESENT:

                       THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE K.RAMAKRISHNAN

                MONDAY,THE 31ST DAY OF MARCH 2014/10TH CHAITHRA, 1936

                                   Crl.MC.No. 1858 of 2014 ()
                                       ---------------------------
   CRIME NO. 934/2013 OF MULAVUKADU POLICE STATION, ERNAKULAM DISTRICT
                                           ------------------

PETITIONER :
--------------------

        1. FREDDY SEBASTIAN,
            S/O.K.L.JOSEPH, AGED 30 YEARS, ANJATTUPPARAMBIL
            PANAMBUKADU, ERNAKULAM DISTRICT.

        2. BINISH THOMAS,
            W/O.FREDIN SEBASTIAN, AGED 26,
            ANJATTUPPARAMBIL, PANAMBUKADU
            ERNAKULAM DISTRICT.

        3. TREESA @ SHIRLY
            W/O.K.L.JOSEPH, AGED 56 YEARS,
            ANJATTUPPARAMBIL, PANAMBUKADU
            ERNAKULAM DISTRICT.

            BY ADV. SRI.SHERRY J. THOMAS

RESPONDENTS :
--------------------------

        1. STATE OF KERALA
            REPRESENTED BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR
            HIGH COURT OF KERALA- 682031.

        2. DOMINIC
            S/O.MANUEL, ANCHATTUPARAMBIL, MULAVUKAD
            ERNAKULAM-682504.


            R1 BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SMT. S. HYMA
            R2 BY ADV. SRI.JOHN JOSEPH (ROY)


            THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE HAVING COME UP FOR ADMISSION
            ON 31-03-2014, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE FOLLOWING:


Mn
                                                                        ...2/-

Crl.MC.No. 1858 of 2014 ()
-------------------------------------

                                                      APPENDIX

PETITIONERS' ANNEXURES :
-------------------------------------------

ANNEXURE-A1:                   THE CERTIFIED COPY OF THE FIR IN CRIME NO.934/2013,
                               MULAVUKADU POLICE STATION.

ANNEXURE-A2:                   THE TRUE COPY OF THE COMPROMISE PETITION IN OS
                               NO. 251/2013 OF MUNSIFF'S COURT, ERNAKULAM.

ANNEXURE-A3:                   THE ORIGINAL OF THE AFFIDAVIT SWORN BY 2ND
                               RESPONDENT.

RESPONDENT(S)' EXHIBITS :                              NIL
------------------------------------------------------------

                                                                         //TRUE COPY//




                                                                         P.A. TO JUDGE
Mn


                       K. Ramakrishnan, J.
    ==============================
                   Crl.M.C.No.1858 of 2014
    ==============================
        Dated this, the 31st day of March, 2014.


                             O R D E R


      Petitioners who are accused in Crime No.934/13 of

Mulavukadu Police Station of Ernakulam District            filed this

petition to quash the proceedings in view of the settlement

arrived at between them under Section 482 of Code of Criminal

Procedure.

      2.    It is alleged in the petition that the first petitioner is

the son of third petitioner and husband of second petitioner.

Second respondent is their neighbour.         On the basis of the

statement given by the second respondent, Annexure A1 First

Information Report has been registered as Crime No.934/13 of

Mulavukadu Police Station of Ernakulam District under Sections

452, 323, 324 read with Section 34 of Indian Penal Code. The

investigation is in progress. In the meantime, the matter has

been settled between the petitioners and the second

respondent. There were some civil disputes also between them

and due to the intervention of mediators, all the cases have

been settled and harmony has been restored between them.

So, there is no possibility of the second respondent co-

Crl.M.C.No.1858 of 2014     :  2 :

operating with the investigation and even ultimately, if final

report is filed, the possibility of conviction will be remote.

Since it is in the crime stage, neither the court nor the police

will drop the proceedings though the matter was settled

between the parties. So, they have no other option except to

approach this court seeking the following relief:

           "To quash the Annexure A 1 FIR filed before the

      Judicial First Class Magistrate Court I Ernakulam in

      Crime No.934/2013 of Mulavukadu Police Station,

      Ernakulam."

      3.     Second respondent appeared through Counsel and

submitted that, the matter has been settled between the

parties and Annexure A2 compromise has been entered into

between them and the entire dispute arose on account of some

civil dispute which has been settled before the Civil Court and

he does not want to proceed with the case. He filed Annexure

A3 affidavit to that effect.    The Counsel for the petitioners

submitted in view of the settlement, there is no possibility of

conviction even if ultimately final report is filed and trial is

allowed to continue.

      4.     The Learned Public Prosecutor, on instructions, as

directed by this court, submitted that, except this case, there

Crl.M.C.No.1858 of 2014    :   3 :

is no other case against the petitioners but opposed the

petition on the ground that it is in the investigation stage.

      5.     It is an admitted fact that the petitioners and

second respondent are neighbours and there were civil

litigations also between them which is evident from Annexure

A2 compromise petition produced along with this petition. It is

also an admitted fact that, on the basis of the statement given

by second respondent, Annexure A1 First Information Report

was registered as Crime No.934/13 of Mulavukadu Police

Station against the petitioners alleging offences under Sections

452, 323, 324 read with Section 34 of Indian Penal Code. In

the meantime, the matter has been settled between the

parties. Annexure A2 compromise and Annexure A3 affidavit

filed by the second respondent show that, the accused and the

second respondent are nieghbours and relatives also and there

were civil disputes between them which was the root cause for

the incident mentioned in Annexure A1.               Due to the

intervention of family members and relatives, the matter has

been settled between the parties and the civil suit has been

withdrawn recording the compromise. So, now harmony has

been restored between the parties due to the settlement. The

Crl.M.C.No.1858 of 2014           :  4 :

second respondent does not want to proceed with the

investigation      or     prosecution        against      the     petitioners.

Considering the fact that the crime itself has registered as an

outcome of a civil dispute and family dispute between the

petitioners and the second respondent and the matter has

been settled due to the intervention of mediators and family

members, no purpose will be served by proceeding with the

investigation as the de facto complainant or his witnesses are

not going to co-operate with the investigation and even

ultimately, if final report is filed, they will not support the case

of the prosecution and conviction of such cases will be remote

as well.

      6.     Further, in the decision reported in Gian Singh V.

State of Punjab [2012(4) KLT 108 (SC)], it is held as

follows:

           "The position that emerges from the above discussion
     can be summarised thus: the power of the High Court in
     quashing in criminal proceeding or F.I.R. or complaint in
     exercise of its inherent jurisdiction is distinct and different from
     the power given to a criminal court for compounding the
     offences under S.320 of the Code. Inherent power is of wide
     plenitude with no statutory limitation but it has to be exercised
     in accord with the guideline engrafted in such power viz;(i) to
     secure the ends of justice or (ii) to prevent abuse of the
     process of any Court.      In what cases power to quash the
     criminal proceeding or complaint or F.I.R may be exercised
     where the offender and victim have settled their dispute would
     depend on the facts and circumstances of each case and no
     category can be prescribed. However, before exercise of such

Crl.M.C.No.1858 of 2014            :  5 :

     power, the High Court must have due regard to the nature and
     gravity of the crime. Heinous and serious offences of mental
     depravity or offences like murder, rape, dacoity, etc., cannot
     be fittingly quashed even though the victim or victim's family
     and the offender have settled the dispute. Such offences are
     not private in nature and have serious impact on society.
     Similarly, any compromise between the victim and offender in
     relation to the offences under special statutes like Prevention of
     Corruption Act or the offences committed by public servants
     while working in that capacity etc; cannot provide for any basis
     for quashing criminal proceedings involving such offences. But
     the criminal cases having overwhelmingly and pre-dominatingly
     civil flavour stand on different footing for the purposes of
     quashing, particularly the offences arising from commercial,
     financial, mercantile, civil, partnership or such like transactions
     or the offences arising out of matrimony relating to dowry, etc;
     or the family disputes where the wrong is basically private or
     personal in nature and the parties have resolved their entire
     dispute.   In this category of case, High Court may quash
     criminal proceedings if in its view, because of the compromise
     between the offender and victim, the possibility of conviction is
     remote and bleak and continuation of criminal case would put
     accused to great oppression and prejudice and extreme
     injustice would be caused to him by not quashing the criminal
     case despite full and complete settlement and compromise with
     the victim.    In other words, the High Court must consider
     whether it would be unfair or contrary to the interest of justice
     to continue with the criminal proceeding or continuation of the
     criminal proceeding would tantamount to abuse of process of
     law despite settlement and compromise between the victim
     and wrongdoer and whether to secure the ends of justice, it is
     appropriate that criminal case is put to end and if the answer to
     the above question(s) is in affirmative, the High Court shall be
     well within its jurisdiction to quash the criminal proceeding."



       7.     In view of the dictum laid down in the above

decision and also considering the fact that, the petitioners and

the second respondent are relatives and neighbours and the

matter has been settled between the parties and the crime

itself is an outcome of a civil dispute between the parties and

no purpose will be served by proceeding with the investigation

Crl.M.C.No.1858 of 2014     :   6 :

or ultimately, final report is filed and proceeded with the trial

of the case, possibility of conviction will be remote in view of

the settlement, this court feels that, it is a fit case where the

power under 482 Code of Criminal Procedure has to be

invoked to quash the proceedings in order to promote the

settlement and harmony that has been restored between the

family members on account of the settlement.

       So, the application is allowed and further proceedings in

Crime No.934/13 of Mulavukadu Police Station of Ernakulam

District against the petitioners is quashed. Office is directed to

communicate this order to the Judicial First Class Magistrate

Court, No-I, Ernakulam, to inform the same to the concerned

police station for necessary further action in this regard.




                                             Sd/-
                                   K.Ramakrishnan, Judge.
Bb

                                             [True copy]

                                                   P.A to Judge



