
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                    PRESENT:

                  THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE ALEXANDER THOMAS

             FRIDAY, THE 24TH DAY OF OCTOBER 2014/2ND KARTHIKA, 1936

                                         Crl.MC.No. 6017 of 2014 ()
                                              ---------------------------
 LP.NO.60/2014 OF JUDICIAL FIRST CLASS MAGISTRATE COURT-IV, KOZHIKODE.
             CRIME NO. 70/1993 OF ELATHUR POLICE STATION, KOZHIKODE.
                                                        .......

PETITIONER/ACCUSED:
------------------------------------

           ABDUL VAHAB. M., S/O.KUNHIPARI,
           AGED 43 YEARS, MADATHIL HOUSE,
           ELATHUR P.O., CALICUT- 673 303.

           BY ADV. SRI.K.PRAVEEN KUMAR.

RESPONDENT/COMPLAINANT/STATE:
--------------------------------------------------------

        1. SHAHARBAN, D/O.MUHAMMED KOYA,
           MUBARACK MANZIL, PERUMALATHUPARAMBA,
           PUTHIYANGADI, ELATHUR P.O,KOZHIKODE -673 303.

        2. SUB INSPECTOR OF POLICE,
           ELATHUR POLICE STATION,
           KOZHIKODE -673 303.

        3. STATE,
           REPRESENTED BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR,
           HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM-682 031.


           R1 BY ADV. SRI.CIBI THOMAS.
           R2 & R3 BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR MR.R. GITHESH.


           THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD
           ON 24-10-2014, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE
           FOLLOWING:

rs.

Crl.MC.No. 6017 of 2014


                                  APPENDIX

PETITIONER'S ANNEXURES:-


ANNEXURE I.         COPY OF THE CHARGE IN CRIME NO.70/1993 OF THE
                    ELATHUR POLICE STATION, KOZHIKODE
                    (LP NO.60/14 OF JFCM- IV, KOZHIKODE).

ANNEXURE II.        COPY OF THE AFFIDAVIT SWORN BY THE
                    1ST RESPONDENT DATED 22.10.2014.


RESPONDENT'S ANNEXURES:-               NIL.




                                              //TRUE COPY//


                                              P.S.TO JUDGE

rs.


                     ALEXANDER THOMAS, J.
                    -----------------------------
                    Crl.M.C.No.6017 Of 2014
                  ---------------------------------
            Dated this the 24th day of October, 2014.

                             O R D E R


      The   above    captioned    Criminal    Miscellaneous  Case

(Crl.M.C) has been filed with the prayer to quash the impugned

Annexure-I Final Report/Charge Sheet in Crime No.70/1993 of

Elathur Police Station, Kozhikode which has led to the

institution of L.P.No.60/2014 on the file of the Judicial First

Class    Magistrate   Court-IV,    Kozhikode      and  all further

proceedings arising therefrom. Petitioner is the husband of the

1st respondent.    Crime No.70/1993 of Elathur Police Station

was registered against the petitioner (husband) at the instance

of the 1st respondent-defacto complainant (wife). The police,

after investigation, submitted the impugned Annexure-I Final

Report/Charge Sheet in the aforementioned crime which later

led to the institution of L.P.No.60/2014 on the file of the

Judicial First Class Magistrate Court-IV, Kozhikode. The gist of

the allegation is that after the marriage between the parties,

the petitioner had misused gold ornaments given to the 1st

respondent by her parents and assaulted her physically and

                              ::2::

Crl.M.C.No.6017 Of 2014

mentally demanding more gold ornaments etc.        During the

pendency of the above case, the petitioner and 1st respondent

got divorced as per the customary rites and she married

another person and petitioner also married another woman.

Now, the petitioner and 1st respondent have settled all the

disputes between them amicably.       The 1st respondent has

sworn to an affidavit dated 22.10.2014 produced as Annexure-

II in the Crl.M.C stating about the factual aspects and that

after divorce she has married another person and that she is

living happily with the husband in the second marriage and

that the petitioner herein has also subsequently married

another person and that due to the intervention of persons of

the locality and well wishers as mediators of them, the parties

have settled all the disputes between them and that the

disputes are purely personal in nature and that no interest of

society is involved in the impugned criminal proceedings and

that she has no objection in quashing the impugned criminal

proceedings in L.P.No.60/2014 on the file of the Judicial First

Class Magistrate Court-IV, Kozhikode arising out of Crime

No.70/1993 of Elathur Police Station etc.        It is in the

                                ::3::

Crl.M.C.No.6017 Of 2014

background of these facts and circumstances, this Crl.M.C has

been filed.

      2.    The Crl.M.C. has been admitted and Sri.Cibi Thomas

has taken notice for the 1st respondent and the learned Public

Prosecutor has taken notice for the 2nd & 3rd respondents.

      3.    Heard Sri.K.Praveen Kumar, learned counsel for the

petitioner,  Sri.Cibi  Thomas,    learned   counsel  for   the   1st

respondent and the learned Public Prosecutor appearing for the

respondents 2 & 3.

      4.    The learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted

that during the pendency of the aforementioned criminal

proceedings, the matter has been settled amicably between the

parties, and that the continuation of the proceedings in the above

case/crime will cause miscarriage of justice to both parties as the

real disputants to the controversy have arrived at an amicable

settlement and any further continuation of the criminal

proceedings will amount to sheer wastage of time and money

and would unnecessarily strain the judicial, administrative and

financial resources of the State.

      5.    Sri.Cibi Thomas, learned counsel appearing for the 1st

respondent has submitted, on the basis of the specific

                               ::4::

Crl.M.C.No.6017 Of 2014

instructions furnished by the 1st respondent, that the 1st

respondent has amicably settled the disputes with the petitioner

as stated above and that she has no objection in the quashment

of   the   impugned    criminal    proceedings  and     that   the

complainant/victim/injured does not intend to proceed any

further against the petitioner as she has no grievance against

him and that she will not raise any dispute/complaint in future if

the prayer for quashing the impugned criminal proceedings is

allowed.

      6.   The learned Public Prosecutor also was heard, who

also has not raised any serious objections and submitted that the

court may consider the prayer in this case in the light of the law

well settled by the Apex Court in that regard.

      7.   After having carefully considered the submissions of

the parties and after having perused the pleadings as well as the

documents and materials placed in this matter, it can be seen

that the offences alleged are more or less personal in nature and

not much element of public interest is involved.      The crucial

aspect of the matter is that though such offences are involved,

the real disputants to the controversy, which has led to the

impugned criminal proceedings, have actually arrived at an

                                   ::5::

Crl.M.C.No.6017 Of 2014

amicable settlement of the matter. From the submissions made

by the learned counsel for the 1st respondent, it is clear to the

Court that the injured/victim/defacto complainant has no further

grievance against the petitioner/accused in the light of the

settlement arrived at by them. In this connection, it is relevant

to note the decision of the Apex Court in the case between Gian

Singh v. State of Punjab reported in 2013 (1) SCC (Cri) 160,

para 61 = (2012) 10 SCC 303 = 2012(4) KLT 108(SC), wherein

the Supreme Court has held as follows in para 61 thereof [ See

SCC (Cri)]:

              "61. The position that emerges from the above
       discussion can be summarised thus: the power of the
       High Court in quashing a criminal proceeding or FIR or
       complaint in exercise of its inherent jurisdiction is
       distinct and different from the power given to a criminal
       court for compounding the offences under S.320 of the
       Code.     Inherent power is of wide plenitude with no
       statutory limitation but it has to be exercised in accord
       with the guideline engrafted in such power viz;(i) to
       secure the ends of justice or (ii) to prevent abuse of
       the process of any Court.        In what cases power to
       quash the criminal proceeding or complaint or F.I.R.
       may be exercised where the offender and victim have
       settled their dispute would depend on the facts and
       circumstances of each case and no category can be
       prescribed..

It is further held as follows:-

       "......... But the criminal cases having overwhelmingly
       and pre-dominatingly civil flavour stand on different
       footing for the purposes of quashing, particularly the
       offences arising from commercial, financial, mercantile,

                                 ::6::

Crl.M.C.No.6017 Of 2014

      civil, partnership or such like transactions or the
      offences arising out of matrimony relating to dowry
      etc. or the family disputes where the wrong is basically
      private or personal in nature and the parties have
      resolved their entire dispute. In this category of cases,
      High Court may quash criminal proceedings if in its
      view, because of the compromise between the offender
      and victim, the possibility of conviction is remote and
      bleak and continuation of criminal case would put
      accused to great oppression and prejudice and
      extreme injustice would be caused to him by not
      quashing the criminal case despite full and complete
      settlement and compromise with the victim........"

Further, in the case Jitendra Raghuvanshi and Others v.

Babita Raghuvanshi and another reported in (2013) 4 SCC

58 [see 2013 (1) KLD 817 (SC)], the Apex Court has held as

follows:-

            "8. It is not in dispute that matrimonial disputes
      have been on considerable increase in recent times
      resulting in filing of complaints under Sections 498A
      and 406 of I.P.C. not only against the husband but also
      against the relatives of the husband. The question is
      when such matters are resolved either by the wife
      agreeing to rejoin the matrimonial home or by mutual
      settlement of other pending disputes for which both
      the sides approached the High Court and jointly prayed
      for quashing of the criminal proceedings or the FIR or
      complaint by the wife under Sections 498A and 406 of
      I.P.C., whether the prayer can be declined on the sole
      ground that since the offences are non-compoundable
      under Section 320        of the Code, it would be
      impermissible for the court to quash the criminal
      proceedings or FIR or complaint.
            9. It is not in dispute that in the case on hand
      subsequent to the filing of the criminal complaint under
      Sections 498A and 406 of IPC and Sections 3 and 4 of
      the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961, with the help and
      intervention of family members, friends and well-

                                  ::7::

Crl.M.C.No.6017 Of 2014

      wishers, the parties concerned have amicably settled
      their   differences   and   executed    a   compromise/
      settlement. Pursuant thereto, the appellants filed the
      said compromise before the Trial Court with a request
      to place the same on record and to drop the criminal
      proceedings against the appellants herein. It is also
      not in dispute that in additional to the mutual
      settlement arrived at by the parties, respondent/-wife
      has also filed an affidavit stating that she did not wish
      to pursue the criminal proceedings against the
      appellants and fully supported the contents of the
      settlement deed. It is the grievance of the appellants
      that no only the Trial Court rejected such prayer of the
      parties but also the High Court failed toe exercise its
      jurisdiction under Section 482 of the Code only on the
      ground that the criminal proceedings relate to the
      offences punishable under Sections 498A and 406 of
      IPC which are non-compoundable in nature.
            15. In our view, it is the duty of the Courts
      to encourage genuine settlements of matrimonial
      disputes, particularly, when the same are on
      considerable increase.       Even if the offences are
      non-compoundable, if they relate to matrimonial
      disputes and the Court is satisfied that the parties
      have settled the same amicably and without any
      pressure, we hold that for the purpose of securing
      ends of justice, Section 320 of the Code would not
      be a bar to the exercise of power of quashing of
      FIR,    complaint    or    the   subsequent     criminal
      proceedings.
            16.      There has been an outburst of
      matrimonial disputes in recent times.                The
      institution of marriage occupies an important place
      and it has an important role to play in the society.
      Therefore, every effort should be made in the
      interest of the individuals in order to enable them
      to settle down in life and live peacefully. If the
      parties ponder over their defaults and terminate
      their disputes amicably by mutual agreement
      instead of fighting it out in a Court of law, in order
      to do complete justice in the matrimonial matters,
      the Courts should be less hesitant in exercising its

                                ::8::

Crl.M.C.No.6017 Of 2014

      extraordinary jurisdiction. It is trite to state that
      the power under Section 482 should be exercised
      sparingly and with circumspection only when the
      Court is convinced, on the basis of material on
      record, that allowing the proceedings to continue
      would be an abuse of the process of the Court or
      that   the  ends    of  justice  require   that   the
      proceedings ought to be quashed."

      8.    Considering the facts and circumstances of this

case, it is seen further that the impugned criminal proceedings

have arisen consequent to the matrimonial disputes between

the disputants and the disputes have been settled amicably

between the parties. Accordingly, this Court is inclined to hold

that in the light of the facts and circumstances involved in the

present case and particularly in view of the settlement arrived

at between the parties, the principles laid down in the

aforementioned decisions of the Apex Court will be squarely

applicable in the present case. Moreover, since the real

disputants to the controversy have amicably settled the

disputes, which led to these impugned criminal proceedings, it

is also the duty of the court to promote such settlement,

instead of compelling the parties to go on with the dispute. It

is also pertinent to note that since the matter is settled out of

court, in the event of proceeding with the trial, there may not

                                  ::9::

Crl.M.C.No.6017 Of 2014

be any fruitful prosecution and the chances of conviction of the

accused is rather negligible and therefore, the net result of

continuance of criminal proceedings would be sheer waste of

judicial time rather meaningless and therefore would amount

to abuse of the process of court proceedings in the larger

sense. Hence following decisions of the Apex Court cited supra,

this Court is inclined to hold that the Crl.M.C. can be allowed

by granting the prayers sought for.

      In the result, Crl.M.C is allowed and the impugned

Annexure-I Final Report/Charge Sheet in Crime No.70/1993 of

Elathur Police Station which had led to the institution of

L.P.No.60/2014 on the file of the Judicial First Class Magistrate

Court-IV, Kozhikode and all further proceedings arising

therefrom stand quashed.            The petitioner shall produce

certified copies of this order before the court below concerned

as well as before the Station House Officer concerned.


                                                  Sd/-
                                           ALEXANDER THOMAS,
                                                   Judge.

Bkn/-            ///True copy///




                              P.A. TO JUDGE



