
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                        PRESENT:

               THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE ALEXANDER THOMAS

         FRIDAY, THE 31ST DAY OF OCTOBER 2014/9TH KARTHIKA, 1936

                              Crl.MC.No.6164 of 2014 ()
                                ---------------------------
                       CC 105/2014 of J.M.F.C.,TALIPARAMBA
        CRIME NO.901/2013 OF THALIPARAMBA POLICE STATION, KANNUR

PETITIONER/ACCUSED:
--------------------------

         RAMESAN T.O, AGED 36 YEARS,
         S/O.KUNHIRAMAN, THAZHATH VEETTILE OTHAYOTH
         CHUZHALI AMSOM DESOM, KANNUR DT

         BY ADVS.SRI.P.NARAYANAN
                      SRI.NICHOLAS JOSEPH

RESPONDENTS/STATE & DEFACTO COMPLAINANT:
---------------------------------------------------------

       1. STATE OF KERALA
         THROUGH STATION HOUSE OFFICER
         TALIPARAMBA POLICE STATION, REP BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR
         HIGH COURT OF KERALA 682031 ERNAKULAM

       2. SARANYA. E, AGED 25 YEARS
         W/O.RAMESAN, EDAKEPRATH HOUSE, CHAVANAPUZHA
         PANNIYOOR AMSOM, KARIMBAM P.O, KANNUR DT 670 142

         R2 BY ADV. SRI.MOHANAN V.T.K.
         R1 BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SRI.R.JITHESH

         THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD ON 31-10-
       2014, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE FOLLOWING:

Crl.MC.No. 6164 of 2014 ()
---------------------------

                                   APPENDIX

PETITIONER(S)' EXHIBITS:
-------------------------------

ANNEXURE-1:            COPY OF THE FIR IN CR NO 901/2013 OF TALIPARAMBA
POLICE STATION.

ANNEXURE-2:            CERTIFIED COPY OF THE FINAL REPORT SUBMITTED BY THE
POLICE BEFORE THE JUDICIAL FIRST CLASS MAGISTRATE COURT, TALIPARAMBA
IN C.C NO 105/2014

ANNEXURE-3:            COPY OF THE PETITION IN OP NO 765/2014 FILED BY THE
PETITIONER AND THE SECOND RESPONDENT, BEFORE THE FAMILY COURT
KANNUR.

ANNEXURE-4:            AFFIDAVIT SWORN BY THE RESPONDENT NO 2.


RESPONDENT(S)' EXHIBITS:                  NIL
--------------------------------




                                                     // TRUE COPY //




                                                     P.A TO JUDGE.


                    ALEXANDER THOMAS, J.
                    -----------------------------
                    Crl.M.C.No.6164 Of 2014
                 ---------------------------------
           Dated this the 31st day of October, 2014.

                             O R D E R


      The above captioned Criminal Miscellaneous Case (Crl.M.C),

seeking invocation of the inherent powers of this Court under

Section 482 Cr.P.C, has been filed with the prayer to quash the

impugned Annexure-2 Final Report/Charge Sheet filed in the

impugned     Annexure-1     FIR    in    Crime   No.901/2013     of

Thaliparamba Police Station which has led to the institution of

C.C.No.105/2014 on the file of the Judicial First Class Magistrate

Court,  Thaliparamba,    and    all  further   proceedings  arising

therefrom. The petitioner is the sole accused in the instant crime

No.901/2013 of Thaliparamba Police Station, Kannur District for

offences alleged under Sections 498A, 323 and 506(i) IPC. The

2nd respondent herein is the defacto complainant and she is the

wife of the petitioner.      Police after investigation filed the

impugned    Annexure-2     Final  Report/Charge    Sheet   in  the

impugned Annexure-1 FIR in Crime No.901/2013 which has led

to the pendency of C.C.No.105/2014 on the file of the Judicial

First Class Magistrate Court, Thaliparamba.      The allegations of

the prosecution is that after the marriage between the petitioner

and 2nd respondent, the petitioner demanded dowry and treated

                                ::2::

Crl.M.C.No.6164 Of 2014

the 2nd respondent with cruelty, mentally and physically and that

he has thereby committed the aforementioned offences.        It is

submitted that the disputes between the parties have been

settled amicably and that the 2nd respondent has no grievance or

complaint against the petitioner. It is submitted that due to the

intervention of the mediators the disputes between the parties

have been amicably settled and on the basis of settlement the

petitioner and 1st respondent filed a petition for dissolution of

marriage under Sec.13B of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955.

Annexure-3 is the copy of the O.P.No.765/2014 filed by the

petitioner herein and the 2nd respondent herein under Sec.13B of

the Hindu Marriage Act before the Family Court, Kannur. It is

further submitted that on the basis of the settlement arrived at

between the parties, further continuation of the impugned

criminal proceedings is not warranted or justified as the 2nd

respondent does not want to proceed with the impugned

proceedings against the petitioner any more. The 2nd respondent

has sworn to an affidavit dated 29.10.2014 produced as

Annexure-4 in this Crl.M.C stating the above aspects and it is

stated therein that the disputes between them have been settled

amicably and that they have decided to dissolve the marriage by

                                ::3::

Crl.M.C.No.6164 Of 2014

filing joint petition as evident from Annexure-3 petition,

O.P.No.765/2014 and that the 2nd respondent is not intending to

prosecute the petitioner any more and she has no objection in

quashing the impugned criminal proceedings against the

petitioner herein which is now pending against the accused in

C.C.No.105/2014 on the file of the Judicial First Class Magistrate

Court, Thaliparamba. It is in the background of these facts and

circumstances the petitioner has filed the instant Crl.M.C with the

prayer to quash the impugned criminal proceedings.

      2.   The Crl.M.C. has been admitted and Sri. V.T.K.

Mohanan, Advocate, has taken notice for the 2nd respondent and

the learned Public Prosecutor has taken notice for the 1st

respondent-State of Kerala.

      3.   Heard Sri.P.Narayanan, learned counsel for the

petitioner, Sri.V.T.K. Mohanan, learned counsel for the 2nd

respondent and the learned Public Prosecutor appearing for the

1st respondent-State of Kerala.

      4.   The learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted

that during the pendency of the aforementioned criminal

proceedings, the matter has been settled amicably between the

parties, and that the continuation of the proceedings in the above

                                ::4::

Crl.M.C.No.6164 Of 2014

case/crime will cause miscarriage of justice to both parties as the

real disputants to the controversy have arrived at an amicable

settlement and any further continuation of the criminal

proceedings will amount to sheer wastage of time and money

and would unnecessarily strain the judicial, administrative and

financial resources of the State.

      5.    Sri.V.T.K. Mohanan, learned counsel appearing for the

2nd respondent has submitted, on the basis of the specific

instructions furnished by the 2nd respondent, that the 2nd

respondent has amicably settled the disputes with the petitioner

as stated above and that she has no objection in the quashment

of   the   impugned     criminal    proceedings  and    that   the

complainant/victim/injured does not intend to proceed any

further against the petitioner as she has no grievance against

them and that she will not raise any dispute/complaint in future if

the prayer for quashing the impugned criminal proceedings is

allowed.

      6.    The learned Public Prosecutor also was heard, who

also has not raised any serious objections and submitted that the

court may consider the prayer in this case in the light of the law

well settled by the Apex Court in that regard.

                                     ::5::

Crl.M.C.No.6164 Of 2014

      7.    After having carefully considered the submissions of

the parties and after having perused the pleadings as well as the

documents and materials placed in this matter, it can be seen

that the offences alleged are more or less personal in nature and

not much element of public interest is involved.                  The crucial

aspect of the matter is that though such offences are involved,

the real disputants to the controversy, which has led to the

impugned criminal proceedings, have actually arrived at an

amicable settlement of the matter. From the submissions made

by the learned counsel for the 2nd respondent, it is clear to the

Court that the injured/victim/defacto complainant has no further

grievance against the petitioner/accused in the light of the

settlement arrived at by them. In this connection, it is relevant

to note the decision of the Apex Court in the case between Gian

Singh v. State of Punjab reported in 2013 (1) SCC (Cri) 160,

para 61 = (2012) 10 SCC 303 = 2012(4) KLT 108(SC), wherein

the Supreme Court has held as follows in para 61 thereof [ See

SCC (Cri)]:

            "61.    The position that emerges from the above
      discussion can be summarised thus: the power of the High
      Court in quashing a criminal proceeding or FIR or complaint
      in exercise of its inherent jurisdiction is distinct and different
      from the power given to a criminal court for compounding
      the offences under S.320 of the Code. Inherent power is of
      wide plenitude with no statutory limitation but it has to be

                                    ::6::

Crl.M.C.No.6164 Of 2014

       exercised in accord with the guideline engrafted in such
       power viz;(i) to secure the ends of justice or (ii) to prevent
       abuse of the process of any Court. In what cases power to
       quash the criminal proceeding or complaint or F.I.R. may be
       exercised where the offender and victim have settled their
       dispute would depend on the facts and circumstances of
       each case and no category can be prescribed..

It is further held as follows:-

       "......... But the criminal cases having overwhelmingly
       and pre-dominatingly civil flavour stand on different
       footing for the purposes of quashing, particularly the
       offences arising from commercial, financial, mercantile,
       civil, partnership or such like transactions or the
       offences arising out of matrimony relating to dowry
       etc. or the family disputes where the wrong is basically
       private or personal in nature and the parties have
       resolved their entire dispute. In this category of cases,
       High Court may quash criminal proceedings if in its
       view, because of the compromise between the offender
       and victim, the possibility of conviction is remote and
       bleak and continuation of criminal case would put
       accused to great oppression and prejudice and
       extreme injustice would be caused to him by not
       quashing the criminal case despite full and complete
       settlement and compromise with the victim........"

Further, in the case Jitendra Raghuvanshi and Others v.

Babita Raghuvanshi and another reported in (2013) 4 SCC

58 [see 2013 (1) KLD 817 (SC)], the Apex Court has held as

follows:-

              "8.  It is not in dispute that matrimonial disputes
       have been on considerable increase in recent times
       resulting in filing of complaints under Sections 498A and
       406 of I.P.C. not only against the husband but also against
       the relatives of the husband. The question is when such
       matters are resolved either by the wife agreeing to rejoin
       the matrimonial home or by mutual settlement of other
       pending disputes for which both the sides approached the

                                     ::7::

Crl.M.C.No.6164 Of 2014

      High Court and jointly prayed for quashing of the criminal
      proceedings or the FIR or complaint by the wife under
      Sections 498A and 406 of I.P.C., whether the prayer can be
      declined on the sole ground that since the offences are non-
      compoundable under Section 320 of the Code, it would be
      impermissible     for  the   court   to  quash   the   criminal
      proceedings or FIR or complaint.
             9.   It is not in dispute that in the case on hand
      subsequent to the filing of the criminal complaint under
      Sections 498A and 406 of IPC and Sections 3 and 4 of the
      Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961, with the help and intervention
      of family members, friends and well-wishers, the parties
      concerned have amicably settled their differences and
      executed a compromise/ settlement. Pursuant thereto, the
      appellants filed the said compromise before the Trial Court
      with a request to place the same on record and to drop the
      criminal proceedings against the appellants herein.       It is
      also not in dispute that in additional to the mutual
      settlement arrived at by the parties, respondent/-wife has
      also filed an affidavit stating that she did not wish to pursue
      the criminal proceedings against the appellants and fully
      supported the contents of the settlement deed. It is the
      grievance of the appellants that no only the Trial Court
      rejected such prayer of the parties but also the High Court
      failed toe exercise its jurisdiction under Section 482 of the
      Code only on the ground that the criminal proceedings
      relate to the offences punishable under Sections 498A and
      406 of IPC which are non-compoundable in nature.
             15.   In our view, it is the duty of the Courts to
      encourage genuine settlements of matrimonial disputes,
      particularly, when the same are on considerable increase.
      Even if the offences are non-compoundable, if they relate to
      matrimonial disputes and the Court is satisfied that the
      parties have settled the same amicably and without any
      pressure, we hold that for the purpose of securing ends of
      justice, Section 320 of the Code would not be a bar to the
      exercise of power of quashing of FIR, complaint or the
      subsequent criminal proceedings.
             16.    There has been an outburst of matrimonial
      disputes in recent times.        The institution of marriage
      occupies an important place and it has an important role to
      play in the society. Therefore, every effort should be made
      in the interest of the individuals in order to enable them to
      settle down in life and live peacefully. If the parties ponder
      over their defaults and terminate their disputes amicably by
      mutual agreement instead of fighting it out in a Court of
      law, in order to do complete justice in the matrimonial

                                    ::8::

Crl.M.C.No.6164 Of 2014

      matters, the Courts should be less hesitant in exercising its
      extraordinary jurisdiction. It is trite to state that the power
      under Section 482 should be exercised sparingly and with
      circumspection only when the Court is convinced, on the
      basis of material on record, that allowing the proceedings to
      continue would be an abuse of the process of the Court or
      that the ends of justice require that the proceedings ought
      to be quashed."

      8.    Considering the facts and circumstances of this case,

it is seen further that the impugned criminal proceedings have

arisen consequent to the matrimonial disputes between the

disputants and the disputes have been settled amicably between

the parties. Accordingly, this Court is inclined to hold that in the

light of the facts and circumstances involved in the present case

and particularly in view of the settlement arrived at between the

parties, the principles laid down in the aforementioned decisions

of the Apex Court will be squarely applicable in the present case.

Moreover, since the real disputants to the controversy have

amicably settled the disputes, which led to these impugned

criminal proceedings, it is also the duty of the court to promote

such settlement, instead of compelling the parties to go on with

the dispute. It is also pertinent to note that since the matter is

settled out of court, in the event of proceeding with the trial,

there may not be any fruitful prosecution and the chances of

conviction of the accused is rather negligible and therefore, the

                                ::9::

Crl.M.C.No.6164 Of 2014

net result of continuance of criminal proceedings would be sheer

waste of judicial time rather meaningless and therefore would

amount to abuse of the process of court proceedings in the larger

sense. Hence following decisions of the Apex Court cited supra,

this Court is inclined to hold that the Crl.M.C. can be allowed by

granting the prayers sought for.

       In the result, the Crl.M.C is allowed and accordingly it is

ordered in the interest of justice that the impugned Annexure-2

Final Report/Charge Sheet filed in the impugned Annexure-1 FIR

in Crime No.901/2013 of Thaliparamba Police Station which is

now pending as C.C.No.105/2014 on the file of the Judicial First

Class Magistrate Court, Thaliparamba and all further proceedings

arising therefrom stand quashed.      The petitioner shall forward

certified copies of this order to the Station House Officer

concerned and as well as to the jurisdictional Magistrate

concerned.




                                            ALEXANDER THOMAS,
                                                    Judge.

bkn/-



