
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                              PRESENT:

               THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE P.BHAVADASAN

       WEDNESDAY, THE 22ND DAY OF JANUARY 2014/2ND MAGHA, 1935

                      CRL.A.No. 46 of 2003 ( )
                      -------------------------
   (JUDGMENT IN SC 149/1995 OF PRINCIPAL ASSISTANT SESSIONS COURT,
                     THRISSUR DATED 19-01-2002)



     APPELLANT/COMPLAINANT:
     ---------------------

       STATE OF KERALA, REPRESENTED BY
       THE PUBLIC PROSECUTOR.

       BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SRI. DHANESH MATHEW MANJOORAN



     RESPONDENTS/ACCUSED:
     ---------------------

    1. CHANDRAN, S/O.BRAHMASWAM VEETTIL
       KOCHUNNI, POOTHARAKKAL DESOM, CHOVVUR VILLAGE.

    2. AMMINI, W/O.BRAHMASWAM VEETIL KOCHUNNI,
       POOTHARAKKAL DESOM, CHOVVUR VILLAGE.

        R1,R2  BY ADV. SRI.P.VIJAYA BHANU (SR.)


       THIS CRIMINAL APPEAL  HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD  ON
       22-01-2014, ALONG WITH CRL.R.P. NO. 1266/2002, THE COURT ON
       THE SAME DAY DELIVERED THE FOLLOWING:


SCL.


                    P. BHAVADASAN, J.
                ------------------------------
                   Crl.A. No.46 of 2003
                              &
                 Crl.R.P.No.1266 of 2002
                -------------------------------
         Dated this the 22nd day of January, 2014


                          JUDGMENT

     A1 and his mother were prosecuted for the offences

punishable under Sections 498 A and 306 r/w Section 34

of Indian Penal Code. They were found not guilty of the

charges levelled against them and they were acquitted

under Section 235(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure.

The State has preferred Crl.A.No.46 of 2003 against the

acquittal and the brother of the victim has preferred Crl.

R.P.No.1266 of 2002.

     2.   Prameela, the victim was married to the first

accused on 1.4.1991. Eversince then, she was residing in

the matrimonial house and the couple had a child. While

she was living in the matrimonial house on 2.9.1993, she

consumed poison and left the world. PW1, the brother of

Crl.A. No.46 of 2003 &
Crl.R.P.No.1266 of 2002

                               2

the victim laid Ext.P1 First Information Statement.      PW8

recorded Ext.P1 First Information Statement and on the

basis of the same, registered the crime as per Ext.P1(a)

FIR. Initial investigation was done by PW9. The inquest

was conducted and Ext.P5 report was obtained. The body

was sent for autopsy. Autopsy was conducted by PW6, who

furnished Ext.P6 report. In the meanwhile, PW10 recorded

the statement of witnesses and prepared Ext.P14 scene

mahazar. He completed the investigation and laid charge

sheet before court.

       3.     The court before which the final report was laid,

took cognizance of the offences. Finding that the offences

are exclusively triable by a court of Sessions, the said court

committed the case to the Sessions Court, Trissur, which

court made over the case to the Additional Sessions Court,

Trissur for trial and disposal. The latter court on receipt of

records and appearance of the accused, framed charges for

Crl.A. No.46 of 2003 &
Crl.R.P.No.1266 of 2002

                                 3

the offence punishable under Sections 498 A and 306 r/w

Sec. 34 of Indian Penal Code.

       4.    To the charge, the accused pleaded not guilty and

claimed to be tried. The prosecution therefore had PWs 1

to 10 examined and Exts. P1 to P15 marked. MO1 letter

was got identified and marked. The defence had Exts.D1 to

D3 marked.

       5.    After the closure of the prosecution evidence, the

accused were questioned under Section 313 of Code of the

Criminal      Procedure.    They    denied  all   incriminating

circumstances brought out in evidence against them and

maintained that they are innocent. They maintained that

they had not committed any act to prompt the victim to

commit suicide and they had not demanded any dowry

from any member of the family of the victim. There was

some disputes between two families regarding the handing

of the gold ornaments and they have been falsely

Crl.A. No.46 of 2003 &
Crl.R.P.No.1266 of 2002

                               4

implicated at the instance of the brother of the victim.

       6.    Finding that they could not be acquitted under

Section 235(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, they

were asked to enter on their defence.         They chose to

adduce no evidence.

       7.    The court below on appreciation of the evidence

in this case, came to the conclusion that there was absolute

want of evidence to support the claim made by PWs 1 to 3

that the victim was subjected to extreme cruelty and

torture, which unable to bear, had driven her to commit

suicide. Therefore the court below acquitted the accused.

       8.    In the appeal filed by the State, the learned

Public Prosecutor pointed out that there was no justification

for the lower court to have ignored the evidence of PWs 1

to 3 which clearly show that the victim was suffering a lot

in the matrimonial house due to the cruel acts meted out

by the in-laws as well as the first accused. From Ext.P2

Crl.A. No.46 of 2003 &
Crl.R.P.No.1266 of 2002

                               5

letter, according to the learned Public Prosecutor, it is clear

that the victim was finding the life in the matrimonial house

extremely difficult and harsh and that would support the

version given by PWs 1 to 3. Thus their version regarding

the ill-treatment meted out by the accused persons are not

successfully or effectively challenged and there was no

justification for the court below not to accept the same. It

is also pointed out that being a domestic matter, only the

family members will be able to give details and one cannot

expect independent outside evidence regarding these

matters. The court below was therefore not justified

without assigning proper reasons in rejecting the evidence

of PWs 1 to 3. Improper rejection, according to the learned

Public Prosecutor has resulted in miscarriage of justice.

The learned Public Prosecutor also contended that the court

below was not justified in overlooking the versions given by

PWs 1 to 3.

Crl.A. No.46 of 2003 &
Crl.R.P.No.1266 of 2002

                                6

       9.    Meeting the arguments of the learned Public

Prosecutor and the learned counsel for the revision

petitioners,      the  learned  counsel  appearing  for  the

respondents contended that it is a case where there is no

evidence to show that any cruel acts have been committed

by the accused persons which might have prompted the

victim to commit suicide. Referring to the evidence of PW1,

it is contended that his version regarding the ill-treatment

does not find a place in Ext.P1 First Information Statement

nor in his any of the previous statement to the police. The

state of affairs as regards the evidence of PWs 2 and 3 are

also in noway different.      If the evidence of these three

witnesses are not found to be acceptable, then there is no

evidence in the case. If as a matter of fact the victim was

driven to commit suicide as a result of the torture and cruel

acts committed by the accused persons, surely and

certainly one would have expected some mention of the

Crl.A. No.46 of 2003 &
Crl.R.P.No.1266 of 2002

                               7

same in Ext.P1 given by PW1. The significant absence of

any such fact speaks volumes and the subsequent

statements made by the witnesses are motivated.          The

court below, according to the learned counsel, has

meticulously analysed the evidence and had to come to the

conclusion that the evidence given by PWs 1 to 3 cannot be

believed as they are repleted with embellishments,

developments etc. The learned counsel went on to point

out that no grounds are made out to interfere with the

order of the lower court.

       10. After having heard the learned counsel on both

the sides and after having perused the evidence in its

entirety, this Court is inclined to accept the contention put

forwarded by the learned counsel for the respondents.

True, PWs 1 to 3 did speak about the ill-treatment meted

out by the accused persons on the victim. However, it is

significant to notice that none of them refer to any specific

Crl.A. No.46 of 2003 &
Crl.R.P.No.1266 of 2002

                                8

instance of the ill-treatment or any specific demand for

dowry said to have been made by anyone of the members

of the family of the accused.

       11. PW1 is the brother of the victim. His evidence is

to the effect that initially the matrimonial life between the

victim and the first accused was smooth and happy. But,

it turned rough later on, since the accused became greedy

and began to demand more dowry. He is definite that on

several occasions, she had complained to him about the ill-

treatment meted out by the accused persons. He would go

on to say that on several occasions, his sister was sent

back home demanding that she should return only with

more dowry.          His evidence reveals that    on the day

previous of the date of incident also, he had occasioned to

see that his sister, who had come to his house. On the

previous night he claimed that he and along with his elder

brother had gone to the house of the victim and on the

Crl.A. No.46 of 2003 &
Crl.R.P.No.1266 of 2002

                                  9

previous day, A1 along with his wife and child had come to

the house of PW1.

       12. If one is to simply believe PW1, it could be said

that there are some material to show that the cruelty

meted out by the accused persons.         But the question is

whether it is possible to accept the version of PW1. As

rightly pointed out by the learned counsel for the

respondent that if as a matter of fact, the life of the victim

was soon miserable           and the conduct of the accused

persons were so harsh, severe and cruel and if as a matter

of fact, very often the victim used to complain about the

conduct of the accused to PW1, surely and certainly one

would have expected some mention of the same in Ext.P1

FI Statement.         The conspicuous   absence of any such

mention in the earliest version given by PW1, to a great

extent belies the prosecution evidence. It is also significant

to    notice that      there is no mention by him as to what

Crl.A. No.46 of 2003 &
Crl.R.P.No.1266 of 2002

                              10

exactly was demanded and when was it made. No specific

instance of the ill-treatment or cruelty meted out to his

sister is also mentioned.     PW1 is silent regarding those

aspects. The statements made by PW1 in chief examination

regarding the ill-treatment have been shown to be false,

since in cross-examination, he was confronted with his

previous statement, which did not contain any of the

statements made by him in chief examination. Similar is

the case that PWs 2 and 3 also. PW2 is closely related to

the victim. PW2 in his chief examination would say about

the miserable life      of Prameela had in her matrimonial

house. He goes a step further and says that poison was

administered to her. He would also say that she was both

mentally and physically assaulted by the accused persons.

Like in the case of PW1, in his case also in cross-

examination,        he  was confronted  with  his  previous

statement to the police mainly PWs 5 and 10 and it was

Crl.A. No.46 of 2003 &
Crl.R.P.No.1266 of 2002

                              11

brought out that none of the statements spoken to by him

by in the chief examination, find a place in the previous

statement.

       13. The next witnesses is PW3 who claims to be a

close friend of the victim. Going by her evidence, she used

to meet Premeela quite often. She would say that on all

those occasions, Premeela was complaining about the ill-

treatment by the members of her husband's family. She

would even go to the extent of saying that more because

the victim did not have sufficient beauty that contributed to

the ill-treatment. Pw3 would say that she had informed

about the ill-treatment to the brothers of the victim and

had requested them to interfere.

       14. As in the case of PWs 1 and 2 and in the case of

PW3 also, most of the statements made out by PW3, do not

find a place in her previous statement.     Apart from the

above fact, if as a matter of fact, PW1, he was fully aware

Crl.A. No.46 of 2003 &
Crl.R.P.No.1266 of 2002

                              12

of the state of affairs in the matrimonial house, it is

unnecessary for PW3 to convey the message to him.

       15. The court below has meticulously analysed the

evidence on record and has come to the conclusion that

none of the witnesses, mainly PWs 1 to 3 who speak about

the so-called ill-treatment, cruelty meted out to the victim

can be trusted or believable for cogent and convincing

reasons. It could not be said that the findings of the court

below are per verse and contrary.

       16. May be that, in appeal a different view may quite

be possible. But if the view taken by the court below is

just, reasonable and a possible one, then it is well settled

that the appellate jurisdiction shall not be exercised to

interfere with the finding of the court below. No grievous

error or perversity is seen with regard to the finding of the

court below. The court below was therefore fully justified

in finding that the prosecution has miserably failed to

Crl.A. No.46 of 2003 &
Crl.R.P.No.1266 of 2002

                              13

establish the charges against the accused persons.        The

acquittal was justified rightly and no grounds are made out

to interfere with it.

       The appeal and the revision are without merits and

they are accordingly dismissed.




                                    Sd/-
                              P. BHAVADASAN
                                   JUDGE


Scl.


                                        True Copy


                                              PA to Judge



