
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                        PRESENT:

               THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE ALEXANDER THOMAS

      FRIDAY, THE 19TH DAY OF DECEMBER 2014/28TH AGRAHAYANA, 1936

                             Crl.MC.No.2770 of 2014 (D)
                                ---------------------------

        CRIME NO.383/2014 OF MANJERI POLICE STATION, MALAPPURAM


PETITIONER/ACCUSED:
--------------------------

         SIRAJUDEEN.E.K. AGED 30 YEARS
         S/O.MUHAMMED, MUNDITHUDIYIL
         POOKOOTTUR P.O., MALAPPURAM DISTRICT - 676 517.

         BY ADV. SRI.ESM.KABEER

RESPONDENTS/STATE & COMPLAINANT:
--------------------------------------------

       1. STATE OF KERALA
         REPRESENTED BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR
         HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM -682 031.

       2. THE SUB INSPECTOR OF POLICE
         MANJERI POLICE STATION
         MALAPPURAM DISTRICT -676 517.

       3. SANTHOSH KUMAR, AGED 42 YEARS
         S/O.NARAYANAN, FLAT NO.3, NARAYANA APARTMENT
         PERINTHALMANNA - 679322 (BRANCH-IN-CHARGE
         MACSON DRILLERS AND TRADERS, C.H.BYEPASS ROAD
         MANJERI).

         R3 BY ADV. SRI.ABDUL MAJEED.N
         R1 & R2 BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SMT.SAREENA GEORGE

         THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE HAVING COME UP FOR ADMISSION ON
       19-12-2014, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE FOLLOWING:

Crl.MC.No. 2770 of 2014 ()
---------------------------

                                  APPENDIX

PETITIONER(S)' EXHIBITS:
------------------------------

ANNEXURE-A1: TRUE COPY OF THE FIRST INFORMATION REPORT IN CRIME
NO.383/2014 OF THE MANJERI POLICE STATION DATED 21.3.2014

ANNEXURE-A2: TRUE COPY OF THE COMPLAINT FILED BEFORE THE JUDICIAL
FIRST CLASS MAGISTRATE COURT - I, MANJERI DATED 22.3.2014


RESPONDENT(S)' EXHIBITS:              NIL
--------------------------------


                                                // TRUE COPY //




                                                P.A TO JUDGE


                    ALEXANDER THOMAS, J.
                   -----------------------------
                   Crl.M.C.No.2770 Of 2014
                 ---------------------------------
         Dated this the 19th day of December, 2014.

                            O R D E R


     The prayer in this Crl.M.C is to quash the impugned

Annexure-A1 FIR in Crime No.383/2014 of Manjeri Police

Station.  The 3rd respondent had filed the private criminal

complaint as C.M.P. before Judicial First Class Magistrate

Court-I, Manjeri alleging certain offences against the petitioner

and some others. This led to the registration of the impugned

Annexure-A1 FIR in Crime No.383/2014 of Manjeri Police

Station for offences alleged under Secs. 143, 147, 383 and

149 IPC. The case of the 3rd respondent in the private criminal

complaint is that the petitioner herein had purchased two

cutting machines from the 3rd respondent and one of the

machine was said to be not usable, so the petitioner contacted

the 3rd respondent on 15.3.2014 and that the 3rd respondent

could not repair the machine for want of spare parts and that

he assured the petitioner that he will do the repair works that

while the 3rd respondent was making arrangement for getting

the spare parts from the Perinthalmanna Branch, on 17.3.2014

at about 5:30 p.m., the petitioner and six other persons came

                               ::2::

Crl.M.C.No.2770 Of 2014

to the 3rd respondent firm and forcibly taken a cutting machine

and some spare parts and taken the items in a lorry and that

the cutting machine and spare parts so taken will fetch an

amount of 1,08,250/- and that the petitioner also threatened

the 3rd respondent that as the police did not register the case,

the 3rd respondent had filed the private criminal complaint

before the Judicial First Class Magistrate Court-I, Manjeri and

pursuant to which the 2nd respondent, Sub Inspector of Police

has registered the impugned Annexure-A1 FIR in Crime

No.383/2014 for the above said offences. Copy of the private

criminal complaint has been produced as Annexure-A2 in this

Crl.M.C. It is the case of the petitioner that due to the delay in

repairing the cutting machine has caused great loss to him in

completing the work already taken by the petitioner. Though

the petitioner waited as requested by the 3rd respondent,

timely arrangements was not made and there happened

difference of opinion among the petitioner and the 3rd

respondent and that it is in this background, the 3rd respondent

has gave the complaint which led to the impugned crime. That

later, the office bearers of the association of production of

stones and the petitioner's brother intervened in the matter

                              ::3::

Crl.M.C.No.2770 Of 2014

and settled all the disputes between the petitioner and 3rd

respondent.    The 3rd respondent-defacto complainant filed

affidavit dated 25.11.2014 which has been produced in this

Crl.M.C wherein it is stated that the petitioner and two others

are the accused in the above crime and that all the disputes

between the petitioner and the 3rd respondent have been

settled out of court.   That the 3rd respondent has received

Rs.1,08,250/- from the petitioner as the price for the cutting

machine and accordingly has agreed to withdraw the private

criminal complaint filed by him before the Judicial First Class

Magistrate Court-I, Manjeri.    It is the background of these

facts and circumstances that the petitioner has filed this

Crl.M.C with the prayer to quash impugned Annexure-A1 FIR in

Crime No.383/2014 of Manjeri Police Station and all further

proceedings arising therefrom.

      2.   The Crl.M.C has been admitted and Sri.N.Abdul

Majeed, Advocate, has taken notice for the 3rd respondent and

the learned Public Prosecutor has taken notice for respondents

1 & 2.

      3.   Heard Sri.E.S.M.Kabeer, learned counsel appearing

for the petitioner, Sri.N.Abdul Majeed, learned counsel

                               ::4::

Crl.M.C.No.2770 Of 2014

appearing for the 3rd respondent and the learned Public

Prosecutor appearing for respondents 1 & 2.

      4.   The learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted

that during the pendency of the aforementioned criminal

proceedings, the matter has been settled amicably between

the parties, and that the continuation of the proceedings in the

above case/crime will cause miscarriage of justice to both

parties as the real disputants to the controversy have arrived

at an amicable settlement and any further continuation of the

criminal proceedings will amount to sheer wastage of time and

money     and   would    unnecessarily    strain  the  judicial,

administrative and financial resources of the State.

      5.   Sri.N.Abdul Majeed, learned counsel appearing for

the 3rd respondent has submitted on the basis of the specific

instructions furnished by the 3rd respondent that the disputes

arose out of misunderstandings in the transaction of sale of

cutting machines and that the crime was registered only on the

basis of the private criminal complaint filed by the 3rd

respondent as evidenced from Annexure-A2 and that the 3rd

respondent wishes to withdraw the impugned Annexure-A2

private criminal complaint which led to the registration of the

                               ::5::

Crl.M.C.No.2770 Of 2014

impugned Annexure-A1 Crime No.383/2014 of Manjeri Police

Station. It is accordingly submitted by the learned counsel for

the 3rd respondent that the impugned criminal proceedings

may be quashed as any further continuance of the impugned

criminal proceedings will only disturb the harmony in the

relation between the petitioner and 3rd respondent as the

entire disputes arose out of the sale of cutting machines and

the entire misunderstandings have been cleared and settled by

the parties and that he has no objection in the quashment of

the    impugned     criminal    proceedings   and     that   the

complainant/victim/injured does not intend to proceed any

further against the petitioner as he has no grievance against

him and that they will not raise any dispute/complaint in future

if the prayer for quashing the impugned final report is allowed.

      6.   The learned Public Prosecutor also was heard and

submitted that this Court may consider the prayer in this case

in the light of the law well settled by the Apex Court in that

regard.

      7.   After having carefully considered the submissions of

the parties and after having perused the pleadings as well as

the documents and materials placed in this matter, it can be

                                   ::6::

Crl.M.C.No.2770 Of 2014

seen that the offences alleged are more or less personal in

nature. The crucial aspect of the matter is that though such

offences are involved, the real disputants to the controversy,

which has led to the impugned criminal proceedings, have

actually arrived at an amicable settlement of the matter. From

the submissions made by the learned counsel for the 3rd

respondent,      it    is   clear     to    the     Court     that   the

injured/victim/defacto complainant has no further grievance

against the petitioner/accused in the light of the settlement

arrived at by them.

      8.    In this connection, it is relevant to note the decision

of the Apex Court in the case between Gian Singh v. State of

Punjab reported in 2013 (1) SCC (Cri) 160, para 61 = (2012)

10 SCC 303 = 2012(4) KLT 108(SC), wherein the Supreme

Court has held as follows in para 61 thereof [ See SCC (Cri)]:

            "61.    The position that emerges from the above
      discussion can be summarised thus: the power of the High
      Court in quashing a criminal proceeding or FIR or complaint in
      exercise of its inherent jurisdiction is distinct and different
      from the power given to a criminal court for compounding the
      offences under S.320 of the Code. Inherent power is of wide
      plenitude with no statutory limitation but it has to be
      exercised in accord with the guideline engrafted in such
      power viz;(i) to secure the ends of justice or (ii) to prevent
      abuse of the process of any Court. In what cases power to
      quash the criminal proceeding or complaint or F.I.R. may be
      exercised where the offender and victim have settled their

                                     ::7::

Crl.M.C.No.2770 Of 2014

      dispute would depend on the facts and circumstances of each
      case and no category can be prescribed..

It is further held as follows:-

       "......... But the criminal cases having overwhelmingly and
       pre-dominatingly civil flavour stand on different footing for
       the purposes of quashing, particularly the offences arising
       from commercial, financial, mercantile, civil, partnership or
       such like transactions or the offences arising out of
       matrimony relating to dowry etc. or the family disputes
       where the wrong is basically private or personal in nature
       and the parties have resolved their entire dispute. In this
       category    of   cases,  High   Court  may     quash   criminal
       proceedings if in its view, because of the compromise
       between the offender and victim, the possibility of conviction
       is remote and bleak and continuation of criminal case would
       put accused to great oppression and prejudice and extreme
       injustice would be caused to him by not quashing the
       criminal case despite full and complete settlement and
       compromise with the victim........"

In the decision reported in the case Yogendra Yadav & others

v. The State of Jharkhand & another reported in 2014 (8)

Scale 634 = III (2014) Current Criminal Reports CCR 426 (SC),

the Apex Court has held as follows:

               "When the High Court is convinced that the offences
       are entirely personal in nature and, therefore, do not affect
       public peace or tranquility and where it feels that quashing of
       such proceedings on account of compromise would bring
       about peace and would secure ends of justice, it should not
       hesitate to quash them".



The Apex Court in the above case was dealing with a case

involving offences under Sections 341, 323, 324, 504 & 307 r/w

Section 34 Indian Penal Code.

                                ::8::

Crl.M.C.No.2770 Of 2014

      9.    Considering the facts and circumstances of this

case, it is seen further that the impugned criminal proceedings

have arisen consequent to the personal disputes between the

disputants and the disputes have been settled amicably

between the parties. Accordingly, this Court is inclined to hold

that in the light of the facts and circumstances involved in the

present case and particularly in view of the settlement arrived

at between the parties, the principles laid down in the

aforementioned decisions of the Apex Court will be squarely

applicable in the present case. Moreover, since the real

disputants to the controversy have amicably settled the

disputes, which led to these impugned criminal proceedings, it

is also the duty of the court to promote such settlement,

instead of compelling the parties to go on with the dispute. It

is also pertinent to note that since the matter is settled out of

court, in the event of proceeding with the trial, there may not

be any fruitful prosecution and the chances of conviction of the

accused is rather negligible and therefore, the net result of

continuance of criminal proceedings would be sheer waste of

judicial time rather meaningless and therefore would amount

to abuse of the process of court proceedings in the larger

                               ::9::

Crl.M.C.No.2770 Of 2014

sense. Hence following decisions of the Apex Court cited supra,

this Court is inclined to hold that the Crl.M.C. can be allowed

by granting the prayers sought for.

      In the result, Crl.M.C is allowed and the impugned

Annexure-A1 FIR in Crime No.383/2014 of Manjeri Police

Station and all further proceedings arising therefrom stand

quashed. The petitioner shall produce certified copies of this

order before the Station House Officer concerned as well as

before the court below concerned.




                                         ALEXANDER THOMAS,
                                                  Judge.

bkn/-



