
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                             PRESENT:

                            THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE P.D.RAJAN

                  THURSDAY, THE 22ND DAY OF MAY 2014/1ST JYAISHTA, 1936

                                     Crl.MC.No. 3900 of 2012
                                       ---------------------------

   C.C.NO. 776/2011 OF JUDICIAL FIRST CLASS MAGISTRATE COURT ,THIRUVALLA
                                              -------------

PETITIONERS :
------------------------

          1.         BIJI SUNIL, AGED 39 YEARS,
                     W/O.SUNIL, PALANTHRA HOUSE, KARIMPA P.O.,
                     EDAKURISHI, PALAKKAD.

          2.         P.I.ABRAHAM @ ANIYAN KUNJU, AGED 50 YEARS,
                     S/O.IDICULA, PULAYAKUNNEL, NELLAD,
                     ERAVIPEROOR P.O., THIRUVALLA.

                     BY ADV. SRI.SANTHOSH G. PRABHU

RESPONDENTS :
--------------------------

          1.         STATE OF KERALA,
                     REPRESENTED BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR,
                     HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM.

          2.         NISHA BINOD, AGED 30 YEARS,
                     D/O.C.K.MATHEW, KUNNEL PARAMBIL HOUSE,
                     CHINGAVANOM P.O., KOTTAYAM DISTRICT, PIN - 686 531.

                     R1 BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SRI.C.K.JAYAKUMAR
                     R2 BY ADV. SRI.V.TEKCHAND

          THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD
          ON 22-05-2014, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE FOLLOWING:


Msd.

Crl.MC.No. 3900 of 2012

                                  APPENDIX


PETITIONER(S)' ANNEXURES:


ANNEXURE A1 :        A CERTIFIED COPY OF FIR DATED 26.07.2011 FILED BEFORE
                     THE HON'BLE JUDICIAL 1ST CLASS MAGISTRATE COURT,
                     THIRUVALLA.

ANNEXURE A1(a):      A CERTIFIED COPY OF FINAL REPORT DATED 28.11.2011 FILED
                     BEFORE THE HON'BLE JUDICIAL 1ST CLASS MAGISTRATE
                     COURT, THIRUVALLA.

ANNEXURE A2 :        A TRUE COPY OF THE O.P.NO.631/2012 ON THE FILES OF
                     THE HON'BLE FAMILY COURT AT KOTTAYAM.

ANNEXURE A3 :        A TRUE COPY OF THE O.P.NO.1059/2011 ON THE FILES OF
                     THE HON'BLE FAMILY COURT, KOTTAYAM AT ETTUMANOOR.

ANNEXURE A4:         A TRUE COPY OF THE M.C.NO.80/2011 ON THE FILES OF
                     THE HON'BLE JFCM COURT I, CHANGANACHERRY.

ANNEXURE A5:         A TRUE COPY OF THE M.C.NO.411/2011 ON THE FILES OF
                     THE HON'BLE FAMILY COURT, KOTTAYAM.


RESPONDENT(S)' ANNEXURES:

                                 NIL

                                             //TRUE COPY//


                                             P.S.TO JUDGE.


Msd.


                          P.D. RAJAN, J.
             -------------------------------------------
                     Crl.M.C. No.3900 of 2012
            ----------------------------------------------
              Dated this the 22nd day of May, 2014

                              ORDER

      Petitioners are A5 and A6 in Crime No.1051/2011 of

Thiruvalla Police Station, which was registered u/s.498A r/w 34

IPC. The 2nd respondent filed the above complaint before Circle

Inspector of Police, Thiruvalla, which was entrusted to the Sub

Inspector of Police, Thiruvalla for investigation. On the basis of

that, Thiruvalla Police registered the above crime against six

accused and investigation is progressing. The 1st petitioner is

the sister and the 2nd petitioner is the uncle of the 2nd

respondent's husband. The 2nd respondent alleged that they ill-

treated her both mentally and physically demanding more

amount as dowry.       The petitioners contended that they are

innocent and falsely implicated in this case due to personal

enmity. The 1st petitioner is residing at Palghat and the 2nd

petitioner is the uncle, who has no direct contact with the

Crl.M.C.No.3900/12                2

aforesaid averment. If trial is proceeded, it is a mere abuse of

process of the Court. Hence, they seek to invoke the inherent

jurisdiction.

      2.    The allegation of the 2nd respondent in her

complaint     was that   on    30.8.2007  her marriage     was

solemnised with the 1st accused as per Christian customary

rites at St.Mary's Knanaya Church, Thengeli. In the wedlock,

a child was born to them on 8.1.2010.            At the time of

marriage, Rs.2,00,000/- and 40 sovereigns were given as her

share.    After the marriage, the 1st accused went to Dubai in

his workplace and returned to the native place in December

2008. While residing so, the accused 1 to 6 ill-treated her

both mentally and physically demanding more amount as

dowry. Finally, they ousted her from the matrimonial house.

In the circumstances, she was forced to file the above

complaint. Hence, the petitioners approached this Court with

this petition.

      3.    The learned counsel appearing for the petitioners

contended that prima facie case is not made out against the

petitioners,    since they   are   residing    at  Palghat  and

Crl.M.C.No.3900/12                 3

Eraviperoor.      Nothing has been stated in Annexure-A1

complaint about the overt act for attracting Section 498A IPC.

In the final report also, there is no allegation attracting 498A

against these persons. In the absence of specific averment

constituting the offence in the complaint and in the final

report, the trial of the case will end in acquittal and it is a mere

abuse of process of the Court. The learned counsel for the

petitioners relied the Apex Court decisions in Preeti Gupta and

another v. State of Jharkhand and another [2010 (7) SCC 667]

and Shakson Belthissor v. State of Kerala and another [2009(14)

SCC 466].

      4.    The learned Public Prosecutor and the learned

counsel appearing for the 2nd respondent strongly resisted the

above contention and contended that prima facie case is

made out against them. Additional statement taken by the

Thiruvalla Police was suppressed by the petitioners in this

petition. In the additional statement, the overt acts of 5th and

6th accused were specifically mentioned by the investigating

officer. Therefore, if any interference is warranted at         this

stage, it will affect the entire prosecution case. Hence, they

Crl.M.C.No.3900/12                      4

seek to dismiss the petition.

      5.    In order to attract 498A IPC, the prosecution has to

plead that the husband or relative of husband of a woman is

subjecting her to cruelty to meet any unlawful demand for any

property or valuable security or there is failure on her part or

any person related to her to meet such demand. Any wilful

conduct of any nature likely to drive the woman to commit

suicide or to cause grave injury or danger to life, limb or

health of the woman or harassment of the woman will come

within the purview of Section 498A IPC. Section 498A reads

as follows:

           "498A. Husband or relative of husband of a woman
           subjecting her to cruelty.- Whoever, being the
           husband or the relative of the husband of a woman,
           subjects such woman to cruelty shall be punished
           with imprisonment for a term which may extend to
           three years and shall also be liable to fine.
           Explanation.-For the purpose of         this section,
           "cruelty" means-
           (a)     any wilful conduct which is of such a nature
           as is likely to    drive the woman to commit suicide
           or to cause grave injury or danger to life, limb or
           health (whether mental of physical) of the woman;
           or
           (b)  harassment     of    the woman     where  such
           harassment is with a view to coercing her or any
           person related to her to meet any unlawful demand
           for any property or valuable security or is on
           account of failure by her or any person related to
           her to meet such demand."

Crl.M.C.No.3900/12                5

      6.    In the light of the aforesaid ingredients, I have

considered the averments in Annexure-A1 complaint.           The

overt act committed by A5 and A6 are not specifically

mentioned in Annexure-A1. But, the 2nd respondent stated

therein that A2, A3, A4 and A5 called her 'kokkumundi' and

another allegation mentioned in the complaint was that the

husband, mother-in-law, 2nd sister of the husband and his

mother's brother ill-treated her mentally. But, what type of ill-

treatment they made was not specifically mentioned in her

petition.

      7.    The   learned    counsel    appearing   for the   2nd

respondent contended that the additional statements were

taken by the additional Sub Inspector of Police, Thiruvalla,

which discloses the overt act and mental ill-treatment made

by these petitioners.

      8.    In the light of that submission, I have perused the

final report, in which it is stated that her privacy was lost due

to the interference of A5 and A6 talked in an indecent words

against her at the native place and thereby A5 and A6 made

mental harassment. But, in the complaint, there is specific

Crl.M.C.No.3900/12                          6

allegation against the 5th accused. Therefore, I am of the

opinion that if trial of A6 is continued in the Court of law, it will

amount to mere abuse of process of the Court.

      9.     In Preeti Gupta's case (supra), Apex Court held as

follows:

          "31. The learned members of the Bar have enormous
          social responsibility and obligation to ensure that the
          social fiber of family life is not ruined or demolished.
          They must ensure that exaggerated versions of small
          incidents should not be reflected in the criminal
          complaints. Majority of the complaints are filed either
          on their advice or with their concurrence. The learned
          members of the Bar who belong to a noble profession
          must maintain its noble traditions and should treat
          every complaint under S.498-A as a basic human
          problem and must make serious endeavour to help
          the parties in arriving at an amicable resolution of that
          human problem. They must discharge their duties to
          the best of their abilities to ensure that social fiber,
          peace and tranquillity of the society remains intact.
          The members of the Bar should also ensure that one
          complaint should not lead to multiple cases.
          32.    xxx            xxx            xxx
          33.    The ultimate object of justice is to find out the
          truth and punish the guilty and protect the innocent.
          To find out the truth is a herculean task in majority of
          these complaints.          The tendency of implicating
          husband and all his immediate relations is also not
          uncommon. At times, even after the conclusion of
          criminal trial, it is difficult to ascertain the real truth.
          The Courts have to be extremely careful and cautions
          in dealing with matrimonial cases. The allegations of
          harassment of husband's close relations who had
          been living in different cities and never visited or rarely
          visited the place where the complainant resided would
          have an entirely different complexion. The allegations
          of the complaint are required to be scrutinized with
          great care and circumspection. Experience reveals
          that long and protracted criminal trials lead to rancour,
          acrimony and bitterness in the relationship amongst
          the parties. It is also a matter of common knowledge

Crl.M.C.No.3900/12                      7

          that in cases filed by the complainant if the husband
          or the husband's relations had to remain in jail even
          for a few days, it would ruin the chances of amicable
          settlement, altogether.    The process of suffering is
          extremely long and painful."

In Shakson Belthissor's case (supra), Apex Court held as follows:

         "21. In the light of the aforesaid language used in the
         Section, the provision would be applicable only to
         such a case where the husband or the relative of the
         husband of a woman subjects the said woman to
         cruelty. When the ingredients of the aforesaid
         Section are present in a particular case, in that event
         the person concerned against whom the offence is
         alleged would be tried in accordance with law in a
         trial instituted against him and if found guilty the
         accused would be punished with imprisonment for a
         term which may extend to three years and shall also
         be liable to fine. The said section contains an
         explanation, which defines "cruelty" as understood
         under Section 498-A, IPC. In order to understand the
         meaning of the expression 'cruelty' as envisaged
         under Section 498-A, there must be such a conduct
         on the part of the husband or relatives of the
         husband of woman which is of such a nature as to
         cause the woman to commit suicide or to cause
         grave injury or danger to life, limb or health whether
         mental or physical of the woman.
         22.When we examine the facts of the present case
         particularly the FIR and the charge-sheet we find that
         there is no such allegation either in the FIR or in the
         charge-sheet making out a prima facie case as
         narrated    under    Explanation    (a). There   is no
         allegation that there is any such conduct on the part
         of the appellant which could be said to be amounting
         to cruelty of such a nature as is likely to cause the
         Respondent No. 2 to commit suicide or to cause any
         injury to her life. The ingredient to constitute an
         offence under Explanation (a) of Section 498-A, IPC
         are not at all mentioned either in FIR or in charge-
         sheet and in absence thereof, no case is made out.
         Therefore, Explanation (a) as found in Section 498-
         A, IPC is clearly not attracted in the present case.
         23.We, therefore, now proceed to examine as to
         whether the case would fall under Explanation (b) of
         Section 498-A of IPC constituting cruelty of the

Crl.M.C.No.3900/12                      8

          nature as mentioned in Explanation (b). In order to
          constitute cruelty under the said provision there has
          to be harassment of the woman with a view to
          coercing her or any person related to her to meet
          any unlawful demand for any property or valuable
          security or a case is to be made out to the effect that
          there is a failure by her or any person related to her
          to meet such demand. When the allegation made in
          the FIR and charge- sheet is examined in the
          present case in the light of the aforesaid provision,
          we find that no prima facie case even under the
          aforesaid provision is made out to attract a case of
          cruelty."

The inherent powers of the High Court contemplated u/s 482

Cr.P.C. has to be exercised only for the three purposes

mentioned in the Section i.e, to make such orders

necessary to "give effect to any order" under this code or

to prevent "abuse of the process" of any court or to secure

"the ends of justice". Apex Court in State of Haryana V.

Bhajanlal, [1992 SCC (Crl) 426] pointed out that:

                  "where the allegations made in the FIR or
         complaint are so absurd and inherently improbable on
         the basis of which no prudent person can ever reach a
         just conclusion that there is sufficient ground for
         proceeding against the accused, the proceedings are
         liable to be quashed".



Apex Court in State of Karnataka v. L. Muniswamy and others

[1977 (2) SCC 699] held as follows:

           ".....the wholesome power under S.482 Cr.PC entitles
           the High Court to quash a proceeding when it comes

Crl.M.C.No.3900/12                    9

           to the conclusion that allowing the proceeding to
           continue would be an abuse of the process of the
           Court or that the ends of justice require that the
           proceeding ought to be quashed. The High courts
           have been invested with inherent powers, both in civil
           and criminal matters, to achieve a salutary public
           purpose.

      10. Considering the facts and circumstances, it is

found that trial of the case against A6 is a mere abuse of the

process of Court. This will not affect the trial of the case

against A1 to A5 in this case.          Hence, I quash the charge

against A6 in the final report.

      Crl.M.C. is partly allowed.



                                             P.D. RAJAN, JUDGE.

acd

Crl.M.C.No.3900/12    10

Crl.M.C.No.3900/12    11



