
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                      PRESENT:

                     THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE ALEXANDER THOMAS

           MONDAY,THE 8TH DAY OF DECEMBER 2014/17TH AGRAHAYANA, 1936

                                           Crl.MC.No. 2279 of 2014 ()
                                                ---------------------------
        AGAINST THE ORDER/JUDGMENT IN CP 6/2013 of J.M.F.C.-I,KOCHI DATED
            CRIME NO. 752/2012 OF KANNAMALI POLICE STATION , ERNAKULAM




PETITIONER(S)/ACCUSED:
------------------------------------------

            SEBASTIAN @ SOLLY,AGED 28 YEARS
            S/O.JOSEPH, CHERUTHALAKKAL HOUSE, COMPANYPADI BUS STOP
            SOUTH CHELLANAM, CHELLANAM.P.O., ERNAKULAM DISTRICT.

            BY ADVS.SRI.K.RAMAKUMAR (SR.)
                          SRI.S.M.PRASANTH
                          SMT.ASHA BABU

RESPONDENT(S)/COMPLAINANT:
----------------------------------------------------

        1. STATE OF KERALA
            REPRESENTED BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR
            HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM.

        2. MERY AJEESHA, AGED 23 YEARS
            D/O.ANTONY, PADASSERY HOUSE, SOUTH CHELLANAM
            CHELLANAM.P.O., ERNAKULAM DISTRICT.

            R2 BY ADV. SMT.RESMI THOMAS
            R1 BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR ADV.ASIF ALI

            THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD ON 4.11.2014
A/W. CRL.M.C.NO. 5926/2014 AND CONNECTED CASES, THE COURT ON 8.12.2014
PASSED THE FOLLOWING:

Crl.MC.No. 2279 of 2014 ()
---------------------------

                                           APPENDIX

PETITIONER(S)' EXHIBITS
-------------------------------------

ANNEXURE I- TRUE COPY OF THE CHARGE SHEET IN CP 6/13 OF JUDICIAL FIRST
CLASS MAGISTRATE COURT-I, KOCHI.
ANNEXURE II- TRUE COPY OF THE AFFIDAVIT SWORN BY THE SECOND
RESPONDENT.

RESPONDENT(S)' EXHIBITS
---------------------------------------

          NIL.

sdk+


                     ///True copy///




                                          P.S. to Judge


                        ALEXANDER THOMAS, J.
                     ==================
       Crl.M.C.Nos.2279, 5926, 5711, 4715 & 5317 of 2014
                     ==================
            Dated this the 8th day of December, 2014
                                O R D E R

Crl.M.C.No. 2279/2014:

     The petitioner herein is the accused in Crime No. 752/2012 of

Kannamali Police Station, alleging offences punishable under Sec.

376 of the IPC. The prosecution allegation is that the petitioner

having given promise of marriage to the defacto complainant, on

13.9.2012 committed rape on her at her house and thereby

committed the above said offence. The petitioner avers that he has

not committed the above said offence as alleged by the prosecution.

Based on the complaint of the defacto complainant (2nd respondent)

the Sub Inspector of Police, Kannamali, registered Crime No.

752/2012 of Kannamali Police Station, for offence punishable under

Sec. 376 of IPC, against the petitioner. After investigation, the Police

filed the impugned Annexure-I final report/charge sheet in the

above said crime, which has led to the institution of C.P.No. 6/2013

on the file of the Judicial First Class Magistrate's Court-I, Kochi. It is

Crl.M.C.2279/14 etc.               - : 2 :-

stated that the petitioner/accused approached the 2nd respondent

and her family and settled the matter and that on 29.5.2013 the

marriage of the 2nd respondent (defacto complainant) was

solemnized and that the 2nd respondent is now peacefully living with

her husband and that in these circumstances, there is no need for

her to proceed with the prosecution any further and that no purpose

will be served by continuing the trial against the petitioner/accused.

The 2nd respondent (defacto complainant) has sworn to affidavit

dated 16.4.2014 produced as Annexure-II in this Criminal

Miscellaneous Case stating the above said aspects and that the

matter has been settled and the dispute is purely personal in nature

and that her marriage was solemnized in the year 2013 and she is

living peacefully with her husband and that since the disputes have

been settled between the parties, there is no need to proceed with

the prosecution further and that she does not wish to proceed with

the impugned criminal proceedings that arose out of Crime No.

752/2012 of Kannamali Police Station and C.P.No.6/2013 on the file

of the Judicial First Class Magistrate's Court-I, Kochi, etc. It is in the

light of these factual aspects that the petitioner has filed this

Criminal Miscellaneous case with the above said prayer.

Crl.M.C.2279/14 etc.              - : 3 :-

Crl.M.C.No. 5926/2014:

      The petitioner herein is the sole accused in Crime No.

691/2011 of Medical College Police Station, Kozhikode. The above

said crime was registered on 26.10.2011 on the allegation that on

8.5.2014 between 9 a.m. and 10 a.m. the petitioner had taken the

defacto complainant (2nd respondent) near      from CIRHS School,

Mathara into his car and raped her at a desolate place between

Thondayadu and Palazhy and the same is recorded in his mobile

phone, etc. Annexure-A1 is the copy of the FIR in Crime No.

691/2011 of Medical College Police Station, Kozhikode alleging

offence under Sec.376/377 of IPC read with Sec.66(E) of the

Information Technology Act, 2000. It is stated that now the matter

between the defacto complainant (2nd respondent) and the petitioner

has been settled and that the defacto complainant does not wish to

proceed any further with the impugned criminal proceedings in

relation to Annexure-A1 crime and that she has no objection in the

quashing of the impugned Annexure-A1 FIR, etc. The 2nd

respondent (defacto complainant) has sworn to affidavit dated

12.10.2014, which has been filed in this Crl.M.C. In the said

affidavit it is stated by the defacto complainant that the disputes

Crl.M.C.2279/14 etc.              - : 4 :-

between the 2nd respondent and the petitioner have been settled

amicably and that she is no longer interested to proceed with the

impugned criminal proceedings in respect of Annexure-A1 FIR and

that the disputes between the petitioner and the 2nd respondent are

purely personal in nature and no public interest is involved and that

she has no objection in allowing this Criminal Miscellaneous Case by

quashing the impugned Annexure-A1 FIR, etc. It is in the above

facts and circumstances that the petitioner has filed above Crl.M.C.

Crl.M.C.No.5711/2014:

      The three petitioners herein are accused Nos.1 to 3 in Crime

No. 675/2011 of Parippally Police Station, Kollam district. The Police

after investigation submitted the impugned Annexure-1 final

report/charge sheet in the above said crime, which has led to the

institution of S.C.No. 304/2014 on the file of the Principal Assistant

Sessions Court, Kollam. The offences alleged therein are under Secs.

109, 120 (b), 376 read with Sec. 34 of the IPC. It is submitted that

now there is a settlement between the petitioners and the 2nd

respondent (defacto complainant) and she is not interested to

prosecute the matter further. The 2nd respondent (defacto

complainant) has sworn to affidavit dated 22.9.2014 produced as

Crl.M.C.2279/14 etc.               - : 5 :-

Annexure-II in this Crl.M.C. In the affidavit it is stated by the 2nd

respondent that the allegations in the impugned crime are false and

frivolous and that there is no iota of truth in this and she has no

complaint against the accused in the above Criminal proceedings

and that she is now married and leading a peaceful life with her

husband and children and that any further proceedings in the above

case would be futile and that it would be seriously affect her

reputation and peaceful life, etc. It is further contended by the

petitioners that it is clear from Annexure-A1 final report itself that

the allegations made therein against the petitioners (accused) are

totally false. It is in the background of these facts and

circumstances that the petitioners have filed the present Crl.M.C.

Crl.M.C.No. 4715/2013:

      The petitioner is implicated       as the accused in Crime No.

261/2007 of Chakkarakkal Police Station, Kannur district. The above

said crime was registered on the basis of a complaint dated

8.12.2007 of the 2nd respondent (defacto complainant) before the

said Police authorities alleging that the petitioner had committed

rape on the 2nd respondent on 26.11.2007 at her residence and had

subsequently taken from there to Safa Lodge, Kannur and raped her

Crl.M.C.2279/14 etc.               - : 6 :-

many times till 7.12.2007 and thereby committed the above

offence. Annexure-I is the copy of the FIR along with the first

information statement in Crime No.261/2007 of Chakkarakkal

Police Station. The Police after investigation has filed the impugned

Annexure-II final report/charge sheet in the above said impugned

Annexure-1 crime alleging offence under Sec.376 of IPC. It is stated

that now the disputes have been settled between the petitioner and

the 2nd respondent and that the 2nd respondent does not wish to

pursue the impugned criminal proceedings any further. The 2nd

respondent has sworn to affidavit dated 14.8.2014 produced as

Annexure-III in this Crl.M.C. stating about the above said settlement

and praying that the impugned criminal proceedings may be

terminated accordingly. It is in the background of these facts and

circumstances, that the instant Crl.M.C. has been filed.

Crl.M.C.No. 5317/2014:

      The petitioner herein is the defacto complainant in Crime No.

1004/2011 of Oachira Police Station, in which, respondents 2 and 3

are accused Nos.1 and 2, for offences alleged under Secs. 366(A)

and 376 of the IPC. The prosecution case is that during May, 2011,

A-1 (2nd respondent) had promised the defacto complainant, who

Crl.M.C.2279/14 etc.               - : 7 :-

was then a minor aged 16, to marry her and induced to have sexual

intercourse with him at his residence and also in a Maruthi Omini

Van and that A-2 (the 3rd respondent), who is a friend of A-1, had

assisted to commit the above said offences. The Police after

investigation submitted impugned Annexure-1 final report/charge

sheet in the above said Crime No. 1004/2011 of Oachira Police

Station, which has led to the institution of the Sessions Case S.C.No.

435/2012 on the file of the Sessions Court, Kollam. It is submitted

that A-1 was the petitioner's neighbour and A-2 is the friend of A-1

and that there was a love affair between the petitioner and A-1 and

that her relatives had interfered against this and that the petitioner

was compelled to lodge the complaint. It is averred by the petitioner

that the matter has now been settled between the parties and that

the petitioner's marriage is fixed with another person and that the

pendency of the above case will affect her married life. The

petitioner and her parents have no surviving grievance against the

accused and she does not want to proceed with the impugned

criminal proceedings. The petitioner has filed affidavit dated

15.9.2014, produced as Annexure-2 in this Crl.M.C., stating the

above aspects stating therein that the impugned final report/charge

Crl.M.C.2279/14 etc.                - : 8 :-

sheet against the accused in this case are not true and that at the

time of giving her statement before the Police, the petitioner was a

minor girl and due to interference of her relatives, she was

constrained to lodge such a first information statement, which led

to the registration of the instant crime and that all the matters are

now settled between the parties and she has no complaints or

grievances against the accused persons and that her marriage is

decided to be solemnized with another person and that the

continuance of the impugned criminal proceedings would affect her

future marriage life, etc. It is accordingly prayed in the said affidavit

that the entire proceedings pending in S.C.No. 435/2012 on the file

of the Sessions Court, Kollam, may be quashed considering the

necessity in that regard for her future welfare or otherwise it will

cause irreparable injury and hardship to her future family life. The

father of the petitioner has also sworn to affidavit dated 15.9.2014

produced as Annexure-3 in this Crl.M.C. stating the above aspects

and that they have no further complaints or grievances against the

accused and that the petitioner's marriage has been decided to be

solemnized with another person and that the pendency of the

impugned criminal proceedings would adversely affect her future

Crl.M.C.2279/14 etc.                - : 9 :-

married life and that they have no intention to proceed with the

impugned criminal proceedings. Accordingly, it is prayed that this

Court may quash the entire proceedings in S.C.No. 435/2012 on the

file of the Sessions Court, Kollam and that this is an immediate need

for his daughter's future welfare or otherwise it will cause

irreparable injury to her future married life, etc. It is in the

background of these facts and circumstances that the petitioner has

filed the instant Crl.M.C. with the above said prayer.

      2.     Heard Sri.Ramakumar, learned Senior Counsel, instructed

by Sri.S.M.Prasanth, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner

and Smt.Resmi Thomas appearing for the 2nd respondent in

Crl.M.C.No. 2279/2014; Sri.Abu Mathew, learned counsel appearing

for the petitioner and Sri.Vinu Chand, learned counsel appearing for

the 2nd respondent in Crl.M.C.No.5926/2014; Sri.B.Krishna Mani,

learned counsel appearing for the petitioners and Sri.C.R.Sivakumar,

learned     counsel    appearing    for     the 2nd   respondent   in

Crl.M.C.No.5711/2014;        Sri.M.R.Venugopal,     learned  counsel

appearing for the petitioner and Smt.T.Sudhamani, learned counsel

appearing for the 2nd respondent in Crl.M.C.No. 4715/2014 and

Sri.G.Ajaya Kumar, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner and

Crl.M.C.2279/14 etc.               - : 10 :-

Sri.M.R.Sarin, learned counsel appearing for respondent Nos.2 and 3

in Crl.M.C.No.5317/2014 and Sri.T.Asaf Ali, learned State Public

Prosecutor and the D.G. of Prosecutions appearing for the official

respondents in these cases.

      3.     The learned counsel for the respondents, during the

course of the submissions, relied on paragraph 61 of the decision of

the Apex Court in Gian Singh v. State of Punjab and Anr. reported

in (2013) 1 SCC (Cri.) 160 = (2012) 10 SCC 303, wherein it was held

that the criminal cases having overwhelmingly and predominantly

civil flavour stand on a different footing for the purpose of

quashing, particularly the offences arising from commercial,

financial, mercantile, civil, partnership or such like transactions or

the offences arising out of matrimony relating to dowry, etc. or the

family disputes where the wrong is basically private or personal in

nature etc. The Apex Court in aforementioned Gian Singh's case

cited supra, after surveying many rulings of the Apex Court on the

point, has categorically held that the inherent power of the High

Court under Sec.482 of the Cr.P.C. is of wide plenitude with no

statutory limitation and is to be exercised (i) to secure the ends of

justice, or (ii) to prevent the abuse of the process of any court (iii)

Crl.M.C.2279/14 etc.               - : 11 :-

to do real, complete and substantial justice. In Inder Mohan

Goswasmi v. State of Uttaranchal reported in (2007) 12 SCC 1, the

Apex Court has held that every High Court has the inherent powers

to act ex debito justitiae to do real and substantial justice, for the

administration of which the court exists or to prevent abuse of

process of the court and it is contended by the learned counsel for

the petitioners that the principles laid down by the Apex Court in

those decisions would squarely apply in the facts of the present

case.

      4.     The learned Advocates appearing for the contesting

respondents have also made submissions in tune with the

averments in the respective affidavits filed by their parties

concerned in these cases.

      5.     It has been now well settled in the case Gian Singh v.

State of Punjab and Anr. reported in (2013) 1 SCC (Cri.) 160 =

(2012) 10 SCC 303 that the inherent power vested with this Court

under Sec.482 of the Cr.P.C. is of wide plenitude with no statutory

limitation, but it has to be exercised in accordance with the

guideline engrafted in such power viz., (i) to secure the ends of

justice, or (ii) to prevent the abuse of the process of any court, etc.

Crl.M.C.2279/14 etc.               - : 12 :-

That where the High Court quashes a criminal proceeding having

regard to the fact that the dispute between the offender and the

victim   has     been settled   although     the   offences     are  not

compoundable, it does so as in its option, continuation of criminal

proceedings will be an exercise in futility and justice in the case

demands that the dispute between the parties put to an end and

peace is restored and placing the ends of justice as the ultimate

guiding factor. It has been held therein in paras 55 and 56 that in

the very nature of its constitution, it is the judicial obligation of the

High Court to undo a wrong in course of administration of justice or

to prevent the continuation of unnecessary judicial proceedings.

That whenever anything is authorised and especially if, as a matter

of duty, required to be done by law, it is found impossible to do that

thing unless somethingelse not authorised in express terms be also

done, may also be done, then that something else will be supplied

by necessary intendment and that ex debito justitiae is inbuilt in

such exercise of power, the whole idea is to do real, complete and

substantial justice for which it exists. The power possessed by the

High Court under Sec. 482 of the Cr.P.C. is of wide amplitude but

requires exercise with great caution and circumspection. It needs

Crl.M.C.2279/14 etc.              - : 13 :-

no emphasis that exercise of the inherent power by the High Court

would entirely depend on the facts and circumstances of each case

and it is neither permissible nor proper for the court to provide a

straitjacket formula regulating the exercise of inherent powers

under Sec. 482 and no precise and inflexible guidelines can also be

provided. However, it has been very explicitly laid down by the Apex

Court in para 61 of the Gian Singh's case supra that before exercise

of such power under Sec.482 of the Cr.P.C., the High Court must

have due regard to the nature and gravity of the crime. That heinous

and serious offences of mental depravity or offences like murder,

rape, dacoity, etc. cannot be fittingly quashed even though the

victim or victim's family and the offender have settled the dispute.

Such offences are not private in nature and have a serious impact on

society. Similarly, any compromise between the victim and the

offender in relation to the offences under the special statutes like

the Prevention of Corruption Act or the offences committed by

public servants while working in that capacity, etc. cannot provide

for any basis for quashing the impugned criminal proceedings

involving such offences, etc.

      6.     The learned State Prosecutor appearing for the official

Crl.M.C.2279/14 etc.             - : 14 :-

respondents in this case has also relied on the decision of the Apex

Court in the case Shimbhu and Anr v. State of Haryana reported in

2013 KHC 4673 = 2013 (10) SCALE 595. In that case, the appellants

(accused) therein had allegedly abducted the victim at knife point,

confined her in their shop for two days and raped her taking turn.

Later, she got married and she has four children. The trial court

convicted     them   and sentenced       them 10    years   rigorous

imprisonment. During pendency of appeal, the parties (accused and

the victim) compromised and the Apex Court in the aforementioned

decision in Shimbhu's case cited supra held that the compromise is

not a reason to reduce the sentence. The Apex Court held that a

compromise entered between the parties cannot be construed as a

leading factor based on which lesser punishment can be awarded

and that rape is a non-compoundable offence and it is an offence

against the society and not a matter to be left for the parties to

compromise and settle. Since the court cannot always be assured

that the consent given by the victim in compromising the case is a

genuine consent, there is every chance that she might have been

pressurized by the convicts or the trauma undergone by her all the

years might have compelled her to opt for a compromise and that

Crl.M.C.2279/14 etc.              - : 15 :-

accepting this proposition will put an additional burden on the

victim as the accused may use all his influence to pressurise her for

a compromise and that in the interest of justice and to avoid

unnecessary pressure or harassment to the victim, it would not be

safe in considering the compromise arrived at between the parties

in rape cases to be a ground for the Court to exercise discretionary

power under the proviso of Sec.376(2) of IPC, etc. The learned

counsel appearing for the petitioners has argued that the above said

decision in Shimbhu's case cited supra is distinguishable, by

contending that the said case did not involve an issue of quashment

under Sec.482 of the Cr.P.C., but was a case wherein the accused

were convicted of the offence of Sec. 376 IPC for rape and that the

compromise was highlighted at the time of the imposition of

sentence as a plea for reduction thereof and that the said decision is

clearly distinguishable on those facts.

      7.     The learned counsel for the petitioners has also relied on

the decision of the Supreme Court in Yogendra Yadav & ors. v.

State of Jharkhand & Anr. reported in 2014 (8) SCALE 634, wherein

the Supreme Court has allowed the plea of quashment in a case

involving offences under Secs. 307 (attempt to murder), 324, 323,

Crl.M.C.2279/14 etc.                      - : 16 :-

341, 504 read with Sec. 34 of the IPC. The learned Public Prosecutor

has relied on the decision of the Apex Court in Narinder Singh v.

State of Punjab reported in (2014) 6 SCC 466, para 29. In Narinder

Singh's case cited supra the Apex Court was dealing with the case,

wherein the crime was registered for offences under Secs. 307, 324

323 read with Sec. 34 of the IPC. The Apex Court, after dealing with

various decisions on the point, has issued various guidelines in

paragraph 29 thereof, which read as follows:

             "29. In view of the aforesaid discussion, we sum up and lay
      down the following principles by which the High Court would be
      guided in giving adequate treatment to the settlement between the
      parties and exercising its power under Section 482 of the Code while
      accepting the settlement and quashing the proceedings or refusing to
      accept the settlement with direction to continue with the criminal
      proceedings:

             29.1.    Power conferred under Section 482 of the Code is to be
      distinguished from the power which lies in the Court to compound
      the offences under Section 320 of the Code. No doubt, under Section
      482 of theproceedings High Court has inherent power to quash the
                    Code, the
      criminal                   even   in   those  cases  which   are   not
      compoundable, where the parties have settled the matter between
      themselves. However, this power is to be exercised sparingly and
      with caution.

             29.2. When the parties have reached the settlement and on
      that basis petition for quashing the criminal proceedings is filed, the
      guiding factor in such cases would be to secure:

             (i) ends of justice, or

             (ii) to prevent abuse of the process of any Court.

      While exercising the power the High Court is to form an opinion on
      either of the aforesaid two objectives.

             29.3 Such a power is not be exercised in those prosecutions

Crl.M.C.2279/14 etc.                     - : 17 :-

      which involve heinous and serious offences of mental depravity or
      offences like murder, rape, dacoity, etc. Such offences are not private
      in nature and have a serious impact on society. Similarly, for offences
      alleged to have been committed under special statute like the
      Prevention of Corruption Act or the offences committed by Public
      Servants while working in that capacity are not to be quashed merely
      on the basis of compromise between the victim and the offender.

             29.4 On the other, those criminal cases having overwhelmingly
      and pre-dominantly civil character, particularly those arising out of
      commercial transactions or arising out of matrimonial relationship or
      family disputes should be quashed when the parties have resolved
      their entire disputes among themselves.

             29.5 While exercising its powers, the High Court is to examine
      as to whether the possibility of conviction is remote and bleak and
      continuation of criminal cases would put the accused to great
      oppression and prejudice and extreme injustice would be caused to
      him by not quashing the criminal cases.

             29.6 Offences under Section 307 IPC would fall in the category
      of heinous and serious offences and therefore is to be generally
      treated as crime against the society and not against the individual
      alone. However, the High Court would not rest its decision merely
      because there is a mention of Section 307 IPC in the FIR or the charge
      is framed under this provision. It would be open to the High Court to
      examine as to whether incorporation of Section 307 IPC is there for
      the sake of it or the prosecution has collected sufficient evidence,
      which if proved, would lead to proving the charge under Section 307
      IPC. For this purpose, it would be open to the High Court to go by the
      nature of injury sustained, whether such injury is inflicted on the
      vital/delegate parts of the body, nature of weapons used etc. Medical
      report in respect of injuries suffered by the victim can generally be
      the guiding factor. On the basis of this prima facie analysis, the High
      Court can examine as to whether there is a strong possibility of
      conviction or the chances of conviction are remote and bleak. In the
      former case it can refuse to accept the settlement and quash the
      criminal proceedings whereas in the later case it would be
      permissible for the High Court to accept the plea compounding the
      offence based on complete settlement between the parties. At this
      stage, the Court can also be swayed by the fact that the settlement
      between the parties is going to result in harmony between them
      which may improve their future relationship.

             29.7. While deciding whether to exercise its power under
      Section 482 of the Code or not, timings of settlement play a crucial
      role. Those cases where the settlement is arrived at immediately after
      the alleged commission of offence and the matter is still under
      investigation, the High Court may be liberal in accepting the

Crl.M.C.2279/14 etc.                     - : 18 :-

      settlement to quash the criminal proceedings/investigation. It is
      because of the reason that at this stage the investigation is still on
      and even the charge sheet has not been filed. Likewise, those cases
      where the charge is framed but the evidence is yet to start or the
      evidence is still at infancy stage, the High Court can show
      benevolence in exercising its powers favourably, but after prima facie
      assessment of the circumstances/material mentioned above. On the
      other hand, where the prosecution evidence is almost complete or
      after the conclusion of the evidence the matter is at the stage of
      argument, normally the High Court should refrain from exercising its
      power under Section 482 of the Code, as in such cases the trial court
      would be in a position to decide the case finally on merits and to
      come a conclusion as to whether the offence under Section 307 IPC is
      committed or not. Similarly, in those cases where the conviction is
      already recorded by the trial court and the matter is at the appellate
      stage before the High Court, mere compromise between the parties
      would not be a ground to accept the same resulting in acquittal of
      the offender who has already been convicted by the trial court. Here
      charge is proved under Section 307 IPC and conviction is already
      recorded of a heinous crime and, therefore, there is no question of
      sparing a convict found guilty of such a crime."

The above said decision in Narinder Singh v. State of Punjab was

subsequently relied on by the Supreme Court in the case Manohar

Singh v. Madhya Pradesh & Anr. reported in 2014 Crl.L.J.4326.

      8.     After consideration of the submissions of the petitioners'
counsel, the counsel for the contesting respondents and the learned
Public Prosecutor in the respondent-State, this Court is of the
considered opinion that taking into account the specific guidelines
engrafted by the Apex Court in para 61 of Gian Singh v. State of
Punjab, reported in (2013) 1 SCC (Cri) 160 and the further detailed
guidelines laid down by the Apex court in Narinder Singh's case
reported in (2014) 6 SCC 466, that the present cases involving
quashment of impugned criminal proceedings for offences under
Sec. 376 IPC, is not a fit case for exercise of discretion under the

Crl.M.C.2279/14 etc.               - : 19 :-

extra ordinary powers under Sec. 482 of the Cr.P.C. on the ground
of settlement. The power under Sec. 482 is of wide plenitude, but
the   same     has  to  be    exercised     with great    caution and
circumspection. Therefore this Court is not inclined to exercise the
discretion for allowing the plea of quashment of the impugned
criminal proceedings for an offence under Sec. 376 of the IPC on
the ground of settlement between the accused and the Prosecutrix
in the facts and circumstances of this case. It is made clear that this
Court has not made any observations on the sustainability or
otherwise of the case of the prosecution in the instant case. In this
view of the matter, this Court is not inclined to allow the prayer for
quashment.
      Faced with this situation, the learned counsel for the
petitioners sought liberty of this Court to seek plea of discharge
before the court below, at the appropriate stage. It is made clear
that nothing in this order will preclude the petitioners in any manner
to seek appropriate plea of discharge before the court below, if the
stage for seeking such plea has not yet been crossed.
      With these observations, the Criminal Miscellaneous Cases
stand dismissed.

                                                      Sd/-
sdk+                                     ALEXANDER THOMAS, JUDGE

          ///True copy///



                             P.S. to Judge

Crl.M.C.2279/14 etc.    - : 20 :-



