
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM
                                                      PRESENT:
                     THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE ALEXANDER THOMAS

                 FRIDAY,THE 17TH DAY OF OCTOBER 2014/25TH ASWINA, 1936

                                           Crl.MC.No. 5450 of 2014 ()
                                                ---------------------------
       AGAINST THE ORDER/JUDGMENT IN CC 84/2014 of J.M.F.C.-I, ALUVA DATED

PETITIONER(S)/ACCUSED NOS.1 TO 4 IN C.C.NO.84/2014 OF JFCM-I, ALUVA:
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

        1. E.R.RAJU
            SON OF A.K.RAGHAVAN
            RESIDING AT EDAKATTUPARAMBIL HOUSE, AYROOR.P.O.
            ATTUPURAM, ERNAKULAM DISTRICT, PIN CODE-683 579.

        2. A.K.RAGHAVAN AGED 73 YEARS
            SON OF LATE SRI.KRISHNAN
            RESIDING AT EDAKATTUPARAMBIL HOUSE, AYROOR.P.O.
            ATTUPURAM, ERNAKULAM DISTRICT, PIN CODE-683 579.

        3. GEETHA BABU AGED 48 YEARS
            WIFE OF SRI.BABU, RESIDING AT 335, KALLUPARAMBIL 3
            ANAPUZHA, METHALA, KODUNGALLUR
            THRISSUR DISTRICT.

        4. AMMINI RAGHAVAN AGED 63 YEARS
            WIFE OF SRI.A.K.RAGHAVAN
            RESIDING AT EDAKATTUPARAMBIL HOUSE, AYROOR.P.O.
            ATTUPURAM, ERNAKULAM DISTRICT, PIN CODE-683 579.

            BY ADVS.SRI.C.S.DIAS
                          SRI.N.K.SUBRAMANIAN

RESPONDENT(S)/DE-FACTO COMPLAINANT/STATE IN C.C.NO.84/2014 OF JFCM-I,
ALUVA
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

        1. AMBILI RAJEEV, AGED 40 YEARS
            DAUGHTER OF SRI.SUDHAKARAN
            RESIDING AT PADAMATTUMMEL HOUSE, KOZHITHURUTHU
            PUTHENVELIKKARA, NORTH PARAVUR, ERNAKULAM DISTRICT.

        2. STATE OF KERALA
            REPRESENTED BY SUB INSPECTOR OF POLICE
            CHENGAMANAD POLICE STATION, ALUVA
            REPRESENTED BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR
            HIGH COURT OF KERALA.

            R1 BY ADV. SRI.M.A.KRISHNAKUMAR
            R1 BY ADV. SMT.DENNIS VARGHESE

            THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD ON ON 17-10-
2014, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE FOLLOWING:

Crl.MC.No. 5450 of 2014 ()
---------------------------

                                           APPENDIX

PETITIONER(S)' EXHIBITS
-------------------------------------

ANNEXURE A- COPY OF CHARGE SHEET DATED 26.07.2012 SUBMITTED BY THE SUB
INSPECTOR OF POLICE, CHENGAMANAD POLICE STATION, BEFORE THE JUDICIAL
FIRST CLASS MAGISTRATE COURT-I, ALUVA, NUMBERED AS C.C.NO.84 OF 2014.
ANNEXURE B- TRUE COPY OF O.P.NO.748 OF 2014 FILED BY THE 1ST PETITIONER
AND THE 1ST RESPONDENT BEFORE THE FAMILY COURT, ERNAKULAM.

RESPONDENT(S)' EXHIBITS
---------------------------------------
          NIL.

Sdk+               ///True copy///


                                           P.S. to Judge


                        ALEXANDER THOMAS, J.
                     ==================
                      Crl.M.C.No. 5450 of 2014
                     ==================
            Dated this the    17th day of October, 2014
                              O R D E R

      The above captioned Criminal Miscellaneous Case (Crl.M.C.)

has been filed with the prayer to quash Annexure-A final

report/charge sheet arising out of Crime No.701/2012 of

Chengamanad Police Station, which led to the pendency of C.C.No.

84/2014 on the file of the Judicial First Class Magistrate Court-I,

Aluva. The 1st petitioner is the husband of the 1st respondent and

petitioners 2 and 4 are the parents of the 1st petitioner and the 3rd

petitioner is the sister of the 1st petitioner. After the marriage

between the 1st petitioner and the 1st respondent, they have a son

and a daughter and the spouses are living separately from

20.10.2011. The 1st respondent filed Crl. M.P.No.1912/2012 before

the Judicial First Class Magistrate Court-I, Aluva, alleging that the

petitioners ill-treated her mentally and physically for extorting more

dowry from her parents and the learned Magistrate directed

investigation of the matter under Section 156(3) of the Cr.P.C.,

CRL.M.C.5450/14                 - : 2 :-

which led to registration of the impugned Crime No.701/2012 of

the Chengamanad Police Station, for offences punishable under

Section 498A read with Section 34 of the IPC. After investigation,

the Police filed the impugned Annexure-A final report/charge sheet,

which led to the pendency of C.C.No.84/2014 on the file of the

Judicial First Class Magistrate Court-I, Aluva. During the pendency

of the above said impugned Annexure A criminal proceedings, the

1st petitioner had filed O.P.No.1673/2012 before the Family Court,

Ernakulam, seeking the decree of divorce to dissolve his marriage

with the 1st respondent and the 1st respondent had filed

M.C.No.221/2012 before the said Family Court, along with the

children, seeking order for separate monthly maintenance. The 1st

respondent herein also filed O.P.No.1711/2012 seeking decree of

return    of   patrimony   and   her    gold  ornaments,   allegedly

misappropriated by the 1st petitioner. During the course of the

above proceedings, the 1st petitioner and the 1st respondent were

referred to mediation and in the mediation proceedings, the parties

arrived at an amicable settlement, whereby they settled all the

disputes. Accordingly, the spouses filed O.P.No.748/2014 before

the Family Court, Ernakulam to dissolve their marriage on mutual

CRL.M.C.5450/14                  - : 3 :-

consent under Section 13B of the Hindu Marriage Act and the terms

and conditions of the settlement have been spelt out in the joint

petition filed as per Annexure B and one of the terms of the

settlement is that the parties would file a petition before this Court

to quash the impugned Annexure-A criminal proceedings. As per

the said terms of settlement, the 1st respondent has agreed that

she shall withdraw the impugned criminal proceedings initiated

before the Judicial First Class Magistrate Court-I, Aluva, for offence

under Section 498A of IPC against the 1st petitioner and his parents

and that she shall also appear through counsel before this Court or

such other court, if necessary and report that she has no objection

in quashing of the above said impugned criminal proceedings. The

1st respondent has sworn to affidavit dated 14.10.2014 produced in

this Crl.M.C., wherein she has stated that all the matrimonial

disputes between the petitioners and herself have been fully and

finally settled as per the terms and conditions in Annexure B

produced in this Crl.M.C. and that she has no objection in

Annexure-A final report/charge sheet in C.C.No. 84/2014 of the

Judicial First Class Magistrate Court,-I, Aluva, being quashed, as per

the settlement arrive at, as per Annexure B herein, etc. It is in the

CRL.M.C.5450/14                  - : 4 :-

background     of   these   facts    and    circumstances,   that   the

aforementioned Crl.M.C. has been filed.

      2.     The Crl.M.C. has been admitted and Sri.R.Githesh has

taken notice for the 1st respondent and the learned Public

Prosecutor has taken notice for the 2nd respondent-State of Kerala.

      3.     Heard Sri. C.S.Dias, the learned counsel appearing for

the petitioners, Sri.R.Githesh, the learned counsel appearing for R1

and the learned Public Prosecutor appearing for the 2nd respondent-

State.

      4.     The learned counsel for the petitioners has submitted

that   during   the  pendency     of     the aforementioned   criminal

proceedings, the matter has been settled amicably between the

parties, which has resulted in the subject matter of the

aforementioned crime/case and that the continuation of the

proceedings in the above case/crime will cause miscarriage of

justice to both parties as the real disputants to the case have arrived

at an amicable settlement and any further continuation of the

criminal proceedings will amount to sheer wastage of time and

money and would unnecessarily strain the financial, administrative

and financial resources of the State.

CRL.M.C.5450/14                   - : 5 :-

      5.     The learned counsel appearing for the 1st respondent has

submitted on the basis of the specific instructions furnished by the

1st respondent that the 1st respondent has amicably settled the

disputes with the petitioners and that she has no objection in the

quashment of the impugned criminal proceedings and that the

complainant/victim/injured does not intend to proceed any further

against the petitioners as she has no grievance against him and that

she will not raise any dispute/compliant in future, if the prayer for

quashing the impugned final report is allowed.

      6.     The learned Public Prosecutor also was heard, who also

has not raised any serious objections and submitted that this Court

may consider the prayer in this case in the light of the law well

settled by the Apex Court in that regard.

      7.     After having carefully considered the submissions of the

parties and after having perused the pleadings as well as the

documents and materials placed in this matter, it can be seen that

the offences alleged are more or less personal in nature and not

much element of public interest is involved. The crucial aspect of

the matter is that though such offences are involved, the real

disputants to the controversy which has led to the impugned

CRL.M.C.5450/14                          - : 6 :-

criminal proceedings, have actually arrived at an amicable

settlement of the matter. From the submissions made by the

learned counsel for the 1st respondent, it is clear to the court that

the injured/victim/defacto complainant has no further grievance

against the petitioners/accused in the light of the settlement arrived

at by them. In this connection, it is relevant to note the decision of

the Apex Court in the case between Gian Singh v. State of Punjab

reported in 2013 (1) SCC (Cri) 160, para 61 = (2012) 10 SCC 303 =

2012(4) KLT 108(SC), wherein the Supreme Court has held as

follows in para 61 thereof [ See SCC (Cri)]:

           discussion canThe summarised thus: the power of the High
                    "61.        position that emerges from the above
                            be
           Court in quashing a criminal proceeding or FIR or complaint
           in exercise of its inherent jurisdiction is distinct and
           different from the power given to a criminal court for
           compounding the offences under S.320 of the Code.
           Inherent power is of wide plenitude with no statutory
           limitation but it has to be exercised in accord with the
           guideline engrafted in such power viz;(i) to secure the ends
           of justice or (ii) to prevent abuse of the process of any
           Court.      In what cases power to quash the criminal
           proceeding or complaint or F.I.R. may be exercised where
           the offender and victim have settled their dispute would
           depend on the facts and circumstances of each case and no
           category can be prescribed..

It is further held as follows:-

           "......... But the criminal cases having overwhelmingly and
           pre-dominatingly civil flavour stand on different footing for
           the purposes of quashing, particularly the offences arising
           from commercial, financial,mercantile, civil, partnership or
           such like transactions or the offences arising out of
           matrimony relating to dowry etc. or the family disputes

CRL.M.C.5450/14                       - : 7 :-

          where the wrong is basically private or personal in nature
          and the parties have resolved their entire dispute. In this
          category of cases, High Court may quash criminal
          proceedings if in its view, because of the compromise
          between the offender and victim, the possibility of
          conviction is remote and bleak and continuation of criminal
          case would put accused to great oppression and prejudice
          and extreme injustice would be caused to him by not
          quashing the criminal case despite      full and complete
          settlement and compromise with the victim........"

Further, in the case Jitendra Raghuvanshi and Others v. Babita

Raghuvanshi and another reported in (2013) 4 SCC 58 [see 2013

(1) KLD 817 (SC)], the Apex Court has held as follows:-

                 "8. It is not in dispute that matrimonial disputes
          have been on considerable increase in recent times
          resulting in filing of complaints under Sections 498A
          and 406 of I.P.C. not only against the husband but also
          against the relatives of the husband. The question is
          when such matters are resolved either by the wife
          agreeing to rejoin the matrimonial home or by mutual
          settlement of other pending disputes for which both the
          sides approached the High Court and jointly prayed for
          quashing of the criminal proceedings or the FIR or
          complaint by the wife under Sections 498A and 406 of
          I.P.C., whether the prayer can be declined on the sole
          ground that since the offences are non-compoundable
          under
          impermissible for320complaint.toCode,
                  Section          ofcourt
                                        the               would   be
          proceedings or FIR orthe              quashitthe criminal


                 9. It is not in dispute that in the case on hand
          subsequent to the filing of the criminal complaint under
          Sections 498A and 406 of IPC and Sections 3 and 4 of
          the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961, with the help and
          intervention of family members, friends and well-
          wishers,differences
                    the parties concerned have amicably settled
          their
          settlement.
          said compromise beforethereto,
                         Pursuantandtheexecutedappellants
                                                   a   compromise/
                                        Trialthe            filed the
                                              Court with a request to
          place the same on record and to drop the criminal
          proceedings against the appellants herein. It is also not
          in dispute that in additional to the mutual settlement

CRL.M.C.5450/14                       - : 8 :-

          arrived at by the parties, respondent/-wife has also filed
          an affidavit stating that she did not wish to pursue the
          criminal proceedings against the appellants and fully
          supported the contents of the settlement deed. It is the
          grievance of the appellants that no only the Trial Court
          rejected such prayer of the parties but also the High
          Court failed toe exercise its jurisdiction under Section
          482 of the Code only on the ground that the criminal
          proceedings relate to the offences punishable under
          Sections 498A and 406 of IPC which are non-
          compoundable in nature.

                 15. In our view, it is the duty of the Courts to
          encourage genuine settlements of matrimonial disputes,
          particularly, when the same are on considerable
          increase. Even if the offences are non-compoundable, if
          they relate to matrimonial disputes and the Court is
          satisfied that the parties have settled the same amicably
          and without any pressure, we hold that for the purpose
          of securing ends of justice, Section 320 of the Code
          would not be a bar to the exercisesubsequent quashing
                                                of power of
          of   FIR,   complaint    or   the                  criminal
          proceedings.

                 16. There has been an outburst of matrimonial
          disputes in recent times.
          occupies an important placeThe it has an important role
                                              institution of marriage
                                         and
          to play in the society. Therefore, every effort should be
          made in the interest of the individuals in order to enable
          them to settle down in life and live peacefully. If the
          parties ponder over their defaults and terminate their
          disputes amicably by mutual agreement instead of
          fighting it out in a Court of law, in order to do complete
          justice in the matrimonial matters, the Courts should be
          less hesitant in exercising its extraordinary jurisdiction.
          It is trite to state that the power under Section 482
          should be exercised sparingly and with circumspection
          only when the Court is convinced, on the basis of
          material on record, that allowing the proceedings to
          continue would be an abuse of the process of the Court
          or that the ends of justice require that the proceedings
          ought to be quashed."

      8. Considering the facts and circumstances of this case, it is

seen further that the impugned criminal proceedings have arisen

CRL.M.C.5450/14                   - : 9 :-

consequent to the matrimonial disputes between the disputants and

the disputes have been settled amicably between the parties.

Accordingly, this Court is inclined to hold that in the light of the

facts and circumstances involved in the present case and

particularly in view of the settlement arrived at between the parties,

the principles laid down in the aforementioned decisions of the

Apex Court will be squarely applicable in the present case.

Moreover, since the real disputants to the controversy have

amicably settled the disputes, which led to these impugned criminal

proceedings, it is also the duty of the court to promote such

settlement, instead of compelling the parties to go on with the

dispute. It is also pertinent to note that since the matter is settled

out of court, in the event of proceeding with the trial, there may not

be any fruitful prosecution and the chances of conviction of the

accused is rather negligible and therefore, the net result of

continuance of criminal proceedings would be sheer waste of

judicial time rather meaningless and therefore would amount to

abuse of the process of court proceedings in the larger sense.

Hence following decisions of the Apex Court cited supra, this Court

is inclined to hold that the Crl.M.C. can be allowed by granting the

CRL.M.C.5450/14                  - : 10 :-

prayers sought for.

         9.    In the result, the Crl.M.C. is allowed and all further

following    proceedings    in  the      impugned Annexure-A    final

report/charge sheet (arising out of the aforementioned Crime No.

701/2012 of Chengamanadu Police Station), which led to the

pendency of C.C.No. 84/2014 on the file of the Judicial First Class

Magistrate Court-I, Aluva, and all further proceedings taken thereon

shall stand quashed. The petitioners shall produce certified copies

of this order before the court below concerned as well as before the

Station House Officer, Chengamanadu Police Station.


                                                     Sd/-
sdk+                                      ALEXANDER THOMAS, JUDGE

          ///True copy///



                              P.S. to Judge



