
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                    PRESENT:

                  THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE ALEXANDER THOMAS

           TUESDAY, THE 28TH DAY OF OCTOBER 2014/6TH KARTHIKA, 1936

                                          Crl.MC.No.6076 of 2014
                                            -------------------------------

CC NO.432/2014 of the JUDICIAL FIRST CLASS MAGISTRATE COURT,
KASARAGOD.

PETITIONERS/ACCUSED NO.3,4 & DEFACTO COMPLAINANT:
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

1.        MUHAMMED ALI,S/O.ABDULLA,SABIR MANZIL,
          VAKKAMVALAPPU,ANGADIMOGARU,P.O. PUTHIGE,
          KASARAGOD DISTRICT,PIN:671 321.

2.        NABEESA,W/O.MUHAMMED ALI,SABIR MANZIL,
          VAKKAMVALAPPU,ANGADIMOGARU,P.O. PUTHIGE,
          KASARAGOD DISTRICT,PIN:671 321.

3.        FOUSIYA,D/O.ABOOBACKER,FATHIMA MAHAL,
          KOLYA PATLA,MADHUR P.O.,KASARAGOD DISTRICT,
          PIN:671 124.

           BY ADVS.SRI.K.V.SOHAN
                         SMT.SREEJA SOHAN.K.
                         SRI.ROVIN RODRIGUES

RESPONDENT/STATE:
---------------------------------

          STATE OF KERALA,REP.BY ADDL. SUB INSPECTOR OF POLICE,
          KUMBALA POLICE STATION,KASARAGOD DISTRICT,
          (CRIME NO.667/2013) REPRESENTED BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR,
          HIGH COURT OF KERALA,ERNAKULAM,PIN:682031.

            BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SRI.R.GITHESH.

          THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD
          ON 28-10-2014, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE
          FOLLOWING:


pk

Crl.MC.No.6076 of 2014
---------------------------------

                                             APPENDIX

PETITIONERS ANNEXURES
---------------------------------------

ANNEXURE I:TRUE COPY OF THE CHARGE SHEET/FINAL REPORT,
                    DATED 14.3.2014 UNDER SECTION 173 CR.P.C.

ANNEXURE 2:TRUE COPY OF THE AGREEMENT DATED 16.4.2014 SETTLING ALL
                    DISPUTES WHICH LED TO ANNEXURE -1 CHARGE IN CRIME
                    NO.667/2013.

RESPONDENTS ANNEXURES:                                NIL
-------------------------------------------




                                                          //TRUE COPY//




                                                          P.S.TO JUDGE




pk


                    ALEXANDER THOMAS, J.
                    -----------------------------
                    Crl.M.C.No.6076 Of 2014
                  ---------------------------------
            Dated this the 28th day of October, 2014.

                             O R D E R


      The above captioned Criminal Miscellaneous Case (Crl.M.C)

has been filed with the prayer to quash the impugned Annexure-

1 Final Report/Charge Sheet in Crime No.667/2013 of Kumbala

Police Station, Kasaragod District which has led to the institution

of C.C.No.432/2014 on the file of the Chief Judicial Magistrate

Court, Kasaragod and all further proceedings arising therefrom.

Petitioners 1 & 2 are accused Nos.3 & 4 and the 3rd petitioner is

the defacto complainant in the above impugned criminal

proceedings. Crime No.667/2013 of Kumbala Police Station was

registered for offences under Sections 498A, 323, 324 294(b) r/w

34 IPC at the instance of the 3rd petitioner herein (defacto

complainant).     After investigation police has submitted the

impugned Annexure-1 Final Report/Charge Sheet pertaining to

the above said Crime. After taking cognisance, C.C.No.432/2014

was instituted on the file of the chief Judicial Magistrate Court,

Kasaragod for the aforementioned offences.         The gist of the

prosecution allegation against the accused is that after the

marriage between the 1st accused and 3rd petitioner herein the

accused persons had demanded more gold and dowry from the

                                  ::2::

Crl.M.C.No.6076 Of 2014

defacto complainant and threatened that is she did not do so she

will be divorced and that the 3rd and 4th accused had abused the

defacto complainant and caused her hurt and had assaulted her

and that the accused have committed the above said offences. It

is averred that during the pendency of the impugned criminal

proceedings all the matrimonial disputes between the accused

Nos.1 to 4 and the 3rd petitioner have been settled and

Annexure-2 agreement dated 16.4.2014 has been entered into

between the parties. It is stated that Annexure-2 agreement was

entered into between the 3rd accused for and on behalf of his son,

1st accused and the 3rd petitioner, whereby a letter of divorce

pronouncing Talak was accepted by the 3rd petitioner and the

gold ornaments and also an amount of Rs.3,50,000/- in cash

were given to her to the full satisfaction of all her claims. It is

specifically stipulated in Annexure-2 agreement that after

payment of aforesaid monetary compensation steps will be take

for quashing the impugned criminal proceedings by approaching

this Court. It is stated that thereafter, the gold ornaments and

amount of Rs.3,50,000/- in cash have been given to the 3rd

petitioner in full satisfaction of all her claims as stated above and

that the accused No.1 could not sign the agreement as he is

working abroad and that as per the said compromise the 3rd

                                ::3::

Crl.M.C.No.6076 Of 2014

petitioner has admitted that the entire disputes have been settled

and that she will co-operate with for quashing the impugned

criminal proceedings etc. That accused Nos.1 & 2 are now in Gulf

and Annexure-2 agreement is executed by the 3rd accused for

and on behalf of his son (1st accused) etc. It is in the background

of these facts and circumstances, this Crl.M.C has been

instituted.

      2.   The Crl.M.C. has been admitted and the learned Public

Prosecutor has taken notice for the respondent-State of Kerala.

      3.   Heard    Sri.K.V.Sohan,    learned    counsel   for  the

petitioners (including the defacto complainant-3rd petitioner) and

the learned Public Prosecutor appearing for the respondent-State

of Kerala.

      4.   The learned counsel for the petitioners has submitted

that during the pendency of the aforementioned criminal

proceedings, the matter has been settled amicably between the

parties, and that the continuation of the proceedings in the above

case/crime will cause miscarriage of justice to both parties as the

real disputants to the controversy have arrived at an amicable

settlement and any further continuation of the criminal

proceedings will amount to sheer wastage of time and money

and would unnecessarily strain the judicial, administrative and

                                ::4::

Crl.M.C.No.6076 Of 2014

financial resources of the State.

      5.    Sri.K.V.Sohan, learned counsel appearing for the

defacto complainant-3rd petitioner has submitted, on the basis of

the specific instructions furnished by the 3rd petitioner, that the

3rd petitioner has amicably settled the disputes with the accused

as stated above and that she has no objection in the quashment

of   the    impugned    criminal    proceedings  and    that    the

complainant/victim/injured does not intend to proceed any

further against the accused as she has no grievance against them

and that she will not raise any dispute/complaint in future if the

prayer for quashing the impugned criminal proceedings is

allowed.

      6.    The learned Public Prosecutor also was heard, who

also has not raised any serious objections and submitted that the

court may consider the prayer in this case in the light of the law

well settled by the Apex Court in that regard.

      7.    After having carefully considered the submissions of

the parties and after having perused the pleadings as well as the

documents and materials placed in this matter, it can be seen

that the offences alleged are more or less personal in nature and

not much element of public interest is involved.       The crucial

aspect of the matter is that though such offences are involved,

                                   ::5::

Crl.M.C.No.6076 Of 2014

the real disputants to the controversy, which has led to the

impugned criminal proceedings, have actually arrived at an

amicable settlement of the matter. From the submissions made

by the learned counsel for the 3rd petitioner, it is clear to the

Court that the injured/victim/defacto complainant has no further

grievance against the accused in the light of the settlement

arrived at by them. In this connection, it is relevant to note the

decision of the Apex Court in the case between Gian Singh v.

State of Punjab reported in 2013 (1) SCC (Cri) 160, para 61 =

(2012) 10 SCC 303 = 2012(4) KLT 108(SC), wherein the

Supreme Court has held as follows in para 61 thereof [ See SCC

(Cri)]:

              "61. The position that emerges from the above
       discussion can be summarised thus: the power of the
       High Court in quashing a criminal proceeding or FIR or
       complaint in exercise of its inherent jurisdiction is
       distinct and different from the power given to a criminal
       court for compounding the offences under S.320 of the
       Code.     Inherent power is of wide plenitude with no
       statutory limitation but it has to be exercised in accord
       with the guideline engrafted in such power viz;(i) to
       secure the ends of justice or (ii) to prevent abuse of
       the process of any Court.        In what cases power to
       quash the criminal proceeding or complaint or F.I.R.
       may be exercised where the offender and victim have
       settled their dispute would depend on the facts and
       circumstances of each case and no category can be
       prescribed..

It is further held as follows:-

       "......... But the criminal cases having overwhelmingly

                                 ::6::

Crl.M.C.No.6076 Of 2014

      and pre-dominatingly civil flavour stand on different
      footing for the purposes of quashing, particularly the
      offences arising from commercial, financial, mercantile,
      civil, partnership or such like transactions or the
      offences arising out of matrimony relating to dowry
      etc. or the family disputes where the wrong is basically
      private or personal in nature and the parties have
      resolved their entire dispute. In this category of cases,
      High Court may quash criminal proceedings if in its
      view, because of the compromise between the offender
      and victim, the possibility of conviction is remote and
      bleak and continuation of criminal case would put
      accused to great oppression and prejudice and
      extreme injustice would be caused to him by not
      quashing the criminal case despite full and complete
      settlement and compromise with the victim........"

Further, in the case Jitendra Raghuvanshi and Others v.

Babita Raghuvanshi and another reported in (2013) 4 SCC 58

[see 2013 (1) KLD 817 (SC)],          the Apex Court has held as

follows:-

            "8. It is not in dispute that matrimonial disputes
      have been on considerable increase in recent times
      resulting in filing of complaints under Sections 498A
      and 406 of I.P.C. not only against the husband but also
      against the relatives of the husband. The question is
      when such matters are resolved either by the wife
      agreeing to rejoin the matrimonial home or by mutual
      settlement of other pending disputes for which both
      the sides approached the High Court and jointly prayed
      for quashing of the criminal proceedings or the FIR or
      complaint by the wife under Sections 498A and 406 of
      I.P.C., whether the prayer can be declined on the sole
      ground that since the offences are non-compoundable
      under Section 320        of the Code, it would be
      impermissible for the court to quash the criminal
      proceedings or FIR or complaint.
            9. It is not in dispute that in the case on hand
      subsequent to the filing of the criminal complaint under
      Sections 498A and 406 of IPC and Sections 3 and 4 of
      the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961, with the help and

                                  ::7::

Crl.M.C.No.6076 Of 2014

      intervention of family members, friends and well-
      wishers, the parties concerned have amicably settled
      their   differences   and   executed    a   compromise/
      settlement. Pursuant thereto, the appellants filed the
      said compromise before the Trial Court with a request
      to place the same on record and to drop the criminal
      proceedings against the appellants herein. It is also
      not in dispute that in additional to the mutual
      settlement arrived at by the parties, respondent/-wife
      has also filed an affidavit stating that she did not wish
      to pursue the criminal proceedings against the
      appellants and fully supported the contents of the
      settlement deed. It is the grievance of the appellants
      that no only the Trial Court rejected such prayer of the
      parties but also the High Court failed toe exercise its
      jurisdiction under Section 482 of the Code only on the
      ground that the criminal proceedings relate to the
      offences punishable under Sections 498A and 406 of
      IPC which are non-compoundable in nature.
            15. In our view, it is the duty of the Courts to
      encourage     genuine    settlements    of   matrimonial
      disputes,   particularly,  when    the   same    are  on
      considerable increase. Even if the offences are non-
      compoundable, if they relate to matrimonial disputes
      and the Court is satisfied that the parties have settled
      the same amicably and without any pressure, we hold
      that for the purpose of securing ends of justice,
      Section 320 of the Code would not be a bar to the
      exercise of power of quashing of FIR, complaint or the
      subsequent criminal proceedings.
            16. There has been an outburst of matrimonial
      disputes in recent times. The institution of marriage
      occupies an important place and it has an important
      role to play in the society.     Therefore, every effort
      should be made in the interest of the individuals in
      order to enable them to settle down in life and live
      peacefully.   If the parties ponder over their defaults
      and terminate their disputes amicably by mutual
      agreement instead of fighting it out in a Court of law,
      in order to do complete justice in the matrimonial
      matters, the Courts should be less hesitant in
      exercising its extraordinary jurisdiction. It is trite to
      state that the power under Section 482 should be
      exercised sparingly and with circumspection only when
      the Court is convinced, on the basis of material on

                                ::8::

Crl.M.C.No.6076 Of 2014

      record, that allowing the proceedings to continue
      would be an abuse of the process of the Court or that
      the ends of justice require that the proceedings ought
      to be quashed."

      8.    Considering the facts and circumstances of this case,

it is seen further that the impugned criminal proceedings have

arisen consequent to the matrimonial disputes between the

disputants and the disputes have been settled amicably between

the parties. Accordingly, this Court is inclined to hold that in the

light of the facts and circumstances involved in the present case

and particularly in view of the settlement arrived at between the

parties, the principles laid down in the aforementioned decisions

of the Apex Court will be squarely applicable in the present case.

Moreover, since the real disputants to the controversy have

amicably settled the disputes, which led to these impugned

criminal proceedings, it is also the duty of the court to promote

such settlement, instead of compelling the parties to go on with

the dispute. It is also pertinent to note that since the matter is

settled out of court, in the event of proceeding with the trial,

there may not be any fruitful prosecution and the chances of

conviction of the accused is rather negligible and therefore, the

net result of continuance of criminal proceedings would be sheer

waste of judicial time rather meaningless and therefore would

                                ::9::

Crl.M.C.No.6076 Of 2014

amount to abuse of the process of court proceedings in the larger

sense. Hence following decisions of the Apex Court cited supra,

this Court is inclined to hold that the Crl.M.C. can be allowed by

granting the prayers sought for.

      In the result, Crl.M.C is allowed and the impugned

Annexure-1 Final Report/Charge Sheet in Crime No.667/2013 of

Kumbala Police Station, which has led to the institution of

C.C.No.432/2014 on the file of the Chief Judicial Magistrate

Court, Kasaragod and all further proceedings arising therefrom as

against all the accused persons concerned shall stand quashed.

Petitioners 1 & 2 shall produce certified copies of this order

before the Magistrate Court concerned as well as before the

Station House Officer concerned.




                                            ALEXANDER THOMAS,
                                                    Judge.

bkn/-



