
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                    PRESENT:

                  THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE ALEXANDER THOMAS

           THURSDAY, THE 9TH DAY OF OCTOBER 2014/17TH ASWINA, 1936

                                          Crl.MC.No.5673 of 2014
                                           --------------------------------


CP NO.79/2013 of JUDICIAL FIRST CLASS MAGISTRATE COURT.-I, KOLLAM
CRIME NO.734/2013 OF KILIKOLLOOR POLICE STATION,KOLLAM

PETITIONER/ACCUSED:
-----------------------------------

          SUNIL,AGED 25 YEARS,S/O.MURALEEDHARA,
          KUNNEL VEEDU,VADAKKEVILA,
          PATTATHANAM, KOLLAM, PIN:691 001.

           BY ADV. SRI.AJAYA KUMAR.G

RESPONDENT/STATE/DEFACTO COMPLAINANT:
----------------------------------------------------------------------

1.        STATE OF KERALA,REPRESENTED BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR,
          HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM.

2.        ANZI HARIS,AGED 18 YEARS,W/O.SUNIL,
          PANDAKASALA VEEDU,KILIKOLLOOR,
          KOLLAM, PIN:691 004.

           R1 BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SRI.DHANESH MATHEW.
           R2 BY ADV. SMT.ASWATHY BABU


          THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD
          ON 09-10-2014, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE
          FOLLOWING:




pk

Crl.MC.No.5673 of 2014
---------------------------------

                                            APPENDIX

PETITIONERS ANNEXURES
---------------------------------------

ANNEXURE I: CERTIFIED COPY OF THE FINAL REPORT IN CRIME NO.734/2013
                    OF THE KILOLLOOR POLICE STATION.

ANNEXURE 2: AFFIDAVIT SWORN BY THE 2ND RESPONDENT DATED 4.10.2014.

RESPONDENTS ANNEXURES:                                     NIL
------------------------------------------


                                                     //TRUE COPY//




                                                     P.S.TO JUDGE




pk


                         ALEXANDER THOMAS, J.
                      ==================
                       Crl.M.C.No. 5673 of 2014
                      ==================
              Dated this the 9th day of October, 2014
                                 O R D E R

      The petitioner is the sole accused in Crime No.734/2013 of

Kilikolloor Police Station and now pending as C.P.No.79/2013 on

the file of the Judicial First Class Magistrate Court-I, Kollam. The 2nd

respondent is the defacto complainant. The offence alleged against

the petitioner, who is now aged 25 years, is that the accused had

abducted the defacto complainant, who was then a minor, from the

lawful custody of her parents and that they had resided various

places. The final report is filed in this case and the case is now

pending as C.P.No.79/2013 before the Judicial First Class Magistrate

Court-I, Kollam. It is the case of the petitioner that there was a love

affair between the petitioner and the 2nd respondent and that the

relatives of the girl were against this, and so they had interfered and

the defacto complainant was constrained to lodge the complaint.

Later, the 2nd respondent had attained the age of majority and the

marriage between the petitioner, who is now aged 25 years, and the

CrlMC 5673/14                    - : 2 :-

2nd respondent, who is now aged 18 years, was solemnized at

Ayathil Jama-Ath, Kollam, on 10.8.2014 and thereafter the

petitioner and the 2nd respondent are living together as husband

and wife and that any further continuation of the impugned criminal

proceedings would only result in more damage to the 2nd

respondent-defacto complainant in ways more than one. That the

2nd respondent has sworn to an affidavit as per Annexure 2 stating

that she has no further complaint against the petitioner and that she

was in love with the petitioner for several years and that as their

parents were against this relationship and that as she was a minor,

complaint had to be given as required by her parents and that

immediately on her attaining majority, the marriage between the

petitioner and the 2nd respondent has solemnized as stated above in

the presence of the parents and relatives of both parties and

thereafter, she is living together with the petitioner in a lawfully

wedded relationship and that any continuance of the criminal

proceedings would adversely affect her future life and that she has

resolved to terminate all       the legal proceedings against the

petitioner and that she has no objection in quashing the final report

in crime No.734/2013 of Kilikolloor Police Station and the proceedings in

CrlMC 5673/14                    - : 3 :-

C.P.No.79/2013 pending before the Judicial First Class Magistrate

Court, Kollam and that this Court may be pleased to quash the final

report in the aforementioned crime, which has led to C.P.No.

79/2013 pending before the aforementioned court etc. It is in the

background      of   these   facts    and  circumstances   that    the

aforementioned Crl.M.C. has been filed praying to quash the final

report in Crime No.734/2013 of Kilikolloor Police Station and all

further proceedings in C.P.No. 79/2014 pending before the Judicial

First Class Magistrate Court-I, Kollam.

      2.     The Crl.M.C. has been admitted and Smt.Aswathi Babu

has taken notice for the 2nd respondent and the learned Public

Prosecutor has taken notice for the 1st respondent-State of Kerala.

      3.     Heard Sri. Ajaya Kumar.G, the learned counsel appearing

for the petitioner, Smt.Aswathi Babu, learned counsel appearing for

R2 and       the learned Public Prosecutor appearing for the 1st

respondent-State.

      4.     The learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted that

during the pendency of the aforementioned criminal proceedings,

the matter has been settled amicably between the parties, which is

resulted in the subject matter of the aforementioned crime/case and

CrlMC 5673/14                     - : 4 :-

that the continuation of the proceedings in the above case/crime

will cause miscarriage of justice to both parties as the real

disputants to the case have arrived at an amicable settlement and

any further continuation of the criminal proceedings will amount to

sheer wastage of time and money and would unnecessarily strain

the financial, administrative and financial resources of the State.

      5.     The learned counsel appearing for the 2nd respondent

has submitted on the basis of the specific instructions furnished by

the 2nd respondent that the 2nd respondent has amicably settled the

disputes with the petitioner and that she has no objection in the

quashment of      the impugned criminal proceedings and that the

complainant/victim/injured does not intend to proceed any further

against the petitioner as she has no grievance against him and that

she will not raise any dispute/compliant in future if the prayer for

quashing the impugned final report is allowed.

      6.     The learned Public Prosecutor also was heard, who also

has not raised any serious objections and submitted that that court

may consider the prayer in this case in the light of the law well

settled by the Apex Court in that regard.

      7.     After having carefully considered the submissions of the

CrlMC 5673/14                    - : 5 :-

parties and after having perused the pleadings as well as the

documents and materials placed in this matter, it can be seen that

the offences arose out of certain complicated relationship of a love

affair between a minor girl and a young boy and on attaining the

age of majority, the defacto complainant girl has married the

petitioner, with the consent and co-operation of their respective

families and relatives and as stated by the young girl, in Annexure 2

it can be seen that any further continuance of the impugned

criminal proceedings would only adversely affect her future life and

it is likely to cause more damage especially to her in domestic and

social life and since the petitioner-accused has married the 2nd

respondent and as both of them are living together and man and

wife, individual interest of the spouses as well as social and public

interest involved would be better subserved, if that marital

relationship is encouraged to go without any interference arising out

of the impugned criminal proceedings. The crucial aspect of the

matter is that though such offences are involved, the real disputants

to the controversy which has led to the impugned criminal

proceedings, have actually arrived at an amicable settlement of the

matter. From the submissions made by the learned counsel for the

CrlMC 5673/14                             - : 6 :-

2nd respondent, it is clear to the court that the injured/

victim/defacto complainant has no further grievance against the

petitioner/accused in the light of the settlement arrived at by them.

In this connection, it is relevant to note the decision of the Apex

Court in the case between Gian Singh v. State of Punjab reported in

2013 (1) SCC (Cri) 160, para 61 = (2012) 10 SCC 303 = 2012(4) KLT

108(SC), wherein the Supreme Court has held as follows in para 61

thereof [ See SCC (Cri)]:

                    "61. The position that emerges from the above
           discussion can be summarised thus: the power of the
           High Court in quashing a criminal proceeding or FIR or
           complaint in exercise of its inherent jurisdiction is
           distinct and different from the power given to a criminal
           court forInherent
                       compounding the offences under S.320 of the
           Code.
           statutory limitationpoweritishas to be exercised in accord
                                            of wide plenitude with no
                                   but
           with the guideline engrafted in such power viz;(i) to
           secure the ends of justice or (ii) to prevent abuse of the
           process of any Court. In what cases power to quash the
           criminal proceeding or complaint or F.I.R. may be
           exercised wherewouldoffender andonvictim have settled
                                 the
           their
           circumstances of each case and no category canand
                     dispute            depend         the  facts
                                                                    be
           prescribed..

It is further held as follows:-

           "......... But the criminal cases having overwhelmingly and
           pre-dominatingly civil flavour stand on different footing
           for the purposes of quashing, particularly the offences
           arising from commercial, financial,mercantile, civil,
           partnership or such like transactions or the offences
           arising out of matrimony relating to dowry etc. or the
           family disputes where the wrong is basically private or
           personal in nature and the parties have resolved their
           entire dispute. In this category of cases, High Court may

CrlMC 5673/14                         - : 7 :-

          quash criminal proceedings if in its view, because of the
          compromise between the offender and victim, the
          possibility of conviction is remote and bleak and
          continuation of criminal case would put accused to great
          oppression and prejudice and extreme injustice would
          be caused to him by not quashing the criminal case
          despite full and complete settlement and compromise
          with the victim........"

Further, in the case Jitendra Raghuvanshi and Others v. Babita

Raghuvanshi and another reported in (2013) 4 SCC 58 [see 2013

(1) KLD 817 (SC)], the Apex Court has held as follows:-

                 "8. It is not in dispute that matrimonial disputes
          have been on considerable increase in recent times
          resulting in filing of complaints under Sections 498A
          and 406 of I.P.C. not only against the husband but also
          against the relatives of the husband. The question is
          when such matters are resolved either by the wife
          agreeing to rejoin the matrimonial home or by mutual
          settlement of other pending disputes for which both the
          sides approached the High Court and jointly prayed for
          quashing of the criminal proceedings or the FIR or
          complaint by the wife under Sections 498A and 406 of
          I.P.C., whether the prayer can be declined on the sole
          ground that since the offences are non-compoundable
          under
          impermissible for320complaint.toCode,
                  Section          ofcourt
                                        the               would   be
          proceedings or FIR orthe              quashitthe criminal


                 9. It is not in dispute that in the case on hand
          subsequent to the filing of the criminal complaint under
          Sections 498A and 406 of IPC and Sections 3 and 4 of
          the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961, with the help and
          intervention of family members, friends and well-
          wishers,differences
                    the parties concerned have amicably settled
          their
          settlement.
          said compromise beforethereto,
                        Pursuantandthe executedappellants
                                                   a   compromise/
                                        Trialthe            filed the
                                              Court with a request to
          place the same on record and to drop the criminal
          proceedings against the appellants herein. It is also not
          in dispute that in additional to the mutual settlement
          arrived at by the parties, respondent/-wife has also filed
          an affidavit stating that she did not wish to pursue the

CrlMC 5673/14                         - : 8 :-

          criminal proceedings against the appellants and fully
          supported the contents of the settlement deed. It is the
          grievance of the appellants that no only the Trial Court
          rejected such prayer of the parties but also the High
          Court failed toe exercise its jurisdiction under Section
          482 of the Code only on the ground that the criminal
          proceedings relate to the offences punishable under
          Sections 498A and 406 of IPC which are non-
          compoundable in nature.

                 15. In our view, it is the duty of the Courts to
          encourage genuine settlements of matrimonial disputes,
          particularly, when the same are on considerable
          increase. Even if the offences are non-compoundable, if
          they relate to matrimonial disputes and the Court is
          satisfied that the parties have settled the same amicably
          and without any pressure, we hold that for the purpose
          of securing ends of justice, Section 320 of the Code
          would not be a bar to the exercisesubsequent quashing
                                                of power of
          of   FIR,   complaint    or   the                  criminal
          proceedings.

                 16. There has been an outburst of matrimonial
          disputes in recent times.
          occupies an important placeThe it has an important role
                                              institution of marriage
                                         and
          to play in the society. Therefore, every effort should be
          made in the interest of the individuals in order to enable
          them to settle down in life and live peacefully. If the
          parties ponder over their defaults and terminate their
          disputes amicably by mutual agreement instead of
          fighting it out in a Court of law, in order to do complete
          justice in the matrimonial matters, the Courts should be
          less hesitant in exercising its extraordinary jurisdiction.
          It is trite to state that the power under Section 482
          should be exercised sparingly and with circumspection
          only when the Court is convinced, on the basis of
          material on record, that allowing the proceedings to
          continue would be an abuse of the process of the Court
          or that the ends of justice require that the proceedings
          ought to be quashed."

      8.     Considering the facts and circumstances of this case, it

is seen further that the impugned criminal proceedings have arisen

consequent to the personal disputes in the personal relationships

CrlMC 5673/14                    - : 9 :-

between the parties and the disputes have been settled amicably

between the parties. Accordingly, this Court is inclined to hold that

in the light of the facts and circumstances involved in the present

case and particularly in view of the settlement arrived at between

the parties, the principles laid down in the aforementioned

decisions of the Apex Court will be squarely applicable in the

present case. Moreover, since the real disputants to the controversy

have amicably settled the disputes, which led to these impugned

criminal proceedings, it is also the duty of the court to promote

such settlement, instead of compelling the parties to go on with the

dispute. It is also pertinent to note that since the matter is settled

out of court, in the event of proceeding with the trial, there may not

be any fruitful prosecution and the chances of conviction of the

accused is rather negligible and therefore, the net result of

continuance of criminal proceedings would be sheer waste of

judicial time rather meaningless and therefore would amount to

abuse of the process of court proceedings in the larger sense.

Hence following decisions of the Apex Court cited supra, this Court

is inclined to hold that the Crl.M.C. can be allowed by granting the

prayers sought for.

CrlMC 5673/14                     - : 10 :-

      9.     In the result, the Crl.M.C. is allowed and accordingly, the

final report in Crime No.734/2014 is quashed and all further

proceedings in C.P.No. 79/2013 pending before the Judicial First

Class Magistrate's Court-I, Kollam are quashed. The petitioner shall

produce certified copies of this order before the court below

concerned as well as before the Station House Officer, Kilikolloor

Police Station.


                                                        Sd/-
sdk+                                       ALEXANDER THOMAS, JUDGE

          ///True copy///



                               P.S. to Judge



