
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                      PRESENT:

                           THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE V.K.MOHANAN

            SATURDAY, THE 20TH DAY OF SEPTEMBER 2014/29TH BHADRA, 1936

                                            Crl.MC.No. 5139 of 2014
                                                ---------------------------


     CRIME NO. 612/2011 IN CC 347/2012 OF CHIEF JUDICIAL MAGISTRATE COURT,
                                                   THALASSERY.
                                                            ...


PETITIONER(S)/ACCUSED:
--------------------------------------

            NISAMUDHEEN C.V. , S/O.SOOPI,
            AGED 34 YEARS, C.V.HOUSE, KANACHERI,
            CHAPPA, MUNDERI, ECHOOR P.O.,
            KANNUR, PIN: 670 591.

            BY ADVS.SRI.LIJIN THAMBAN
                          SRI.G.S.KRISHNAN KARTHA


RESPONDENT(S)/STATE & DEFACTO COMPLAINANT 2 TO 5:
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

        1. STATE OF KERALA,
            REPRESENTED BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR,
            HIGH COURT OF KERALA.

        2. SAFEENA.A, D/O.SULAIMAN K,
            AGED 27 YEARS, SAFEENA MANZIL, KANACHERI,
            CHAPPA, MUNDERI, ECHOOR P.O.
            KANNUR, PIN - 670591.


            R1 BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SMT.R.REMA
            R2 BY ADV. SRI.M.RETHEESHKUMAR


            THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE HAVING COME UP FOR ADMISSION
            ON 20-09-2014, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE
             FOLLOWING:

mbr/

Crl.MC.No. 5139 of 2014
---------------------------------

                                               APPENDIX

PETITIONER(S)' ANNEXURES:
------------------------------------------

ANNEXURE-A1: TRUE COPY OF FIR NO.612/2011 OF CHAKKARAKKAL POLICE
                        STATION.

ANNEXURE-A2: ATRUE COPY OF AGREEMENT DTD 13.8.14.

ANNEXURE-A3: AFFIDAVIT SWORN BY THE 2ND RESPONDENT.


RESPONDENT(S)' ANNEXURES:                               -  NIL
---------------------------------------------




                                                               /TRUE COPY/




                                                               P.A. TO JUDGE
mbr/


                     V.K.MOHANAN, J.
                  -------------------------------
                  Crl.M.C.No.5139 of 2014
                  -------------------------------
      Dated this the 20th day of September, 2014.


                          O R D E R

        The above petition is filed under Section 482 of the

Criminal Procedure Code (for short 'Cr.P.C.') at the

instance of the petitioner, who is the accused in

C.C.No.347/12 of the Chief Judicial Magistrate Court,

Thalassery, which is a case instituted upon the police

report [in Crime No.612 of 2011 of Chakkarakkallu Police

Station, Kannur] for the offences punishable under Section

498 A of I.P.C. with a prayer to quash the above calendar

case and consequential proceedings therein, as the matter

is settled out of court.

        2.  The allegation in the above case is that the

petitioner married the 2nd respondent/de facto complainant

on 25.1.2009 in accordance with Islamic rites and he

misappropriated the gold ornaments that were given to the

Crl.M.C.No.5139 of 2014
                               2

de facto complainant at the time of marriage, for his

personal use and thereafter, the accused started harassing

the de facto complainant both mentally and physically for

more dowry. Now, the case of the petitioner is that the

matter is settled out of court.

         3. Heard the learned counsel for the petitioner as

well as the 2nd respondent. I have also heard the learned

Public Prosecutor.

         4. The learned counsel for the petitioner submitted

that during the pendency of the above case, the matter is

settled amicably between the parties to the dispute, which

is the subject matter of the above case, as per Annexure A2

agreement dated 13.8.2014 and Annexure A3 affidavit

sworn by the 2nd respondent/de facto complainant.

Therefore, the continuation of the proceedings in the above

case is abuse of process of law and proceedings.

         5. The learned counsel for the 2nd respondent who

on the basis of specific instruction received      from the

Crl.M.C.No.5139 of 2014
                               3

respondent submitted that the above respondent, who is

the de facto complainant does not intend to proceed any

further against the petitioner and she has no grievance

against him.

         6.    I    have carefully   considered   the  above

submissions of the respective counsel. I have verified the

documents and materials produced along with the above

petition. In the given facts and circumstances of the case

and especially in the light of the settlement arrived

between the parties to the dispute, the learned Public

Prosecutor has also no objection in allowing the above

petition.

         7. Having regard to the facts and circumstances

involved in the case, it can be seen that the offence

involved in the above case is only under Section 498 A of

I.P.C. which is more or less personal in nature and no

public interest is involved.     It is pertinent to note that

though such an offence is involved, the real parties to the

Crl.M.C.No.5139 of 2014
                                    4

dispute approached this Court after having amicably

settled the matter.        From the submission made by the

counsel for the 2nd respondent, it appears to me that the de

facto complainant has no further grievance against the

petitioner/accused in the light of the settlement arrived by

them.      In this juncture, it is relevant to note that the

Honourable Apex Court, in the decision reported in

Jitendra       Raghuvanshi          and      Others      v.   Babita

Raghuvanshi and another [2013 (1) KLD 817(SC)],

has held as follows:-

                "7. It is not in dispute that matrimonial disputes
         have been on considerable increase in recent times
         resulting in filing of complaints under Sections 498A
         and 406 of I.P.C. not only against the husband but also
         against the relatives of the husband. The question is
         when such matters are resolved either by the wife
         agreeing to rejoin the matrimonial home or by mutual
         settlement of other pending disputes for which both the
         sides approached the High Court and jointly prayed for
         quashing of the criminal proceedings or the FIR or
         complaint by the wife under Sections 498A and 406 of
         I.P.C., whether the prayer can be declined on the sole
         ground that since the offences are non-compoundable
         under Section 320         of the Code,    it would be
         impermissible for the court to quash the criminal
         proceedings or FIR or complaint.
                8. It is not in dispute that in the case on hand
         subsequent to the filing of the criminal complaint
         under Sections 498A and 406 of IPC and Sections 3

Crl.M.C.No.5139 of 2014
                                     5

         and 4 of the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961, with the help
         and intervention of family members, friends and well-
         wishers, the parties concerned have amicably settled
         their        differences        and      executed        a
         compromise/settlement.           Pursuant   thereto,   the
         appellants filed the said compromise before the Trial
         Court with a request to place the same on record and
         to drop the criminal proceedings against the appellants
         herein. It is also not in dispute that in additional to the
         mutual      settlement   arrived   at  by   the   parties,
         respondent/-wife has also filed an affidavit stating that
         she did not wish to pursue the criminal proceedings
         against the appellants and fully supported the contents
         of the settlement deed.       It is the grievance of the
         appellants that no only the Trial Court rejected such
         prayer of the parties but also the High Court failed toe
         exercise its jurisdiction under Section 482 of the Code
         only on the ground that the criminal proceedings relate
         to the offences punishable under Sections 498A and
         406 of IPC which are non-compoundable in nature."

                "12. In our view, it is the duty of the Courts to
         encourage       genuine    settlements   of  matrimonial
         disputes,     particularly, when    the   same    are   on
         considerable increase. Even if the offences are non-
         compoundable, if they relate to matrimonial disputes
         and the Court is satisfied that the parties have settled
         the same amicably and without any pressure, we hold
         that for the purpose of securing ends of justice, Section
         320 of the Code would not be a bar to the exercise of
         power of quashing of FIR, complaint or the subsequent
         criminal proceedings.
                    13.     There   has   been   an   outburst    of
         matrimonial disputes in recent times. The institution
         of marriage occupies an important place and it has an
         important role to play in the society. Therefore, every
         effort should be made in the interest of the individuals
         in order to enable them to settle down in life and live
         peacefully. If the parties ponder over their defaults
         and terminate their disputes amicably by mutual
         agreement instead of fighting it out in a Court of law,
         in order to do complete justice in the matrimonial

Crl.M.C.No.5139 of 2014
                                  6

         matters, the Courts should be less hesitant in
         exercising its extraordinary jurisdiction. It is trite to
         state that the power under Section 482 should be
         exercised sparingly and with circumspection only when
         the Court is convinced, on the basis of material on
         record, that allowing the proceedings to continue
         would be an abuse of the process of the Court or that
         the ends of justice require that the proceedings ought
         to be quashed."

In the present case, the only offence involved is under

Section 498A of I.P.C. The criminal proceedings for the

said offence originated from the matrimonial issues, which

are now settled. Consequently, the parties want a quietus

to the criminal case as well.

         8.     According to me, in the light of the facts and

circumstances involved in the present case and particularly

in view of the settlement arrived in the present case, the

dictum laid in the above decision will be squarely

applicable in the present case. According to me, as the

parties to the dispute settled the issues amicably, it is the

duty of this Court to promote such settlement, instead of

compelling the parties to go on with the dispute.                 It is

pertinent to note that since the matter is settled out of

Crl.M.C.No.5139 of 2014
                                7

court,     in the event of proceeding with the trial, there

would not have any fruitful prosecution resulting the

conviction of the accused, rather the net result would be

sheer waste of judicial time and abuse of process of the

court and proceedings. Thus, according to me, following

the decision cited supra, this Crl.M.C. can be allowed

granting the relief as sought for.

         In the result, this Crl.M.C. is allowed, quashing all

further proceedings pending against the petitioner in

C.C.No.347/12 of the Chief Judicial Magistrate Court,

Thalassery, pursuant to Crime No.612 of 2011 of

Chakkarakkallu Police Station, Kannur.

                                                   Sd/-
                                             V.K.MOHANAN,
                                                 Judge.
ami/
                         //True copy//

                         P.A.to Judge



