
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                    PRESENT:

                  THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE ALEXANDER THOMAS

           THURSDAY, THE 9TH DAY OF OCTOBER 2014/17TH ASWINA, 1936

                                        Crl.MC.No. 5620 of 2014 ()
                                              ---------------------------
         CC. NO.1584/2013 OF JUDICIAL FIRST CLASS MAGISTRATE COURT-I,
                                             PARAPPANANGADI.
  CRIME NO. 256/2013 OF THENHIPALAM POLICE STATION, MALAPPURAM DIST.
                                                        .......

PETITIONER/ACCUSED:-
------------------------------------

           KAVALAKATT TOJO, AGED 38 YEARS,
           S/O.JOSE, KAVALAKKAT HOUSE, CLINT CORNER,
           TENHIPALAM POST, TIRURANGADI TALUK,
           MALAPPURAM DISTRICT.

           BY ADV. SRI.ARUN MATHEW VADAKKAN.

RESPONDENTS/STATE & DEFACTO COMPLAINANT:
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

        1. THE STATE OF KERALA,
           REPRESENTED BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR,
           HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM,
           REPRESENTING SUB INSPECTOR OF POLICE,
           TENHIPALAM POLICE STATION, TENHIPALAM - 673 636,
           MALAPPURAM DISTRICT.

        2. SAMEENA M.A., AGED 34 YEARS,
           W/O.KAVALAKATT TOJO, KAVALAKKAT HOUSE,
           CLINT CORNER, TENHIPALAM POST - 673 636,
           TIRURANGADI TALUK, MALAPPURAM DISTRICT.


           R1 BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SMT.BINDU GOPINATH.
           R2 BY ADV. SRI.K.P.SUDHEER.


           THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD
           ON 09-10-2014, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE
           FOLLOWING:

rs.

Crl.MC.No. 5620 of 2014


                                 APPENDIX

PETITIONER'S ANNEXURES:-


ANNEXURE A1.        TRUE COPY OF FIRST INFORMATION REPORT
                    DATED 17.05.2013 IN CRIME NO.256/2013 OF
                    TENHIPALAM POLICE STATION.

ANNEXURE A2.        TRUE COPY OF FINAL REPORT IN CRIME NO.256/2013 OF
                    TENHIPALAM POLICE STATION.

ANNEXURE A3.        AFFIDAVIT DATED 03.10.2014 OF THE 2ND RESPONDENT.


RESPONDENT'S ANNEXURES:-               NIL.




                                             //TRUE COPY//


                                             P.S.TO JUDGE

rs.


                       ALEXANDER THOMAS, J.
                     ==================
                      Crl.M.C.No. 5620 of 2014
                     ==================
             Dated this the 9th day of October, 2014
                              O R D E R

      The petitioner is the accused in C.C.No.1584/2013 on the file

of the Judicial First Class Magistrate's Court-I, Parappanangadi,

which arose out of Crime No.256/2013 of Tenhipalam Police

Station. The aforementioned crime was registered at the instance of

the 2nd respondent herein, for the offences punishable under Section

498A of the IPC. Annexure A1 is the copy of the FIR and Annexure

A2   is  the    final report  in  this  case,  which   has   led   to

C.C.No.1584/2013 on the file of the aforementioned court. During

the pendency of the case, the disputes between the parties have

been amicably settled and that the petitioner and the 2nd

respondent-wife are now living together, it is averred. Annexure A3

is the affidavit sworn to by the 2nd respondent-wife stating that the

disputes have been entirely and amicably settled and that they are

living together and that she has no objection in quashing the entire

proceedings in C.C.No. 1584/2013 on the file of the Judicial First

Crl.M.C.5620/14                 - : 2 :-

Class Magistrate's Court-I, Parappanangadi. It is in the background

of these facts and circumstances that the petitioner has chosen to

file the present Crl.M.C. with the prayer to quash the entire

proceedings in C.C.No.1584/2013 on the file of the Judicial First

Class Magistrate's Court-I, Parappanangadi, arising out of the

aforementioned crime.

      2.     The Crl.M.C. has been admitted and Sri.K.P.Sudheer has

taken notice for the 2nd respondent and the learned Public

Prosecutor has taken notice for the 1st respondent-State of Kerala.

      3.     Heard Sri. Arun Mathew Vadakkan, the learned counsel

appearing for the petitioner, Sri.K.P.Sudheer, the learned counsel

appearing for R2 and the learned Public Prosecutor appearing for

the 1st respondent-State.

      4.     The learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted that

during the pendency of the aforementioned criminal proceedings,

the matter has been settled amicably between the parties, which is

resulted in the subject matter of the aforementioned crime/case and

that the continuation of the proceedings in the above case/crime

will cause miscarriage of justice to both parties as the real

disputants to the case have arrived at an amicable settlement and

Crl.M.C.5620/14                   - : 3 :-

any further continuation of the criminal proceedings will amount to

sheer wastage of time and money and would unnecessarily strain

the judicial, administrative and financial resources of the State.

      5.     The learned counsel appearing for the 2nd respondent

has submitted on the basis of the specific instructions furnished by

the 2nd respondent that the 2nd respondent has amicably settled the

disputes with the petitioner and that she has no objection in the

quashment of the impugned criminal proceedings and that the

complainant/victim/injured does not intend to proceed any further

against the petitioner as she has no grievance against him and that

she will not raise any dispute/compliant in future if the prayer for

quashing the impugned final report is allowed.

      6.     The learned Public Prosecutor also was heard, who also

has not raised any serious objections and submitted that that court

may consider the prayer in this case in the light of the law well

settled by the Apex Court in that regard.

      7.     After having carefully considered the submissions of the

parties and after having perused the pleadings as well as the

documents and materials placed in this matter, it can be seen that

the offences alleged are more or less personal in nature and not

Crl.M.C.5620/14                      - : 4 :-

much element of public interest is involved. The crucial aspect of

the matter is that though such offences are involved, the real

disputants to the controversy which has led to the impugned

criminal proceedings, have actually arrived at an amicable

settlement of the matter. From the submissions made by the

learned counsel for the 2nd respondent, it is clear to the court that

the injured/victim/defacto complainant has no further grievance

against the petitioner/accused in the light of the settlement arrived

at by them. In this connection, it is relevant to note the decision of

the Apex Court in the case between Gian Singh v. State of Punjab

reported in 2013 (1) SCC (Cri) 160, para 61 = (2012) 10 SCC 303 =

2012(4) KLT 108(SC), wherein the Supreme Court has held as

follows in para 61 thereof [ See SCC (Cri)]:

                "61. The position that emerges from the above
         discussion can be summarised thus: the power of the
         High Court in quashing a criminal proceeding or FIR or
         complaint in exercise of its inherent jurisdiction is
         distinct and different from the power given to a criminal
         court forInherent
                   compounding the offences under S.320 of the
         Code.
         statutory limitationpoweritishas to be exercised in accord
                                       of wide plenitude with no
                              but
         with the guideline engrafted in such power viz;(i) to
         secure the ends of justice or (ii) to prevent abuse of the
         process of any Court. In what cases power to quash the
         criminal proceeding or complaint or F.I.R. may be
         exercised wherewouldoffender andonvictim have settled
                            the
         their
         circumstances of each case and no category canand
                dispute            depend          the  facts
                                                                 be
         prescribed..

Crl.M.C.5620/14                           - : 5 :-

It is further held as follows:-

           "......... But the criminal cases having overwhelmingly and
           pre-dominatingly civil flavour stand on different footing
           for the purposes of quashing, particularly the offences
           arising from commercial, financial, mercantile, civil,
           partnership or such like transactions or the offences
           arising out of matrimony relating to dowry etc. or the
           family disputes where the wrong is basically private or
           personal in nature and the parties have resolved their
           entire dispute. In this category of cases, High Court may
           quash criminal proceedings if in its view, because of the
           compromise between the offender and victim, the
           possibility of conviction is remote and bleak and
           continuation of criminal case would put accused to great
           oppression and prejudice and extreme injustice would
           be caused to him by not quashing the criminal case
           despite full and complete settlement and compromise
           with the victim........"

Further, in the case Jitendra Raghuvanshi and Others v. Babita

Raghuvanshi and another reported in (2013) 4 SCC 58 [see 2013

(1) KLD 817 (SC)], the Apex Court has held as follows:-

                    "8. It is not in dispute that matrimonial disputes
           have been on considerable increase in recent times
           resulting in filing of complaints under Sections 498A
           and 406 of I.P.C. not only against the husband but also
           against the relatives of the husband. The question is
           when such matters are resolved either by the wife
           agreeing to rejoin the matrimonial home or by mutual
           settlement of other pending disputes for which both the
           sides approached the High Court and jointly prayed for
           quashing of the criminal proceedings or the FIR or
           complaint by the wife under Sections 498A and 406 of
           I.P.C., whether thethe  prayer can be declined on the sole
           ground that since320 offences arequashitthe
                                                    non-compoundable
           under
           impermissible for the court toCode,
                      Section          of   the             would   be
                                                              criminal
           proceedings or FIR or complaint.

                    9. It is not in dispute that in the case on hand
           subsequent to the filing of the criminal complaint under
           Sections 498A and 406 of IPC and Sections 3 and 4 of

Crl.M.C.5620/14                       - : 6 :-

          the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961, with the help and
          intervention of family members, friends and well-
          wishers,differences
          their     the partiesand
                                 concerned have amicably settled
                                       executed     a   compromise/
          settlement.   Pursuant thereto, the appellants filed the
          said compromise before the Trial Court with a request to
          place the same on record and to drop the criminal
          proceedings against the appellants herein. It is also not
          in dispute that in additional to the mutual settlement
          arrived at by the parties, respondent/-wife has also filed
          an affidavit stating that she did not wish to pursue the
          criminal proceedings against the appellants and fully
          supported the contents of the settlement deed. It is the
          grievance of the appellants that no only the Trial Court
          rejected such prayer of the parties but also the High
          Court failed toe exercise its jurisdiction under Section
          482 of the Code only on the ground that the criminal
          proceedings relate to the offences punishable under
          Sections 498A and 406 of IPC which are non-
          compoundable in nature.

                 15. In our view, it is the duty of the Courts to
          encourage genuine settlements of matrimonial disputes,
          particularly, when the same are on considerable
          increase. Even if the offences are non-compoundable, if
          they relate to matrimonial disputes and the Court is
          satisfied that the parties have settled the same amicably
          and without any pressure, we hold that for the purpose
          of securing ends of justice, Section 320 of the Code
          would not be a bar to the exercisesubsequent quashing
                                                of power of
          of   FIR,   complaint    or   the                  criminal
          proceedings.

                 16. There has been an outburst of matrimonial
          disputes in recent times.
          occupies an important placeThe it has an important role
                                              institution of marriage
                                         and
          to play in the society. Therefore, every effort should be
          made in the interest of the individuals in order to enable
          them to settle down in life and live peacefully. If the
          parties ponder over their defaults and terminate their
          disputes amicably by mutual agreement instead of
          fighting it out in a Court of law, in order to do complete
          justice in the matrimonial matters, the Courts should be
          less hesitant in exercising its extraordinary jurisdiction.
          It is trite to state that the power under Section 482
          should be exercised sparingly and with circumspection
          only when the Court is convinced, on the basis of

Crl.M.C.5620/14                      - : 7 :-

          material on record, that allowing the proceedings to
          continue would be an abuse of the process of the Court
          or that the ends of justice require that the proceedings
          ought to be quashed."

      8.     Considering the facts and circumstances of this case, it

is seen further that the impugned criminal proceedings have arisen

consequent to the matrimonial disputes between the disputants and

the disputes have been settled amicably between the parties.

Accordingly, this Court is inclined to hold that in the light of the

facts and circumstances involved in the present case and

particularly in view of the settlement arrived at between the parties,

the principles laid down in the aforementioned decisions of the

Apex Court will be squarely applicable in the present case.

Moreover, since the real disputants to the controversy have

amicably settled the disputes, which led to these impugned criminal

proceedings, it is also the duty of the court to promote such

settlement, instead of compelling the parties to go on with the

dispute. It is also pertinent to note that since the matter is settled

out of court, in the event of proceeding with the trial, there may not

be any fruitful prosecution and the chances of conviction of the

accused is rather negligible and therefore, the net result of

continuance of criminal proceedings would be sheer waste of

Crl.M.C.5620/14                   - : 8 :-

judicial time rather meaningless and therefore would amount to

abuse of the process of court proceedings in the larger sense.

Hence following the decisions of the Apex Court cited supra, this

Court is inclined to hold that the Crl.M.C. can be allowed by

granting the prayers sought for.

      9.     In the result, the Crl.M.C. is allowed and the impugned

proceedings in C.C.No.1584/2013 on the file of the Judicial First

Class Magistrate's Court-I, Parappanangadi arising out of crime

No.256/2013 of Tenhipalam Police Station stand quashed.          The

petitioner shall produce certified copies of this order before the

court below concerned as well as before Station House Officer,

Tenhipalam Police Station.


                                                      Sd/-
sdk+                                      ALEXANDER THOMAS, JUDGE

          ///True copy///



                              P.S. to Judge



