
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                    PRESENT:

                    THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE K.RAMAKRISHNAN

               MONDAY, THE 14TH DAYOF JULY 2014/23RD ASHADHA, 1936

                                          Crl.MC.No. 2105 of 2014
                                              ---------------------------
     CRIME NO. 299/2011 OF POOCHAKAL POLICE STATION , ALAPPUZHA
                                                            .....

PETITIONERS:ACCUSED NOS.1 TO 7:
--------------------------------------------------------

        1. MANOJ, AGED 38 YEARS,
           RAGHAVAN PILLAI, PAZHAYAMKUZHY HOUSE, WARD NO.VII,
           THYCATTUSSERI PANCHAYATH, CHERTHALA, ALAPUZHA.

        2. MAHESH, AGED 31 YEARS,
           MDHAVAN PILLAI, KUNNEPPALLY HOUSE, WARD NO.VII,
           THYCATTUSSERI PANCHAYATH, CHERTHALA,ALAPUZHA.

        3. MAHESH KUMAR, AGED 35 YEARS,
           REGHUNATHA PILLAI, SANTHA NIVAS, WARD NO.IV,
           THYCATTUSSERI PANCHAYATH, CHERTHALA, ALAPUZHA.

        4. MANOJ KUMAR, AGED 31 YEARS,
           RAJAN PILLAI, KORAMPARAMBU VEEDU, WARD NO.VII,
           THYCATTUSSERI PANCHAYATH, CHERTHALA,ALAPUZHA.

        5. RAJU, AGED 39 YEARS,
           KARUNAKARA PILLAI, EDAYEZHATHU VEEDU, WARD NO.V,
           THYCATTUSSERI PANCHAYATH, CHERTHALA,ALAPUZHA.

        6. RENJITH KUMAR, AGED 33 YEARS,
            REGHUNATHA PILLAI, SANTHA NIVAS, WARD NO.IV,
            THYCATTUSSERI PANCHAYATH, CHERTHALA, ALAPUZHA.

         7. VINOD KUMAR, AGED 33 YEARS,
            CHANDRAN PILLAI, KANNATTU HOUSE, WARD NO.VII,
            THYCATTUSSERI PANCHAYATH, CHERTHALA, ALAPUZHA.

           BY ADV. SRI.B.PRAMOD




Kss                                                                          ..2/-

                                                             ..2....

Crl.M.C.No.2105/2014


RESPONDENTS/COMPLAINANT & INJURED:
-----------------------------------------------------------------

        1. STATE OF KERALA,
           REPRESENTED BY THE PUBLIC PROSECUTOR,
           HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM.

        2. SATHEESAN PILLAI,AGED 42 YEARS,
           RAGHAVAN PILLAI, IDAYEZHATHU HOUSE, WARD NO.IV,
           THYCATTUSSERI PANCHAYATH, CHERTHALA, 688 524.

        3. SURESH, AGED 40 YEARS,
           S/O.GOPALAKRISHNAN, KORANIYIL VEETTIL, WARD NO.III,
           THYCATTUSSERI PANCHAYATH, CHERTHALA - 688 524.


           R1 BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SMT.P.MAYA


           THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE HAVING COME UP FOR ADMISSION
           ON 25/06/2014, THE COURT ON 14/07/2014 PASSED THE FOLLOWING:


Kss

Crl.MC.No. 2105 of 2014
-----------------------------------

                                                APPENDIX

PETITIONER(S)' ANNEXURES:
---------------------------------------------

ANNEXURE 1. COPY OF THE CHARGE SHEET IN CRIME NO.299/11 OF
POOCHACKAL POLICE STATION.

ANNEXURE II. AFFIDAVIT OF THE 2ND RESPONDENT.

ANNEXURE III AFFIDAVIT OF THE 3RD RESPONDENT.

ANNEXURE IV. COPY OF THE ADVICE MEMO DATED 24.02.14 ISSUED TO THE
6TH PETITIONER.


RESPONDENT(S)' ANNEXURES:
------------------------------------------------         N I L




                                                               /TRUE COPY/




                                                               P.S.TOJUDGE

Kss


                        K. RAMAKRISHNAN, J.
                   .................................................
                      Crl.M.C.No.2105 of 2014
                   ..................................................
               Dated this the 14th day of July, 2014.

                                O R D E R
                                                                            "CR"

      This Criminal Miscellaneous Case is                            filed  by the

petitioners, who are accused              1 to 7 in Crime No.299/2011 of

Poochackal police station of Alappuzha district to quash the

proceedings on the basis of a settlement under Section 482 of

the Code of Criminal Procedure (hereinafter referred to as 'the

Code').

      2. It is alleged in the petition that the petitioners were

arrayed as accused 1 to 7 in Crime No.299/2011 of Poochackal

police station alleging commission of offences                            punishable

under Sections 143, 147, 148, 342, 324, 307 (wrongly shown

as Section 308 in the synopsis                 and statement of facts) and

506(ii) read with Section 149 of the Indian Penal Code and

Section 27 of the Arms Act. They are really innocent and they

have been falsely implicated in the case. The defacto

complainant    and the injured are                DYFI workers, Communist

Party of India (Marxist) sympathizers                    while       the petitioners

belong to Rashtirya Swayam Sevak Sangh and sympathizers of

Crl.M.C.No.2105 of 2014                  2

Bharathiya Janatha Party. There is no public interest involved

and it is a private dispute, which resulted in the criminal case.

        3. The matter has been now settled between the parties.

No purpose will be served by proceeding with the case and

pendency of the crime will have some adverse impact on their

employment prospects and they are seeking for employment

now. The 6th petitioner (Ranjithkumar) has now been advised

by the Kerala Public            Service     Commission       for the post of

Fireman        Driver cum Pump Operator               in Fire and     Rescue

Services Department and if the prosecution of the case is not

terminated, he will not be given appointment. Since some of

the offences are non compoundable in nature and it is in the

crime stage, the court will not quash the proceedings. So, the

petitioners have no other              remedy except to approach this

Court seeking the following reliefs:

           "For the grounds mentioned above and for other grounds

          that may be urged at the time of arguments, it is most

          respectfully prayed that this Hon'ble Court may be pleased

          to quash Annexure-I       charge sheet and all proceedings

          based on the same".

        4. On       the basis of the allegations in the petition,        the

Public Prosecutor was directed to file a statement                  regarding

Crl.M.C.No.2105 of 2014                   3

the antecedents of the petitioners and their involvement in

other criminal cases and accordingly, the Circle Inspector of

Police, Cherthala            has    filed a    statement, which reads as

follows:

                      "1. It is respectfully submitted that, the

              above writ petition has ben filed by the petitioner

              for quashing the         charge sheet in Crime

              No.299/2011 of Poochakkal Police Station.

                      2. It is submitted that ,on   16.5.2011 at

              about 20.45 hrs, the petitioners 1 to 7 formed

              themselves into an unlawful assembly, armed with

              deadly weapons like sword stick, iron rode and

              wooden stick, assaulted and attempted to kill the

              2nd     respondent     Satheesanpillai and      3rd

              respondent Suresh, due to political enmity. The

              2nd    and    3rd respondents   sustained serious

              injuries all over their body. A case as Cr.299/11

              u/s 143, 147, 148,149,506(ii), 324, 307 IPC and

              Sec.27 of Arms act w as registered on 17.5.2011

              at 02.00 hrs by ASI Sri,. Dharmajan, on the

              basis of the statement of        2nd   respondent

              Satheeshanpilai. This being a grave crime, the

              then Circle Inspector of Police, Cherthala Sri.K.A

              Abdul     Salam conducted the investigation of the

Crl.M.C.No.2105 of 2014                    4

              case.

                      3. It is submitted that, the Circle Inspector

              of Police, Cherthala conducted the investigation

              of the case and arrested all the accused involved

              in the case, seized the weapons on 23.5.2011. In

              his investigation, all the accuse are having active

              role in the commission of the offence. A2 Mahesh

              was the person who chopped on the back of the

              2nd      respondent   using   stick  sword.      The

              investigation of th case was completed and the

              case was charged sheeted on 8.8.12          and   the

              same is under trial as      SC    1060/13   at    the

              Honourable Sessions Court, Alappuzha.

                      4. it is submitted that, the only reason for

              this case was political enmity of the petitioners,

              who are the activists of          RSS, towards the

              respondents 2 and who are CPM activists. This

              incident leads to a major law and order situation

              in that area, which affected the peaceful life of

              the common man.

                      5. Petitioners are used to create law and

              order sitatui0n in that locality and another case

              was also registered      against     2nd   petitioner

              Mahesh,        3rd petitioner Maheshkumar,         6th

              petitioner Raju, and 8th petitioner Vinodkumar.

Crl.M.C.No.2105 of 2014                    5

              In that case, the above petitioners along with 6

              others a formed themselves into an unlawful

              assembly     armed    with   deadly   weapons     and

              trespassed into the     compound of one Abhijith,

              who is an activist of      CPM, assaulted him and

              committed      mischief   to  his  house    and    his

              neighbour's     house.   As  per     the   statement

              Abhijith, a case was registered against them on

              16.5.2011 as Cr.298/11 u/s. 143, 147, 148, 149,

              448, 323, 324 47 IPC and the investigation of the

              case       completed     and  charge    sheeted    on

              30.6.2011.      The case is under trial at the

              Honourable Judicial First Class Magistrate Court-

              II, Cherthala as C.C.No.888/11.

                      6. It is submitted that, all the petitioners

              are having violent politics and they always tries

              to attack the opposite political party activists. This

              always ends in political      clashes   and thereby

              creates law and order situation in that locality.

              This will adversely affect the peaceful life of

              common man.

                      7. In this circumstances, it is most humbly

              submits that the petition of the petitioners may

              kindly    be dismissed and the cases against the

              petitioners    may     kindly be tried, so that the

Crl.M.C.No.2105 of 2014                 6

              peaceful life of the common man in that area can

              be kept".




        5. A report has been called for from the Sessions Court

as to whether final report has been filed in this case and the

learned Sessions Judge             has sent a report stating that after

committal, the case has been taken on file as S.C.No.1060/2013

and pending before                  the Additional Sessions Court-III,

Alappuzha.

        6. Heard the counsel for the petitioners and the learned

Public Prosecutor.

        7. The counsel for the petitioners submitted that it is true

that there are some cases against                 some of the petitioners

and it is a political clash. Now the parties have               changed

their mind and             in order to bring harmony in the society,

decided to settle the issues between them and the injured do

not want to           prosecute the petitioners.       Further, the   6th

petitioner (though it is corrected as 7th petitioner, as per order

in Crl.M.A.No.5944/2014, in fact he is 6th petitioner only as in

the cause title, in the serial number after 3, 5 was typed), has

now got an employment and he is undergoing training as

Crl.M.C.No.2105 of 2014             7

Fireman Driver cum Pump Operator in Fire and Rescue Services

Department           evidenced by Annexure-IV memo and if this case

is not quashed, he is likely to lose his employment. Further,

the nature of allegations made against him is not            that of

grave and he has no previous criminal antecedents as well.

Further, on account of the fact that the matter has been settled,

allowing the prosecution to continue          will only amount   to

wastage of judicial time and in view of the dictum laid down in

Gian Singh v. State of Punjab [2012 (4) KLT 108(SC)], if the

matter has been settled between the parties, then there is no

necessity to allow the case to continue as it will only amount to

wastage of judicial time. So, according to him, it is a fit case

where power under Section 482 of the Code has to be invoked

to quash the proceedings.

         8. On the other hand,      the learned   Public Prosecutor

submitted that if a liberal view is taken in such matters, then it

will give        a wrong     message  to the society.  The Hon'ble

Supreme Court never intended to quash               the proceedings

were public interest is involved and in political clashes etc.

So, it is not a fit case where power under Section 482 of the

Code has to be invoked.

Crl.M.C.No.2105 of 2014               8

        9. Heard both sides and perused the case diary file.

        10. It is an admitted fact that on the basis of the statement

given by the defacto complainant namely the second respondent

herein, a crime was registered as Crime No. 299/2011 of

Poochakal police station alleging offences under Sections 143,

147, 148, 149, 307, 324, 506(ii) of the Indian Penal Code and

Section 27 of the Arms Act against 7 named persons and 43

identifiable persons. The case of the prosecution was that, on

17.5.2011 at about 9.15 p.m, while the defacto complainant,

the     second respondent and           the third  respondent    were

standing on          the side of the road at the place of occurrence,

the accused persons who belong to Rashtriya Swayam Sevak

Sangh and sympathizers of Bharathiya Janatha Party came in

a procession           holding     dangerous weapons like iron rod,

sword, sticks etc and on          seeing the defacto complainant and

another injured, they         shouted that they belong to Marxit party

goondas and attacked them with deadly weapons and caused

injuries      on their vital     parts and thereby all of them have

committed the offences punishable under Sections 143, 147,

148, 149, 307 324, 506(ii) of the Indian Penal Code and

Section 27 of the Arms Act. After investigation, final report

Crl.M.C.No.2105 of 2014               9

was filed against the present             seven persons alleging the

above offences and it was taken on file as C.P.No.15/2013 on

the file of            the Judicial First Class Magistrate    Court-II,

Cherthala and the learned Magistrate             committed the case to

the Sessions Court and the Sessions Court has, after committal,

taken       cognizance of the case        as    S.C.No.1060/2013   on

28.12.2013 and made over to the third              Additional Sessions

Court, Alappuzha and the case is now pending before that court.

According to the petitioners, they have not involved in the crime

and they have been falsely implicated in the case and

respondents           2 and 3   had understood the mistakes and so

they wanted to             terminate the prosecution at the earliest

possible time against the petitioners. So they have        settled the

issues and filed affidavit stating those facts. It is also alleged

in the petition as well as in the affidavit that they have      given

the names of the petitioners under misconception and now they

realised that the petitioners have not involved and they are

innocent.        On that basis    that the petitioners have now come

before this Court quashing the proceedings invoking Section

482 of the Code.

        11. It is true that the Supreme Court has in some cases

Crl.M.C.No.2105 of 2014                  10

held that in appropriate cases the court can invoke the power

under 482 of the Code even to quash the proceedings in

which non compoundable offences were incorporated. I may

consider some of those decisions which I feel necessary for

consideration to decide the question in this case.

        12. In the decision reported in Gian Sing's case (cited

supra)          the three Judges          Bench of the Hon'ble Supreme

Court has considered the nature of cases where the court can

invoke the power under Section 482 of the Code and quash

the proceedings in which non compoundable                         offences are

incorporated.          The    principle has been summarized            in that

decision as follows:

                       "The position that emerges from the above

               discussion can be summarised thus: The power of

               the     High   Court in    quashing    a    criminal

               proceeding or F.I.R or complaint in exercise of its

               inherent jurisdiction is distinct and different from

               the power      given to    a     criminal court for

               compounding     the offences under     S.320 of the

               Code. Inherent power is of wide plenitude with no

               statutory limitation but it has to be exercised in

               accord with the guideline engrafted in such power

Crl.M.C.No.2105 of 2014                  11

               viz; (i) to secure the ends of justice or (ii)     to

               prevent abuse of the process of any Court. In

               what cases power to quash the criminal proceeding

               or complaint of F.I.R may be exercised where the

               offender and victim have settled       their  dispute

               would depend on the facts and circumstances of

               each case and no      category can be prescribed.

               However, before exercise of such power the High

               Court must have due regard to the nature and

               gravity of the crime. Heinous and serious offences

               of mental depravity or offences like murder, rape,

               dacoity, etc.,  cannot be fittingly    quashed even

               though the victim or victim's family and          the

               offender have settled the dispute.     Such offences

               are not private in nature and have serious impact

               on society. Similarly, any compromise between the

               victim and offender in relation to the offences under

               special statutes like Prevention of Corruption Act

               or the offences    committed by     public   servants

               while working in that capacity etc; cannot provide

               for any basis for quashing     criminal proceedings

               involving such offences. But, the criminal cases

               having overwhelmingly and pre-dominatingly civil

               flavour stand on different footing for the purposes

               of quashing, particularly the offences arising from

Crl.M.C.No.2105 of 2014                   12

               commercial, financial, mercantile, civil, partnership

               or such like transaction or the offences arising out

               of matrimony relating to dowry, etc or the family

               disputes where the wrong is basically private or

               personal in nature and the parties have resolved

               their entire dispute. In this category of cases, High

               Court   may quash criminal proceedings       if in its

               view, because     of the compromise between the

               offender and victim, the possibility of conviction is

               remote and bleak and continuation of criminal

               case would put accused to great oppression and

               prejudice and extreme injustice would be caused

               to him by not quashing the criminal case despite

               full and complete settlement and compromise with

               the victim. In other words, the High Court      must

               consider whether it would be unfair or contrary to

               the interest of justice to continue with the criminal

               proceeding or       continuation of the      criminal

               proceeding would tantamount to abuse of process

               of law despite settlement and compromise between

               the victim and wrongdoer and whether to secure

               the ends of justice, it is appropriate that criminal

               case is put to an end and if the answer to the above

               question(s) is in affirmative, the High Court shall

               be well within its jurisdiction to quash the criminal

Crl.M.C.No.2105 of 2014           13

               proceeding."

        13. The Hon'ble Supreme Court has discussed       all the

previous decisions namely B.S. Joshi and others v. State

of Haryana [2003 (2) KLT 1062(SC)], Nikhil Merchant v.

Central Bureau of Investigation & Another [2008 (3) KLT

769(SC)] and Manoj Sharma v. State and Others [2008 (4)

KLT 417(SC)] as well in the above decision. It is clear from the

above decisions that though in certain cases, the cases could

not be compounded invoking the power under Section 320 of

the Code as they were not compoundable offences, but in

appropriate cases, the power under Section 482 of the Code

can be invoked to          quash such proceedings.  In the same

decision, it has been observed that       it is  for the court to

consider the facts and circumstances of the case and no

category of cases can be prescribed for this purpose. It is also

observed in the same decision that however, before exercise of

such power the High Court must have due regard to the nature

and gravity of the crime.        Heinous and serious offences of

mental depravity or offences like murder, rape, dacoity, etc.,

cannot be fittingly quashed even though the victim or victim's

family and the offender have settled the dispute. Such offences

Crl.M.C.No.2105 of 2014             14

are not private in nature and have serious impact on society.

Similarly, any compromise between the victim and offender in

relation to the offences under special statutes like Prevention

of    Corruption         Act or the offences  committed by    public

servants while working in that capacity etc; cannot provide for

any basis for quashing         criminal proceedings   involving such

offences. But, the criminal cases having overwhelmingly and

pre-dominatingly civil flavour stand on different footing for the

purposes of quashing, particularly the offences arising from

commercial, financial, mercantile, civil, partnership or such like

transaction or the offences arising out of matrimony relating to

dowry, etc or the family disputes where the wrong is basically

private or personal in nature and the parties have resolved

their entire dispute. In this category of cases, High Court may

quash criminal proceedings if in its view, because            of the

compromise between the offender and victim, the possibility of

conviction is remote and bleak and continuation of criminal

case would put accused to great oppression and prejudice and

extreme injustice would be caused to him by not quashing the

criminal case despite          full and complete    settlement  and

compromise            with the victim. It is clear from the   above

Crl.M.C.No.2105 of 2014                   15

decisions that          the High Court should not quash             all type of

criminal cases merely on the ground that the matter has been

settled between the victim and the offender invoking the power

under Section 482 of the Code. The power under Section 482

of the Code has to be used by the High Court very cautiously.

        14. Further in the decision reported in Narinder Singh &

Others v. State of Punjab and Another (2014 (4) SCALE 195

the Hon'ble Supreme Court has held that:

                    "At the same time, one has to keep in mind the

            subtle distinction between the power of compounding of

            offences given to Court under section 320 of the Code

            and quashing of criminal proceedings by the High Court

            in exercise of tis inherent jurisdiction conferred upon it

            under Section 482 of the Code. Once, it is found that

            compounding is permissible only if a particular offence is

            covered by the provisions of Section 320 of the Code

            and the Court in such cases is guided solitary and

            squarely by the compromise between the parties, in so

            far as power of quashing under Section 482 of the Code

            is concerned, it is guided by the material on record as to

            whether the ends of justice would justify such exercise of

            power, although the ultimate        consequence may be

            acquittal or dismissal of indictment".

Crl.M.C.No.2105 of 2014                   16

        15. Further in the same decision               while considering the

question as to whether offence under Section 307 of the Indian

Penal Code can be quashed on the ground of compromise, it

has been observed that:

                    "Finding an answer     to this question becomes

            imperative    as the philosophy    and   jurisprudence of

            sentencing is based thereupon. If it is heinous crime

            of serious nature, then it has to be treated as a crime

            against the society and not against the individual alone.

            Then     it becomes   the  solemn duty of the    State to

            punish the crime        doer.    Even    if there is    a

            settlement/compromise between the perpetrator of

            crime and the victim, that is of no consequence. Law

            prohibits certain acts and/or conduct and treats them

            as offences.    Any   person    committing those acts is

            subject to penal consequences which may be of various

            kind".

        16. In the same decision it has been held that:

                   "Therefore, in respect of such offences which are

          treated against the society, it becomes the duty of the

          State to punish the offender. Thus, even when there is

          a settlement     between the offender    and the   victim,

          their will would not prevail as in such cases the

          matter is in public domain.     Society demands that the

Crl.M.C.No.2105 of 2014                 17

          individual offender should be punished in order to

          deter other effectively as it amounts to greatest good


          of the greatest number of persons in a society".

        17. Further in the same decision it has been held that:

                      "On the other hand, there may be, offences

             falling in the category where "correctional" objective

             of     criminal law would have to be given more

             weightage in contrast with "deterrence" philosophy.

             Punishment, whatever else may be, must be fair and

             conducive to good rather than further evil. If in a

             particular case the Court is of the opinion that the

             settlement between the parties would lead to more

             good,     better  relations between    them;   would

             prevent     further occurrence of such    encounters

             between the parties, it may hold settlement to be on

             a better pedestal. It is a delicate balance between

             the two inflicting interests which is to be achieved

             by the Court after examining all these parameters

             and then deciding as to which course of action it

             should take in a particular case."




        18. In this case it is seen from the statement of the Circle

Inspector of Police, Cherthala that the injured and the

Crl.M.C.No.2105 of 2014               18

petitioners are sympathizers of two political parties namely

Communist Party of India (Marxit) and Rashtriya Swayam

Sevak        Sangham which is having some            allegiance    with

Bharathiya Janatha Party. It is also seen from the report of the

Circle Inspector of Police that the second          petitioner Mahesh

and the third petitioner Mahesh Kumar, 5th petitioner (wrongly

shown in the cause title as             6th petitioner) Raju and     8th

petitioner,        who in fact   as 7th petitioner Vinod Kumar, are

accused in another case namely Crime No.298/2011                     of

Cherthala         police   station involving  offences under Sections

143, 147, 148, 149, 448, 323, 324, 427 of the Indian Penal Code

and that is pending as C.C.No.888/2011. It is also mentioned in

paragraph-6 of the           statement of     the Circle Inspector of

Police that all the petitioners are having         violent politics and

they     always        tried to attack  the opposite   political party's

activists. This always ends in political clashes and thereby

created law and order situation in the locality and this will

adversely affect the peaceful life of common man. It is true

that as often said there is no permanent enmity in politics.

But, at the same time, politics is being used           for violence as

well and that creates fear in the mind of the people in the

Crl.M.C.No.2105 of 2014             19

society. Political violence is created by the lower rank party

workers and           create unnecessary clashes and attack on the

opposite group without any motive or personal animosity

causing grave injuries to them and even death and causes

unnecessary tension in the locality and causes threat          to the

public life. Though they may be recede from their activities for

sometime, due to the           intervention  of  all political party

meeting called at the instances of law and order administrative

machinery, such as, police and         district administration, after

sometime without            any provocation the same process will

continue again. This shows that there is no bonafides in their

acts. If cases of this nature having public interest are allowed

to be quashed on the basis of the settlement, then it will give a

wrong message to the society and it will promote lawlessness

in the society. Same is the case of habitual offenders, persons

committing crimes as hired goondas without any motive              or

personal enmity but for money.

        19. So under the circumstances this Court feels that it is

not a fit case to quash the proceedings as against all the

accused persons           merely on the ground   that it was settled

between the parties especially when it is a political clash and

Crl.M.C.No.2105 of 2014              20

grave offences have been incorporated. But, as far as the 6th

petitioner is concerned, it is seen that he has got                   an

employment now and he is undergoing training which is evident

from Annexure-iv letter. It is true that this Court has in one

writ petition observed that criminalization in service has to be

eliminated.         This  petitioner  had   without    knowing       the

consequences, under the blind belief of politics involved in this

incident and he has no other criminal background as well. If this

opportunity          is denied to him, he is likely to get frustration in

life and that may lead to other consequences as well. So giving

an opportunity to man to reform himself,            correct himself and

lead a good life always must be the policy in criminal matters if

the court is of the opinion that, that will          give him a better

thinking in his future life. So hoping            that this will be     a

lesson for him that involving in criminal activities on the basis

of politics without knowing his responsibility to the society

will land him in trouble in future and hoping that he might

have understood consequences of his act and considering the

nature of        overt act alleged against him shows that he has no

intention to commit grave offence alleged, this Court feels that

taking this as an exceptional circumstance, composition as

Crl.M.C.No.2105 of 2014          21

regards the 6th petitioner alone can be         accepted for the

purpose of quashing the proceedings invoking the power under

Section 482 of the Code under the hope that he might have

understood the consequences of his act and that he         will not

repeat the same even after he is getting an employment and he

will work for the society as a     government servant and not as

a political servant of any particular party. So under the

circumstances, this Court feels that this is not a fit case to

quash the entire proceedings as against all the petitioners

especially when it is a political clash between two groups

and such clash are causing threat to life of persons belonging

to both groups and also considering the fact that some of the

accused are accused in other cases as well.        But taking an

exceptional circumstance,       this Court feels that the power

can be exercised only in respect of     6th petitioner alone as he

has got an employment and as an opportunity to reform himself

and settle in life. So the application is allowed in part. The

prayer of quashing the proceedings as against the petitioners

1 to 5 and 7 ( as per cause title 1 to 3, 5, 6 and 8) is rejected

and proceedings as against the 6th petitioner namely Renjith

Kumar         alone     is quashed and   further proceedings in

Crl.M.C.No.2105 of 2014               22

S.C.No.1065/13 as against the th petitioner namely Renjith

Kumar (Crime No.299/2011 of               Poochakkal Police station)

pending before Additional Sessions Court No.III,           Alapuzha

alone is quashed and the prayer to quash in respect of other

petitioners is rejected.

          20. So, the application is allowed in part.     The prayer

for quashing the proceedings as against the petitioners 1 to 5

and 7 is rejected and proceedings as against the 6th petitioner

namely        Renjith   Kumar       alone is    quashed. So  further

proceedings in S.C.No.1060/2013 as against the 6th petitioner

namely        Renjith Kumar       (Crime No.299/2011 of Poochakkal

Police station) pending before the Additional Sessions Court

No.III, Alappuzha        alone is quashed and the prayer to quash

in respect of other petitioners is rejected.

        Office is directed to        communicate this order to the

concerned court immediately.

                                                  Sd/-

                                       K. RAMAKRISHNAN, JUDGE.

cl

                          /true copy/

                                      P.S to Judge



