
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                      PRESENT:

                     THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE ALEXANDER THOMAS

                 FRIDAY,THE 10TH DAY OF OCTOBER 2014/18TH ASWINA, 1936

                                            Crl.MC.No. 5701 of 2014
                                            ----------------------------------


         CC 822/2014 OF JUDICIAL FIRST CLASS MAGISTRATE, KUTHUPARAMBA
                CRIME NO. 478/2013 OF PERAVOOR POLICE STATION, KANNUR
                                                        .............

PETITIONER(S)/ACCUSED:
-------------------------------------

            BINU CHACKO, AGED 38 YEARS,
            S/O. CHACKO, KAKKANATHIL HOUSE, PARAPPA P.O.,
            EDATHODE, KASARAGOD DISTRICT.

            BY ADV. SRI.A.ARUNKUMAR

RESPONDENT(S)/COMPLAINANT/STATE:
---------------------------------------------------------

        1. SONIYA JOSE M., AGED 30 YEARS,
            D/O. JOSEPH, MATTAPALLIL HOUSE, THONDAYIL P.O.,
            PERAVOOR, KANNUR DISTRICT - 670 673,
            PRESENTLY RESIDING AT XF 28,
            FACT TOWNSHIP, UDYOGAMANDAL, ELOOR,
            ERNAKULAM DISTRICT - 670 653.

        2. STATE OF KERALA,
            REPRESENTED BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR,
            HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM - 682 031.

            R1 BY ADV. SRI.C.A.CHACKO
            R2 BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SRI.DHANESH MATHEW MANJOORAN

            THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD ON
            10-10-2014, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE FOLLOWING:


msv/

Crl.MC.No. 5701 of 2014
----------------------------------

                                             APPENDIX

PETITIONER(S)' ANNEXURE
---------------------------------------

ANNX.AI: ATRUE COPY OF THE FIR IN CRIME NO.478 OF 2013 OF PERAVOOR
             POLICE STATION, KANNUR DISTRICT.

ANNX.AII: ATRUE COPY OF THE FINAL REPORT IN CRIME NO.478 OF 2013 OF
              PERAVOOR POLICE STATION, KANNUR DISTRICT.

ANNX.AIII: ATRUE COPY FO THE MEDIATION AGREEMENT ENTERED BETWEEN THE
               PARTIES.

ANNX.AIV: ATRUE COPY OF THE RECEIPT SHOWING THE PAYMENT OF THE
               AMOUNT.

ANNX.AV: ATRUE COPY OF THE AFFIDAVIT SWORN TO BY THE 1ST RESPONDENT
              ENDORSING THE FACTUM OF SETTLEMENT.

RESPONDENT(S)' ANNEXURE
------------------------------------------

                                             NIL

                                                         /TRUE COPY/




                                                         P.S. TO JUDGE

msv/


                       ALEXANDER THOMAS, J.
                   ==================
                     Crl.M.C.No. 5701 of 2014
                   ==================
            Dated this the 10th day of October, 2014
                             O R D E R

     The petitioner herein is the accused in crime No.478/2013 of

Peravoor Police Station, Kannur district. It is now pending as C.C.No.

822/2014 on the file of the Judicial First Class Magistrate Court,

Kuthuparamba. The offences alleged against the petitioner are

those under Sections 498A, 406, 341, 323 of IPC. The case of the

prosecution is that the marriage between the petitioner and the 1st

respondent-defacto complainant took place on 18.6.2009 and that

during her stay with the accused, he ill-treated the defacto

complainant cruelly and asked for more gold and money and thus

cruelty was effected both mentally and physically and that the

accused misused the gold ornaments of the defacto complainant

and that thereby committed the alleged offences. The petitioner

submits that he is innocent of all the allegations and that in the

meanwhile, the disputes between the petitioner and the 1st

respondent have been amicably settled in the mediation held before

CRL.M.C.5701/14                 - : 2 :-

this Court and the marriage between them has been agreed to be

dissolved and that now they are living separately and that as per the

terms of the mediation agreement, the petitioner and the 1st

respondent has filed joint petition before the Family Court,

Ernakulam, as O.P.No.1727/2014 and out of the total amount

agreed to be paid, an amount of Rs. 10,00,000/- was paid          on

11.9.2014, on which date, joint petition for divorce was filed. The

1st  respondent-defacto     complainant   has   filed  Annexure-AIII

memorandum       of   settlement    before this   Court   in  Tr.P(C)

No.231/2014. Annexure AIV is the copy of the receipt having

received Rs. 10,00,000/- as stated above and Annexure-AV is the

affidavit sworn to by the 1st respondent stating that the matter has

been amicably settled in the presence of the mediator before the

Kerala State Mediation and Conciliation Centre and that she has

agreed to withdraw the criminal case registered against the

petitioner as crime No.478/2013 of Peravoor Police Station and that

she has no subsisting grievance against the petitioner and that she

has no objection in quashing all further proceedings against the

petitioner in the aforementioned crime, etc. It is in the background

of these facts and circumstances of the case that the petitioner has

CRL.M.C.5701/14                  - : 3 :-

chosen to file the aforementioned Crl.M.C. praying to quash

Annexure-AII final report in crime No.478/2013 of Peravoor Police

Station, Kannur district and all further proceedings in C.C.No.

822/2014 on the file of the Judicial First Class Magistrate Court,

Kuthuparamba.

      2.     The Crl.M.C. has been admitted and Sri.C.A.Chacko has

taken notice for the 1st respondent and the learned Public

Prosecutor has taken notice for the 2nd respondent-State of Kerala.

      3.     Heard Sri. Arunkumar.A., the learned counsel appearing

for the petitioner, Sri.C.A.Chacko, the learned counsel appearing for

R1 and the learned Public Prosecutor appearing for the 2nd

respondent-State.

      4.     The learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted that

during the pendency of the aforementioned criminal proceedings,

the matter has been settled amicably between the parties, which is

resulted in the subject matter of the aforementioned crime/case and

that the continuation of the proceedings in the above case/crime

will cause miscarriage of justice to both parties as the real

disputants to the case have arrived at an amicable settlement and

any further continuation of the criminal proceedings will amount to

CRL.M.C.5701/14                   - : 4 :-

sheer wastage of time and money and would unnecessarily strain

the judicial, administrative and financial resources of the State.

      5.     The learned counsel appearing for the 1st respondent has

submitted on the basis of the specific instructions furnished by the

1st respondent that the 1st respondent has amicably settled the

disputes with the petitioner and that she has no objection in the

quashment of the impugned criminal proceedings and that the

complainant/victim/injured does not intend to proceed any further

against the petitioner as she has no grievance against him and that

she will not raise any dispute/compliant in future if the prayer for

quashing the impugned final report is allowed.

      6.     The learned Public Prosecutor also was heard, who also

has not raised any serious objections and submitted that this court

may consider the prayer in this case in the light of the law well

settled by the Apex Court in that regard.

      7.     After having carefully considered the submissions of the

parties and after having perused the pleadings as well as the

documents and materials placed in this matter, it can be seen that

the offences alleged are more or less personal in nature and not

much element of public interest is involved. The crucial aspect of

CRL.M.C.5701/14                         - : 5 :-

the matter is that though such offences are involved, the real

disputants to the controversy which has led to the impugned

criminal proceedings, have actually arrived at an amicable

settlement of the matter. From the submissions made by the

learned counsel for the 1st respondent, it is clear to the court that

the injured/victim/defacto complainant has no further grievance

against the petitioner/accused in the light of the settlement arrived

at by them. In this connection, it is relevant to note the decision of

the Apex Court in the case between Gian Singh v. State of Punjab

reported in 2013 (1) SCC (Cri) 160, para 61 = (2012) 10 SCC 303 =

2012(4) KLT 108(SC), wherein the Supreme Court has held as

follows in para 61 thereof [ See SCC (Cri)]:

                  "61. The position that emerges from the above
           discussion can be summarised thus: the power of the
           High Court in quashing a criminal proceeding or FIR or
           complaint in exercise of its inherent jurisdiction is
           distinct and different from the power given to a criminal
           court for compounding the offences under S.320 of the
           Code.
           statutoryInherent
                      limitationpoweritishas to be exercised in accord
                                          of wide plenitude with no
                                 but
           with the guideline engrafted in such power viz;(i) to
           secure the ends of justice or (ii) to prevent abuse of the
           process of any Court. In what cases power to quash the
           criminal proceeding or complaint or F.I.R. may be
           exercised where the offender andonvictim have settled
           their
           circumstances ofwould case and no category canand
                   dispute            depend         the   facts
                               each                                be
           prescribed..

It is further held as follows:-

CRL.M.C.5701/14                          - : 6 :-

          "......... But the criminal cases having overwhelmingly and
          pre-dominatingly civil flavour stand on different footing
          for the purposes of quashing, particularly the offences
          arising from commercial, financial,mercantile, civil,
          partnership or such like transactions or the offences
          arising out of matrimony relating to dowry etc. or the
          family disputes where the wrong is basically private or
          personal in nature and the parties have resolved their
          entire dispute. In this category of cases, High Court may
          quash criminal proceedings if in its view, because of the
          compromise between the offender and victim, the
          possibility of conviction is remote and bleak and
          continuation of criminal case would put accused to great
          oppression and prejudice and extreme injustice would
          be caused to him by not quashing the criminal case
          despite full and complete settlement and compromise
          with the victim........"

Further, in the case Jitendra Raghuvanshi and Others v. Babita

Raghuvanshi and another reported in (2013) 4 SCC 58 [see 2013

(1) KLD 817 (SC)], the Apex Court has held as follows:-

                   "8. It is not in dispute that matrimonial disputes
          have been on considerable increase in recent times
          resulting in filing of complaints under Sections 498A
          and 406 of I.P.C. not only against the husband but also
          against the relatives of the husband. The question is
          when such matters are resolved either by the wife
          agreeing to rejoin the matrimonial home or by mutual
          settlement of other pending disputes for which both the
          sides approached the High Court and jointly prayed for
          quashing of the criminal proceedings or the FIR or
          complaint by the wife under Sections 498A and 406 of
          I.P.C., whether thethe  prayer can be declined on the sole
          ground that since320 offences arequashitthe
                                                   non-compoundable
          under
          impermissible for the court toCode,
                     Section          of   the             would   be
                                                             criminal
          proceedings or FIR or complaint.

                   9. It is not in dispute that in the case on hand
          subsequent to the filing of the criminal complaint under
          Sections 498A and 406 of IPC and Sections 3 and 4 of
          the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961, with the help and
          intervention of family members, friends and well-

CRL.M.C.5701/14                       - : 7 :-

          wishers,differences
                    the parties concerned have amicably settled
          their
          settlement.
          said compromise beforethereto,
                        Pursuantandthe executedappellants
                                                    a   compromise/
                                        Trialthe             filed the
                                              Court with a request to
          place the same on record and to drop the criminal
          proceedings against the appellants herein. It is also not
          in dispute that in additional to the mutual settlement
          arrived at by the parties, respondent/-wife has also filed
          an affidavit stating that she did not wish to pursue the
          criminal proceedings against the appellants and fully
          supported the contents of the settlement deed. It is the
          grievance of the appellants that no only the Trial Court
          rejected such prayer of the parties but also the High
          Court failed toe exercise its jurisdiction under Section
          482 of the Code only on the ground that the criminal
          proceedings relate to the offences punishable under
          Sections 498A and 406 of IPC which are non-
          compoundable in nature.

                 15. In our view, it is the duty of the Courts to
          encourage genuine settlements of matrimonial disputes,
          particularly, when the same are on considerable
          increase. Even if the offences are non-compoundable, if
          they relate to matrimonial disputes and the Court is
          satisfied that the parties have settled the same amicably
          and without any pressure, we hold that for the purpose
          of securing ends of justice, Section 320 of the Code
          would not be a bar to the exercisesubsequent quashing
                                                of power of
          of   FIR,   complaint    or   the                  criminal
          proceedings.

                 16. There has been an outburst of matrimonial
          disputes in recent times.
          occupies an important placeThe it has an important role
                                              institution of marriage
                                         and
          to play in the society. Therefore, every effort should be
          made in the interest of the individuals in order to enable
          them to settle down in life and live peacefully. If the
          parties ponder over their defaults and terminate their
          disputes amicably by mutual agreement instead of
          fighting it out in a Court of law, in order to do complete
          justice in the matrimonial matters, the Courts should be
          less hesitant in exercising its extraordinary jurisdiction.
          It is trite to state that the power under Section 482
          should be exercised sparingly and with circumspection
          only when the Court is convinced, on the basis of
          material on record, that allowing the proceedings to
          continue would be an abuse of the process of the Court

CRL.M.C.5701/14                      - : 8 :-

          or that the ends of justice require that the proceedings
          ought to be quashed."

      8.     Considering the facts and circumstances of this case, it

is seen further that the impugned criminal proceedings have arisen

consequent to the matrimonial disputes between the disputants and

the disputes have been settled amicably between the parties.

Accordingly, this Court is inclined to hold that in the light of the

facts and circumstances involved in the present case and

particularly in view of the settlement arrived at between the parties,

the principles laid down in the aforementioned decisions of the

Apex Court will be squarely applicable in the present case.

Moreover, since the real disputants to the controversy have

amicably settled the disputes, which led to these impugned criminal

proceedings, it is also the duty of the court to promote such

settlement, instead of compelling the parties to go on with the

dispute. It is also pertinent to note that since the matter is settled

out of court, in the event of proceeding with the trial, there may not

be any fruitful prosecution and the chances of conviction of the

accused is rather negligible and therefore, the net result of

continuance of criminal proceedings would be sheer waste of

judicial time rather meaningless and therefore would amount to

CRL.M.C.5701/14                   - : 9 :-

abuse of the process of court proceedings in the larger sense.

Hence following decisions of the Apex Court cited supra, this Court

is inclined to hold that the Crl.M.C. can be allowed by granting the

prayers sought for.

      9.     In the result, the Crl.M.C. is allowed and Annexure-AII

final report in crime No.478/2013 of Peravoor Police Station and all

further proceedings in C.C.No. 822/2014 on the file of the Judicial

First Class Magistrate Court, Kuthuparamba, are quashed. The

petitioner shall produce certified copies of this order before the

court below concerned as well as before the Station House Officer,

Peravoor Police Station.


                                                     Sd/-
sdk+                                      ALEXANDER THOMAS, JUDGE

          ///True copy///



                              P.S. to Judge



