
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                      PRESENT:

                     THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE ALEXANDER THOMAS

               TUESDAY, THE 21ST DAY OF OCTOBER 2014/29TH ASWINA, 1936

                                            Crl.MC.No. 5929 of 2014
                                                ---------------------------


        CC 970/2012 OF JUDICIAL FIRST CLASS MAGISTRATE COURT - I, VARKALA.
     CRIME NO. 580/2009 OF VARKALA POLICE STATION , THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.
                                                            ....

PETITIONER(S)/ACCUSED NO. 1 & 2:
---------------------------------------------------

        1. HUSSNAL, S/O.HUSAIN,
            AGED 37, HAAZ VILLA, ODAYAM,
            VARKALA, THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

        2. SHAMSHAD BEEGUM,
            W/O.HUSAIN, AGED 59, HAAZ VILLA, ODAYAM,
            VARKALA, THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.


            BY ADV. SRI.LIJU. M.P


RESPONDENT(S)/COMPLAINANT & DEFACTO COMPLAINANT:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

        1. REJEESA, D/O.HAMEED KUTTY, AGED 28,
            MEENATHEL VEEDU, KAMPALADI MURI,
            PORUVAZHI, KUNNATHOOR, KOLLAM - 691 508.

        2. STATE OF KERALA,
            REPRESENTED BY THE SUB INSPECTOR OF POLICE,
            VARKALA POLICE STATION, THIRUVANANTHAPURAM,
            REPRESENTED BY THE PUBLIC PROSECUTOR,
            HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM.


            R1 BY ADV. SRI.JOSEPH SEBASTIAN (KOLLAM)
            R2 BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SRI.R.GITHESH


            THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD
            ON 21-10-2014, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE
            FOLLOWING:

mbr/

Crl.MC.No. 5929 of 2014
---------------------------------

                                               APPENDIX

PETITIONER(S)' ANNEXURES:
------------------------------------------

ANNEXURE A- CRIME NO.580/09 OF VARKALA POLICE STATION,
                     THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

ANNEXURE B - TRUE COPY OF THE SETTLEMENT ENTERED INTO BETWEEN THE
                     PETITIONERS AND THE IST RESPONDENT DATED 03.04.2014.

ANNEXURE C - ORIGINAL AFFIDAVIT DATED 16.06.14 EXECUTED BY THE
                      IST RESPONDENT/DEFACTO COMPLAINANT.

RESPONDENT(S)' ANNEXURES:                          -    NIL
--------------------------------------------




                                                               /TRUE COPY/

                                                               P.S. TO JUDGE
mbr/


                 ALEXANDER THOMAS, J.
           =========================
                  Crl.M.C No.5929 of 2014
        ============================
         Dated this the 23rd day of October, 2014

                           ORDER



      The above captioned Criminal Miscellaneous Case (Crl.M.C.)

has been filed seeking the invocation of the inherent powers of

this Court conferred under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal

Procedure, with the prayer to quash the impugned Annexure A

final report/charge sheet in Crime No.580 of 2009 of Varkala

Police Station, Thiruvananthapuram, including C.C No.970 of

2012 on the file of Judicial First Class Magistrate Court - I,

Varkala. The two petitioners herein are arrayed as accused Nos.1

and 2 in Crime No.580 of 2009 of Varkala Police Station, which is

registered for the offence under Section 498A r/w Section 34 of

Indian Penal Code.

      2.  The brief of the prosecution case is that after the

marriage between the 1st petitioner and the 1st respondent, it is

alleged that the 1st respondent was subjected to cruelty by the

petitioners claiming dowry.   It has resulted in registration of

Crime    No.580    of   2009    of   Varkala    Police   Station,

Thiruvananthapuram at the instance of the 1st respondent wife.

Crl.M.C No.5929 of 2014          2



After investigation, the Police submitted Annexure A impugned

final report/charge sheet in the aforementioned crime.      It is

submitted that the petitioners are absolutely innocent and that

they had not committed the alleged offences and that the

allegations in Annexure A does not make out the offences

alleged. Further, it is submitted that now the entire disputes

have been settled between the 1st respondent and the 1st

petitioner, whereby they have entered into an agreement to

terminate all disputes between them including the above

impugned criminal case through mediation at Family Court,

Chavara. Annexure B is the copy of the settlement agreement

entered into between the 1st respondent and 1st petitioner on

03.04.2014.       Apart from settling all the other matrimonial

disputes, it has also been agreed as per Clause 8 of Annexure B

settlement that steps will be taken for termination of the above

said impugned criminal proceeding, which has led to C.C No.970

of 2012 on the file of Judicial First Class Magistrate Court- I,

Varkala.    It is further submitted that there is no purpose in

continuing the abovesaid criminal proceedings as against the

petitioners and that the 1st respondent has sworn to affidavit

dated 16.06.2014, produced as Annexure C with this Crl.M.C,

Crl.M.C No.5929 of 2014          3



stating the abovesaid aspects and further stating that the 1st

respondent has agreed to terminate the impugned criminal

proceedings and that she is not interested in continuing with the

abovesaid criminal proceedings against the petitioners and that

she has no objection in quashing the impugned criminal

proceedings against them. It is in the background of these facts

and circumstances that the aforementioned Crl.M.C has been

filed.

      3.    The Crl.M.C. has been admitted and Sri.Joseph

Sebastian has taken notice for the 1st respondent and the learned

Public Prosecutor has taken notice for the 2nd respondent-State

of Kerala.

      4.    Heard Sri.Liju M.P, the learned counsel appearing for

the petitioners, Sri.Joseph Sebastian, learned counsel appearing

for 1st respondent and the learned Public Prosecutor appearing

for the 2nd respondent-State of Kerala.

      5.    The learned counsel for the petitioners has submitted

that during the pendency of the aforementioned impugned

criminal proceedings, the matter has been settled amicably

between the parties, which is resulted in the subject matter of

the aforementioned crime/case and that the continuation of the

Crl.M.C No.5929 of 2014         4



proceedings in the above case/crime will cause miscarriage of

justice to both parties as the real disputants to the case have

arrived at an amicable settlement and any further continuation

of the criminal proceedings will amount to sheer wastage of time

and money and would unnecessarily strain the financial,

administrative and financial resources of the State.

      6.    Sri.Joseph Sebastian, the learned counsel appearing

for the 1st respondent, has submitted on the basis of the specific

instructions furnished by the 1st respondent that the 1st

respondent has amicably settled the disputes with the petitioners

and that she has no objection in the quashment of the impugned

criminal proceedings and that the complainant/victim/injured

does not intend to proceed any further against the petitioners as

she has no grievance against them and that she will not raise any

dispute/compliant in future if the prayer for quashing the

impugned final report is allowed.

      7.    The learned Public Prosecutor also was heard, who

also has not raised any serious objections and submitted that this

court may consider the prayer in this case in the light of the law

well settled by the Apex Court in that regard.

Crl.M.C No.5929 of 2014             5



      8.    After having carefully considered the submissions of

the parties and after having perused the pleadings as well as the

documents and materials placed in this matter, it can be seen

that the offence alleged is more or less personal in nature and

not much element of public interest is involved.              The crucial

aspect of the matter is that though such offence is involved, the

real disputants to the controversy which has led to the impugned

criminal proceedings, have actually arrived at an amicable

settlement of the matter. From the submissions made by the

learned counsel for the 1st respondent, it is clear to the court that

the injured/victim/defacto complainant has no further grievance

against the petitioners/accused in the light of the settlement

arrived at by them. In this connection, it is relevant to note the

decision of the Apex Court in the case between Gian Singh v.

State of Punjab reported in 2013 (1) SCC (Cri) 160, para 61 =

(2012) 10 SCC 303 = 2012(4) KLT 108(SC), wherein the

Supreme Court has held as follows in para 61 thereof [See SCC

(Cri)]:

                "61. The position that emerges from the above
         discussion can be summarised thus: the power of the
         High Court in quashing a criminal proceeding or FIR
         or complaint in exercise of its inherent jurisdiction is
         distinct and different from the power given to a
         criminal court for compounding the offences under
         S.320 of the Code. Inherent power is of wide plenitude

Crl.M.C No.5929 of 2014                 6



         with no statutory limitation but it has to be exercised
         in accord with the guideline engrafted in such power
         viz;(i) to secure the ends of justice or (ii) to prevent
         abuse of the process of any Court.        In what cases
         power to quash the criminal proceeding or complaint
         or F.I.R. may be exercised where the offender and
         victim have settled their dispute would depend on the
         facts and circumstances of each case and no category
         can be prescribed..

It is further held as follows:-

          "......... But the criminal cases having overwhelmingly
          and pre-dominatingly civil flavour stand on different
          footing for the purposes of quashing, particularly the
          offences          arising       from        commercial,
          financial,mercantile, civil, partnership or such like
          transactions or the offences arising out of matrimony
          relating to dowry etc. or the family disputes where the
          wrong is basically private or personal in nature and
          the parties have resolved their entire dispute. In this
          category of cases, High Court may quash criminal
          proceedings if in its view, because of the compromise
          between the offender and victim, the possibility of
          conviction is remote and bleak and continuation of
          criminal case would put accused to great oppression
          and prejudice and extreme injustice would be caused
          to him by not quashing the criminal case despite full
          and complete settlement and compromise with the
          victim........"

       Further, in the case Jitendra Raghuvanshi and Others v.

Babita Raghuvanshi and another reported in (2013) 4 SCC

58 [see 2013 (1) KLD 817 (SC)], the Apex Court has held as

follows:-

                   "8.    It is not in dispute that matrimonial
          disputes have been on considerable increase in recent
          times resulting in filing of complaints under Sections
          498A and 406 of I.P.C. not only against the husband
          but also against the relatives of the husband.     The
          question is when such matters are resolved either by
          the wife agreeing to rejoin the matrimonial home or
          by mutual settlement of other pending disputes for

Crl.M.C No.5929 of 2014                7



         which both the sides approached the High Court and
         jointly   prayed    for   quashing    of   the   criminal
         proceedings or the FIR or complaint by the wife under
         Sections 498A and 406 of I.P.C., whether the prayer
         can be declined on the sole ground that since the
         offences are non-compoundable under Section 320 of
         the Code, it would be impermissible for the court to
         quash the criminal proceedings or FIR or complaint.

                9. It is not in dispute that in the case on hand
         subsequent to the filing of the criminal complaint
         under Sections 498A and 406 of IPC and Sections 3
         and 4 of the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961, with the
         help and intervention of family members, friends and
         well-wishers, the parties concerned have amicably
         settled their differences and executed a compromise/
         settlement. Pursuant thereto, the appellants filed the
         said compromise before the Trial Court with a request
         to place the same on record and to drop the criminal
         proceedings against the appellants herein. It is also
         not in dispute that in additional to the mutual
         settlement arrived at by the parties, respondent/-wife
         has also filed an affidavit stating that she did not wish
         to pursue the criminal proceedings against the
         appellants and fully supported the contents of the
         settlement deed. It is the grievance of the appellants
         that no only the Trial Court rejected such prayer of
         the parties but also the High Court failed toe exercise
         its jurisdiction under Section 482 of the Code only on
         the ground that the criminal proceedings relate to the
         offences punishable under Sections 498A and 406 of
         IPC which are non-compoundable in nature.

                15. In our view, it is the duty of the Courts to
         encourage     genuine     settlements   of   matrimonial
         disputes,    particularly, when     the  same    are  on
         considerable increase. Even if the offences are non-
         compoundable, if they relate to matrimonial disputes
         and the Court is satisfied that the parties have settled
         the same amicably and without any pressure, we hold
         that for the purpose of securing ends of justice,
         Section 320 of the Code would not be a bar to the
         exercise of power of quashing of FIR, complaint or the
         subsequent criminal proceedings.


                16. There has been an outburst of matrimonial
         disputes in recent times. The institution of marriage
         occupies an important place and it has an important

Crl.M.C No.5929 of 2014               8



         role to play in the society.   Therefore, every effort
         should be made in the interest of the individuals in
         order to enable them to settle down in life and live
         peacefully. If the parties ponder over their defaults
         and terminate their disputes amicably by mutual
         agreement instead of fighting it out in a Court of law,
         in order to do complete justice in the matrimonial
         matters, the Courts should be less hesitant in
         exercising its extraordinary jurisdiction. It is trite to
         state that the power under Section 482 should be
         exercised sparingly and with circumspection only
         when the Court is convinced, on the basis of material
         on record, that allowing the proceedings to continue
         would be an abuse of the process of the Court or that
         the ends of justice require that the proceedings ought
         to be quashed."

         9. Considering the facts and circumstances of this case,

it is seen further that the impugned criminal proceedings have

arisen consequent to the matrimonial disputes between the

disputants and the disputes have been settled amicably between

the parties. Accordingly, this Court is inclined to hold that in the

light of the facts and circumstances involved in the present case

and particularly in view of the settlement arrived at between the

parties, the principles laid down in the aforementioned decisions

of the Apex Court will be squarely applicable in the present case.

Moreover, since the real disputants to the controversy have

amicably settled the disputes, which led to these impugned

criminal proceedings, it is also the duty of the court to promote

such settlement, instead of compelling the parties to go on with

the dispute. It is also pertinent to note that since the matter is

Crl.M.C No.5929 of 2014          9



settled out of court, in the event of proceeding with the trial,

there may not be any fruitful prosecution and the chances of

conviction of the accused is rather negligible and therefore, the

net result of continuance of criminal proceedings would be sheer

waste of judicial time rather meaningless and therefore would

amount to abuse of the process of court proceedings in the

larger sense. Hence following decisions of the Apex Court cited

supra, this Court is inclined to hold that the Crl.M.C. can be

allowed by granting the prayers sought for.

         In the result, the Crl.M.C. is allowed and the impugned

Annexure A final report/charge sheet in Crime No.580 of 2009 of

Varkala Police Station, Thiruvananthapuram, which has led to

the institution of C.C No.970 of 2012 on the file of Judicial First

Class Magistrate Court - I, Varkala and all further proceedings

arising therefrom stands quashed.           The petitioners shall

produce certified copies of this order before the court below

concerned as well as before the Station House Officer, Varkala

Police Station.

                                             Sd/-
                               ALEXANDER THOMAS, JUDGE.



vdv         //True Copy//   P.A to Judge



