
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                      PRESENT:

                     THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE ALEXANDER THOMAS

               FRIDAY, THE 24TH DAY OF OCTOBER 2014/2ND KARTHIKA, 1936

                                           Crl.MC.No. 5904 of 2014 ()
                                                ---------------------------
               CRIME NO. 927/2014 OF MATTANNUR POLICE STATION , KANNUR

PETITIONER(S)/ACCUSED:
------------------------------------------

        1. UJUAL AGED 33 YEARS
            S/O.VASANTHARAJ, AMRITHAM, NELLUNNI P.O.
            MATTANNUR, KANNUR.

        2. PREJUL AGED 30 YEARS
            S/O.VASANTHARAJ, AMRITHAM, NELLUNNI P.O.
            MATTANNUR, KANNUR.

            BY ADVS.SRI.K.C.SANTHOSHKUMAR
                          SMT.K.K.CHANDRALEKHA

RESPONDENT(S)/COMPLAINANT AND INJURED:
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

        1. STATE OF KERALA
            REPRESENTED BY THE PUBLIC PROSECUTOR
            HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM-682031.

        2. K.SOUMINI, AGED 51 YEARS
            W/O.DAMODARAN, SREENILAYAM, PAZHASSI AMSOM
            NELLUNNI DESOM, MATTANNUR, KANNUR DISTRICT-670702.

        3. K.V.DAMODARAN
            S/O.KUNHIRAMAN, SREENILAYAM, PAZHASSI AMSOM
            NELLUNNI DESOM, MATTANNUR, KANNUR DISTRICT-670702.

            R2 & 3 BY ADV. SMT.M.M.DEEPA
            R1 BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SRI.R.GITHESH

            THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD ON 24-10-2014,
THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE FOLLOWING:


                       ALEXANDER THOMAS, J.
                    ==================
                     Crl.M.C.No. 5904 of 2014
                    ==================
            Dated this the 24th day of October, 2014
                              O R D E R

      The petitioners herein are the accused in Annexure-1 FIR in

Crime No.927/2014 of Mattannur Police Station in Kannur district,

registered for offences punishable under Secs. 452, 323, 324, 354,

427 read with Sec. 34 of the IPC. Annexure-1 crime was registered

on 23.9.2014 by the Police on the basis of the first information

statement furnished by the 2nd respondent herein (defacto

complainant) stating that she and her husband (3rd respondent)

sustained injuries in the incident, which occurred on 21.9.2014 at

8.30 p.m. at their residence. That the petitioners herein, who are

residing in the neighbourhood of respondent Nos.2 and 3,

trespassed into the residence of 2nd and 3rd respondents on

21.9.2014 at about 8.30 p.m. and inflicted injuries on the body of

respondent Nos. 2 and 3 and thereby committed the above said

offences and that they have sustained loss to the tune of

Rs. 25,000/.- etc. It is stated that the petitioners, who are the

Crl.M.C.5904/14                 - : 2 :-

accused, are neighbours of the 2nd and 3rd respondents, who are

defacto complainants and the injured. It is further stated that the

above said impugned crime was registered due to some

misunderstandings between the two families in connection with the

marriage function of the 2nd petitioner solemnized recently.

Thereafter some respectable mediators, family members and well

wishers of the parties mediated the disputes between the petitioners

and the 2nd and 3rd respondents, whereby the 2nd and 3rd

respondents have agreed to terminate the impugned criminal

proceedings. The 2nd and 3rd respondents have sworn to affidavit

dated 14.10.2014, produced as Annexure-II in this Crl.M.C., stating

the above aspects and further stating that the matters have been

amicably settled as above said and that the petitioners had no

intention to inflict injuries on them or to commit any offence of

trespass, mischief, assault or use of criminal force with the intend to

outrage the modesty of the 2nd respondent and that they have

sustained simple injuries during the scuffle occurred in the said

incident and that they are willing to terminate the impugned

criminal proceedings and that the disputes between the parties are

purely personal in nature and it has nothing to do with the peace and

Crl.M.C.5904/14                  - : 3 :-

tranquility of the area or society at large and that there is no

necessity    to  continue   any    further   the  impugned  criminal

proceedings and that there is no prospect of the successful

prosecution and conviction of the petitioners as the petitioners had

no intention to commit any offence and that the entry of the

petitioners to their residence and subsequent incidents occurred

there, was not at all pre-mediated. It is in the background of these

facts and circumstances that the petitioners have filed the instant

Crl.M.C. with the prayer to quash the impugned Annexure-1 FIR in

Crime No.927/2014 of Mattannur Police Station and all further

proceedings arising therefrom.

      2.     The Crl.M.C. has been admitted and Smt.M.M.Deepa,

Advocate has taken notice for R-2 and R-3 and the learned Public

Prosecutor has taken notice for the 1st respondent-State of Kerala.

      3.     Heard   Sri.K.C.Santhosh      Kumar,  learned  counsel

appearing for the petitioners, Smt.M.M.Deepa, learned counsel

appearing for respondent Nos.2 and 3 and the learned Public

Prosecutor appearing for the 1st respondent-State.

      4.     The learned counsel for the petitioners has submitted

that   during   the  pendency    of      the aforementioned criminal

Crl.M.C.5904/14                  - : 4 :-

proceedings, the matter has been settled amicably between the

parties,   which   is  resulted   in     the subject  matter   of   the

aforementioned crime/case and that the continuation of the

proceedings in the above case/crime will cause miscarriage of

justice to both parties as the real disputants to the case have arrived

at an amicable settlement and any further continuation of the

criminal proceedings will amount to sheer wastage of time and

money and would unnecessarily strain the judicial, administrative

and financial resources of the State.

      5.     The learned counsel appearing for respondent Nos.2 and

3 has submitted, on the basis of the specific instructions furnished

by respondent Nos.2 and 3, that they have amicably settled the

disputes with the petitioners and that they have no objection in the

quashment of the impugned criminal proceedings and that the

complainants/victims/injured do not intend to proceed any further

against the petitioners as they have no grievance against them and

that they will not raise any dispute/compliant in future if the prayer

for quashing the impugned final report is allowed.

      6.     The learned Public Prosecutor also was heard, who also

has not raised any serious objections and submitted that this Court

Crl.M.C.5904/14                      - : 5 :-

may consider the prayer in this case in the light of the law well

settled by the Apex Court in that regard.

      7.     After having carefully considered the submissions of the

parties and after having perused the pleadings as well as the

documents and materials placed in this matter, it can be seen that

the offences alleged are more or less personal in nature. The crucial

aspect of the matter is that though such offences are involved, the

real disputants to the controversy which has led to the impugned

criminal proceedings, have actually arrived at an amicable

settlement of the matter. From the submissions made by the

learned counsel for respondent Nos.2 and 3, it is clear to the court

that the injured/victims/defacto complainants have no further

grievance against the petitioners/accused in the light of the

settlement arrived at by them.

      8.     In this connection, it is relevant to note the decision of

the Apex Court in the case between Gian Singh v. State of Punjab

reported in 2013 (1) SCC (Cri) 160, para 61 = (2012) 10 SCC 303 =

2012(4) KLT 108(SC), wherein the Supreme Court has held as

follows in para 61 thereof [ See SCC (Cri)]:

             "61. The position that emerges from the above discussion can
      be summarised thus: the power of the High Court in quashing a

Crl.M.C.5904/14                           - : 6 :-

        criminal proceeding or FIR or complaint in exercise of its inherent
        jurisdiction is distinct and different from the power given to a
        criminal court for compounding the offences under S.320 of the
        Code.
        limitationInherent has to be exercised in accord with the guideline
                             power is of wide plenitude with no statutory
                     but it
        engrafted in such power viz;(i) to secure the ends of justice or (ii) to
        prevent abuse of the process of any Court. In what cases power to
        quash the criminal proceeding or complaint or F.I.R. may be
        exercised where the offender and victim have settled their dispute
        would depend on the facts and circumstances of each case and no
        category can be prescribed.."

It is further held as follows:-

        "......... But the criminal cases having overwhelmingly and pre-
        dominatingly civil flavour stand on different footing for the purposes
        of quashing, particularly the offences arising from commercial,
        financial,mercantile, civil, partnership or such like transactions or the
        offences arising out of matrimony relating to dowry etc. or the family
        disputes where the wrong is basically private or personal in nature
        and the parties have resolved their entire dispute. In this category of
        cases, High Court may quash criminal proceedings if in its view,
        because of the compromise between the offender and victim, the
        possibility of conviction is remote and bleak and continuation of
        criminal case would put accused to great oppression and prejudice
        and extreme injustice would be caused to him by not quashing the
        criminal case despite full and complete settlement and compromise
        with the victim........"

In the decision reported in the case Yogendra Yadav & others v. The

State of Jharkhand & another reported in 2014 (8) SCALE 634 = III

(2014) Current Criminal Reports CCR 426 (SC), the Apex Court has

held as follows:

                  "When the High Court is convinced that the offences are
        entirely personal in nature and, therefore, do not affect public peace
        or tranquility and where it feels that quashing of such proceedings on
        account of compromise would bring about peace and would secure
        ends of justice, it should not hesitate to quash them".

The Apex Court in the above case was dealing with a case involving

offences under Secs. 341, 323, 324, 504 & 307 r/w Sec. 34 Indian

Crl.M.C.5904/14                   - : 7 :-

Penal Code.

      9.     Considering the facts and circumstances of this case, it

is seen further that the impugned criminal proceedings have arisen

consequent to the personal disputes between the disputants and

the disputes have been settled amicably between the parties.

Accordingly, this Court is inclined to hold that in the light of the

facts and circumstances involved in the present case and

particularly in view of the settlement arrived at between the parties,

the principles laid down in the aforementioned decisions of the

Apex Court will be squarely applicable in the present case.

Moreover, since the real disputants to the controversy have

amicably settled the disputes, which has led to these impugned

criminal proceedings, it is also the duty of the court to promote

such settlement, instead of compelling the parties to go on with the

dispute. It is also pertinent to note that since the matter is settled

out of court, in the event of proceeding with the trial, there may not

be any fruitful prosecution and the chances of conviction of the

accused is rather negligible and therefore, the net result of

continuance of criminal proceedings would be sheer wastage of

judicial time rather meaningless and therefore would amount to

Crl.M.C.5904/14                   - : 8 :-

abuse of the process of court proceedings in the larger sense.

Hence, following the decisions of the Apex Court cited supra, this

Court is inclined to hold that the Crl.M.C. can be allowed by

granting the prayers sought for.

      10.    In the result, the Crl.M.C. is allowed and the impugned

Annexure-I final report/charge sheet in Crime No.927/2014 of

Mattannur Police Station and all further proceedings arising

therefrom pending on the file of the Judicial First Class Magistrate's

Court, Mattannur, stand      quashed. The petitioners shall produce

certified copies of this order before the court below concerned as

well as before the Station House Officer, Mattannur Police Station.


                                                      Sd/-
sdk+                                      ALEXANDER THOMAS, JUDGE

          ///True copy///



                              P.S. to Judge



