
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                      PRESENT:

                     THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE ALEXANDER THOMAS

                TUESDAY,THE 7TH DAY OF OCTOBER 2014/15TH ASWINA, 1936

                                           Crl.MC.No. 5608 of 2014 ()
                                                ---------------------------
CRIME NO. 370/2014 OF MANJESHWAR POLICE STATION, KASARGOD DISTRICT
                                          -------------------------

PETITIONER(S)/ACCUSED:
------------------------------------------

        1. MOHAMMED MUSHTHAQ,S/O.ABBAS, AGED 27 YEARS,
            H.I.M. HOUSE, MANGALPPADY,
            MANJESHWAR, KASARAGOD.

        2. ABBAS HAJI, S/O.ARABI, AGED 51 YEARS,
            H.I.M. HOUSE, MANGALPPADY, MANJESHWAR,
            KASARAGOD.

        3. FATHIMATH SOURA,W/O.ABBAS HAJI,AGED 48 YEARS,
            H.I.M. HOUSE, MANGALPPADY,
            MANJESHWAR, KASARAGOD.

        4. AYISHA, D/O.ARABI, AGED 45 YEARS,
            H.I.M. HOUSE, MANGALPPADY, MANJESHWAR,KASARAGOD.

             BY ADV. SRI.S.JIJI

RESPONDENT(S)/DE-FACTO COMPLAINANT & STATE:
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

        1. UMMU SOUDA, AGED 23 YEARS,
            D/O.IBRAHIM, W/O.MOHAMMED MUSHTHAQ,
            H.I.M.HOUSE ,MANGALPPADY, MANJESHWAR,
            KASARAGOD.

        2. STATE OF KERALA,
            REPRESENTED BY THE PUBLIC PROSECUTOR,
            HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM.

             R1 BY ADV. SMT.K.S.SANTHI
             R2 BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SMT. R.REMA

            THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD
            ON 07-10-2014, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE
            FOLLOWING:




sts

Crl.MC.No. 5608 of 2014 ()
--------------------------------------

                                               APPENDIX

PETITIONER(S)' ANNEXURES:
---------------------------------------------

ANNEXURE .A1 -                 TRUE COPY OF THE FIR IN CRIME NO.370/2014 OF
                               MANJESHWAR POLICE STATION.

ANNEXURE. A2 -                 AFFIDAVIT DATED 20-09-2014 SWORN BY THE 1ST
                               RESPONDENT.




RESPONDENT(S)' ANNEXURES:                           NIL




                                                              /TRUE COPY/


                                                              P.S.TO.JUDGE


sts


                        ALEXANDER THOMAS, J.
                     ==================
                      Crl.M.C.No. 5608 of 2014
                     ==================
               Dated this the 7th day of October, 2014
                               O R D E R

      The petitioners are the accused in Crime No.370/2014 of

Manjeshwar Police Station, which has been transmitted to the

Judicial First Class Magistrate Court, Kasargod. The 1st respondent is

the defacto complainant therein. The offences alleged against the

petitioners (accused) are under Sections 324, 498A read with

Section 34 of the IPC. The matter was initiated on the basis of the

statement given by the 1st respondent. The allegations of the

prosecution is that the marriage between the 1st petitioner and the

1st respondent-defacto complainant was solemnized according to

the community customs at Uppala, on 27.10.2013 and it is alleged

by the defacto complainant that she was given 50 sovereigns of

gold ornaments and rupees two lakhs at the time of her marriage by

her parents and that after some time, the petitioners had taken

away the gold ornaments and demanded more gold and cash from

the defacto complainant and that she was harassed by them with

Crl.M.C.5608/14                   - : 2 :-

the intention to humiliate her and assaulted her and thus committed

the aforementioned offences. It is stated that the matter has now

been settled amicably between the parties and they are now living

together as husband and wife, as a happy family. The 1st respondent

has filed Annexure A2 affidavit stating that the Judicial First Class

Magistrate Court-I, Kasargod, has referred both the spouses for

mediation in the Maintenance Case initiated by the wife and in the

mediation held on 20.9.2014, both the 1st petitioner and the 1st

respondent herein decided to live together as husband and wife and

that she has decided not to continue with this case. It is further

stated that the petitioners herein have not committed any illegal

acts against her and that all her gold ornaments are in her custody

and that she has no objection to quash the impugned criminal

proceedings now pending against the four petitioners, who are

accused Nos.1 to 4 in Crime No.370/2014 of Manjeshwar Police

Station. It is further prayed by her that the said criminal proceedings

against the four petitioners herein may be quashed in the interest of

justice. It is in the background of these facts and circumstances that

the petitioners have chosen to file this Crl.M.C. under Section 482

Cr.P.C. to quash Annexure-A1 FIR and all further proceedings in

Crl.M.C.5608/14                   - : 3 :-

Crime No.370/2014 of Manjeshwar Police Station.

      2.     The Crl.M.C. has been admitted and Smt.K.S.Santhi has

taken notice for the 1st respondent and the learned Public

Prosecutor has taken notice for the 2nd respondent-State of Kerala.

      3.     Heard Sri.Jiji.S. the learned counsel appearing for the

petitioners, Smt.K.S.Santhi, learned counsel appearing for R1 and

the learned Public Prosecutor appearing for the 2nd respondent-

State.

      4.     The learned counsel for the petitioners has submitted

that   during   the  pendency      of     the aforementioned  criminal

proceedings, the matter has been settled amicably between the

parties, which has resulted in the subject matter of the

aforementioned crime/case and that the continuation of the

proceedings in the above case/crime will cause miscarriage of

justice to both parties as the real disputants to the case have arrived

at an amicable settlement and any further continuation of the

criminal proceedings will amount to sheer wastage of time and

money and would unnecessarily strain the judicial, administrative

and financial resources of the State.

      5.     Smt.D.N.Nishani, the learned counsel appearing for the

Crl.M.C.5608/14                   - : 4 :-

1st respondent has submitted on the basis of the specific

instructions furnished by the 1st respondent that the 1st respondent

has amicably settled the disputes with the petitioners and that she

has no objection in the quashment of the impugned criminal

proceedings and that the complainant/victim/injured does not

intend to proceed any further against the petitioners as she has no

grievance    against   them and       that she will not raise any

dispute/compliant in future if the prayer for quashing the impugned

criminal proceedings is allowed.

      6.     The learned Public Prosecutor also was heard, who also

has not raised any serious objections and submitted that that court

may consider the prayer in this case in the light of the law well

settled by the Apex Court in that regard.

      7.     After having carefully considered the submissions of the

parties and after having perused the pleadings as well as the

documents and materials placed in this matter, it can be seen that

the offences alleged are more or less personal in nature and not

much element of public interest is involved. The crucial aspect of

the matter is that though such offences are involved, the real

disputants to the controversy which has led to the impugned

Crl.M.C.5608/14                           - : 5 :-

criminal proceedings, have actually arrived at an amicable

settlement of the matter. From the submissions made by the

learned counsel for the 1strespondent, it is clear to the court that the

injured/victim/defacto complainant has no further grievance against

the petitioners/accused in the light of the settlement arrived at by

them. In this connection, it is relevant to note the decision of the

Apex Court in the case between Gian Singh v. State of Punjab

reported in 2013 (1) SCC (Cri) 160, para 61 = (2012) 10 SCC 303 =

2012(4) KLT 108(SC), wherein the Supreme Court has held as

follows in para 61 thereof [ See SCC (Cri)]:

                    "61. The position that emerges from the above
           discussion can be summarised thus: the power of the
           High Court in quashing a criminal proceeding or FIR or
           complaint in exercise of its inherent jurisdiction is
           distinct and different from the power given to a criminal
           court forInherent
                       compounding the offences under S.320 of the
           Code.
           statutory limitationpoweritishas to be exercised in accord
                                            of wide plenitude with no
                                   but
           with the guideline engrafted in such power viz;(i) to
           secure the ends of justice or (ii) to prevent abuse of the
           process of any Court. In what cases power to quash the
           criminal proceeding or complaint or F.I.R. may be
           exercised wherewouldoffender andonvictim have settled
                                 the
           their
           circumstances of each case and no category canand
                     dispute            depend         the  facts
                                                                    be
           prescribed..

It is further held as follows:-

           "......... But the criminal cases having overwhelmingly and
           pre-dominatingly civil flavour stand on different footing
           for the purposes of quashing, particularly the offences
           arising from commercial, financial, mercantile, civil,

Crl.M.C.5608/14                       - : 6 :-

          partnership or such like transactions or the offences
          arising out of matrimony relating to dowry etc. or the
          family disputes where the wrong is basically private or
          personal in nature and the parties have resolved their
          entire dispute. In this category of cases, High Court may
          quash criminal proceedings if in its view, because of the
          compromise between the offender and victim, the
          possibility of conviction is remote and bleak and
          continuation of criminal case would put accused to great
          oppression and prejudice and extreme injustice would
          be caused to him by not quashing the criminal case
          despite full and complete settlement and compromise
          with the victim........"

Further, in the case Jitendra Raghuvanshi and Others v. Babita

Raghuvanshi and another reported in (2013) 4 SCC 58 [see 2013

(1) KLD 817 (SC)], the Apex Court has held as follows:-

                 "8. It is not in dispute that matrimonial disputes
          have been on considerable increase in recent times
          resulting in filing of complaints under Sections 498A
          and 406 of I.P.C. not only against the husband but also
          against the relatives of the husband. The question is
          when such matters are resolved either by the wife
          agreeing to rejoin the matrimonial home or by mutual
          settlement of other pending disputes for which both the
          sides approached the High Court and jointly prayed for
          quashing of the criminal proceedings or the FIR or
          complaint by the wife under Sections 498A and 406 of
          I.P.C., whether the prayer can be declined on the sole
          ground that since the offences are non-compoundable
          under
          impermissible for320complaint.toCode,
                  Section          ofcourt
                                        the               would   be
          proceedings or FIR orthe              quashitthe criminal


                 9. It is not in dispute that in the case on hand
          subsequent to the filing of the criminal complaint under
          Sections 498A and 406 of IPC and Sections 3 and 4 of
          the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961, with the help and
          intervention of family members, friends and well-
          wishers,differences
                    the parties concerned have amicably settled
          their
          settlement.
          said compromise beforethereto,
                        Pursuantandthe executedappellants
                                                   a   compromise/
                                        Trialthe            filed the
                                              Court with a request to

Crl.M.C.5608/14                       - : 7 :-

          place the same on record and to drop the criminal
          proceedings against the appellants herein. It is also not
          in dispute that in additional to the mutual settlement
          arrived at by the parties, respondent/-wife has also filed
          an affidavit stating that she did not wish to pursue the
          criminal proceedings against the appellants and fully
          supported the contents of the settlement deed. It is the
          grievance of the appellants that no only the Trial Court
          rejected such prayer of the parties but also the High
          Court failed toe exercise its jurisdiction under Section
          482 of the Code only on the ground that the criminal
          proceedings relate to the offences punishable under
          Sections 498A and 406 of IPC which are non-
          compoundable in nature.

                 15. In our view, it is the duty of the Courts to
          encourage genuine settlements of matrimonial disputes,
          particularly, when the same are on considerable
          increase. Even if the offences are non-compoundable, if
          they relate to matrimonial disputes and the Court is
          satisfied that the parties have settled the same amicably
          and without any pressure, we hold that for the purpose
          of securing ends of justice, Section 320 of the Code
          would not be a bar to the exercisesubsequent quashing
                                                of power of
          of   FIR,   complaint    or   the                  criminal
          proceedings.

                 16. There has been an outburst of matrimonial
          disputes in recent times.
          occupies an important placeThe it has an important role
                                              institution of marriage
                                         and
          to play in the society. Therefore, every effort should be
          made in the interest of the individuals in order to enable
          them to settle down in life and live peacefully. If the
          parties ponder over their defaults and terminate their
          disputes amicably by mutual agreement instead of
          fighting it out in a Court of law, in order to do complete
          justice in the matrimonial matters, the Courts should be
          less hesitant in exercising its extraordinary jurisdiction.
          It is trite to state that the power under Section 482
          should be exercised sparingly and with circumspection
          only when the Court is convinced, on the basis of
          material on record, that allowing the proceedings to
          continue would be an abuse of the process of the Court
          or that the ends of justice require that the proceedings
          ought to be quashed."

      8.     Considering the facts and circumstances of this case, it

Crl.M.C.5608/14                   - : 8 :-

is seen further that the impugned criminal proceedings have arisen

consequent to the matrimonial disputes between the disputants and

the disputes have been settled amicably between the parties.

Accordingly, this Court is inclined to hold that in the light of the

facts and circumstances involved in the present case and

particularly in view of the settlement arrived at between the parties,

the principles laid down in the aforementioned decisions of the

Apex Court will be squarely applicable in the present case.

Moreover, since the real disputants to the controversy have

amicably settled the disputes, which led to these impugned criminal

proceedings, it is also the duty of the court to promote such

settlement, instead of compelling the parties to go on with the

dispute. It is also pertinent to note that since the matter is settled

out of court, in the event of proceeding with the trial, there may not

be any fruitful prosecution and the chances of conviction of the

accused is rather negligible and therefore, the net result of

continuance of criminal proceedings would be sheer waste of

judicial time rather meaningless and therefore would amount to

abuse of the process of court proceedings in the larger sense.

Hence following decisions of the Apex Court cited supra, this Court

Crl.M.C.5608/14                   - : 9 :-

is inclined to hold that the Crl.M.C. can be allowed by granting the

prayers sought for.

      9.     In the result, the Crl.M.C. is allowed and the impugned

Annexure AI final report/charge sheet and all further proceedings

pending against the petitioners in Crime No.370/2014 of

Manjeshwar Police Station stand quashed.         The petitioners shall

produce certified copies of this order before the court below

concerned, as well as before the Station House Officer, Manjeshwar

Police Station.


                                                      Sd/-
sdk+                                      ALEXANDER THOMAS, JUDGE

          ///True copy///



                              P.S. to Judge



