
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                      PRESENT:

                             THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE P.D.RAJAN

                  MONDAY,THE 16TH DAY OF JUNE 2014/26TH JYAISHTA, 1936

                                            Crl.MC.No. 3104 of 2009
                                          ---------------------------------------

     C.C.NO. 465 OF 2007 OF CHIEF JUDICIAL MAGISTRATE COURT - III ,KOTTAYAM
                                                    ------------------

PETITIONER / ACCUSED :
--------------------------------------

            SASI KUMAR K.,
            M.I.G. 47, SURABHI NAGAR,
            KAKKANAD, KOCHI-30.

            BY SRI.K.RAMAKUMAR (SENIOR ADVOCATE)
                 ADVS.SRI.M.MANOJKUMAR (CHELAKKADAN)
                          SMT.ASHA BABU
                          SMT.AMMU CHARLES
                          SRI.S.M.PRASANTH

RESPONDENTS / STATE & COMPLAINANT :
---------------------------------------------------------------

        1. STATE OF KERALA,
            REPRESENTED BY THE PUBLIC PROSECUTOR,
            HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM.

        2. THE SUB INSPECTOR OF POLICE,
            KOTTAYAM WEST POLICE STATION, KOTTAYAM.

        3. THE ASSISTANT GENERAL MANAGER,
            REPRESENTING STATE BANK OF TRAVANCORE, MAIN BRANCH,
            KOTTAYAM.

            R1 & R2 BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SMT.BINDU GOPINATH
            R3 BY ADVS. SRI.SATHISH NINAN
                                SRI.SANTHOSH MATHEW

            THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD
           ON 16-06-2014, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE FOLLOWING:




Msd.

Crl.MC.No. 3104 of 2009

                                  APPENDIX


PETITIONER(S)' ANNEXURES:


ANNEXURE A :         A TRUE CERTIFIED COPY OF THE STATEMENT SUBMITTED BY
                     THE COMPLAINANT BEFORE THE LOWER COURT.

ANNEXURE B :         A TRUE COPY OF THE JUDGMENT DATED 19.06.2009 IN
                     CRL.M.C.NO.71/09 OF THIS HON'BLE COURT.

ANNEXURE C :         TRUE CERTIFIED COPY OF CHARGE SHEET.


RESPONDENT(S)' ANNEXURES:

                                 NIL

                                               //TRUE COPY//


                                               P.A.TO JUDGE.


Msd.


                         P.D. RAJAN, J.
               - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                   Crl.M.C.No.3104 of 2009
               - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
            Dated this the 16th day of June, 2014

                              O R D E R

     This petition is filed under Section 482 of the Code of

Criminal Procedure to quash Annexure C Final Report in

C.C. No.465/2007 before the Judicial First Class Magistrate

Court III, Kottayam under Sections 408, 420, 477(A) of the

Indian Penal Code by invoking inherent jurisdiction.

     2.   The petitioner, who is the accused in the above

case, which was charge sheeted by the Kottayam West

Police Station in crime No.169/2003, contended that the

third respondent is not interested in prosecuting the matter

and if trial is proceeded, it will lead to manifest injustice

and prejudice to him. The learned counsel for the petitioner

submits that in similar circumstances, a complaint filed by a

Co-operative Society had been quashed by this Court

invoking inherent jurisdiction. Hence he prays to quash

Annexure C.

     3.   The third respondent is the complainant in the

above case, who gave Annexure A statement to the Sub

Crl.M.C.No.3104 of 2009
                              2

Inspector of Police, Kottayam West Police Station, on the

basis of that crime No.169/2003 was registered. The third

respondent alleged that while he was working as Assistant

General Manager, Kottayam Main Branch, the former

manager K. Sasi Kumar had committed misappropriation of

the accounts for which, he was suspended from service in

the year 2003 and subsequently removed from service in

the year 2004. On 17.4.2003 he swindled Rs.7,36,760/- from

the customers account. After investigation the police filed

Annexure C Final Report.

      4.    The learned counsel appearing for the petitioner

contended that the petitioner and the third respondent have

settled the matter mutually and the petitioner had repaid

the entire amount and if the case is tried in a Court of law,

it will be mere abuse of the process of the Court. He

produced Annexure B order in Crl.M.C.71/2009 and prays

to invoke the inherent jurisdiction of this Court.

      5.    The learned counsel for the third respondent

strongly resisted the above contention and contended that

though the amount due was remitted by the petitioner, the

Crl.M.C.No.3104 of 2009
                                  3

third respondent, which is a banking institution dealing with

public money, is not in a position to concede to the

arguments advanced by the petitioner. The offence, which

was committed by a senior manger working in that capacity,

in a bank, cannot be quashed simply on the basis of

repayment. The third respondent relies on the decision of

the Apex Court in Central Bureau of Investigation v.

Jagjit Singh [(2013) 10 SCC 686].

      6.    The petitioner is the sole accused in crime

No.169/2003 of Kottayam West Police Station, which was

registered under Sections 408, 420 and 477(A) of IPC. The

above case was registered on the basis of the information

given by the third respondent, that the petitioner

misappropriated        Rs.7,36,760/-    from     the    customers'

accounts. The petitioner admitted that he repaid the entire

amount and nothing survives. But the third respondent is

not satisfied with those repayments alone. The Apex Court

in CBI's case referred to (supra) held as follows:

            "In the present case, the specific allegation made
      against the respondent-accused is that he obtained the
      loan on the basis of forged document with the aid of
      officers of Indian Overseas Bank (IOB). On investigation,
      having found the ingredients of cheating and dishonestly

Crl.M.C.No.3104 of 2009
                                    4

      inducing delivery of property of IOB (Section 420 IPC) and
      dishonestly using as genuine a forged document (Section
      471 IPC) charge-sheet was submitted under Sections
      420/471 IPC against the accused persons. The debt which
      was due to IOB was recovered by the Bank pursuant to an
      order passed by the Debts Recovery Tribunal. Therefore,
      it cannot be said that there is a compromise between the
      offender and the victim. The offences when committed in
      relation with banking activities including offences under
      Sections 420/471 IPC have a harmful effect on the public
      and threaten the well-being of the society. These offences
      fall under the category of offences involving moral
      turpitude committed by public servants while working in
      that capacity. Prima facie, one may state that the bank is
      the victim in such cases but, in fact, society in general,
      including customers of the bank are the sufferers."

The learned counsel for the petitioner relied on another

decision of the Apex Court in Gian Singh v. State of

Punjab [(2012) 10 SCC 303] and submitted that in cases

where offences are not compoundable, this Court can

exercise the power under Section 482 of Cr.P.C. In

paragraph 61 it was held as follows:

            "61. The position that emerges from the above
      discussion can be summarised thus: the power of the High
      Court in quashing a criminal proceeding or FIR or
      complaint in exercise of its inherent jurisdiction is distinct
      and different from the power given to a criminal court for
      compounding the offences under Section 320 of the Code.
      Inherent power is of wide plenitude with no statutory
      limitation but it has to be exercised in accord with the
      guideline engrafted in such power viz (i) to secure the
      ends of justice, or (ii) to prevent abuse of the process of
      any court.     In what cases power to quash the criminal
      proceeding or complaint or FIR may be exercised where
      the offender and the victim have settled their dispute
      would depend on the facts and circumstances of each case
      and no category can be prescribed.         However, before
      exercise of such power, the High Court must have due

Crl.M.C.No.3104 of 2009
                                    5

      regard to the nature and gravity of the crime. Heinous
      and serious offences of mental depravity or offences like
      murder, rape, dacoity, etc. cannot be fittingly quashed
      even though the victim or victim's family and the offender
      have settled the dispute. Such offences are not private in
      nature and have a serious impact on society. Similarly,
      any compromise between the victim and the offender in
      relation to the offences under special statutes like the
      Prevention of Corruption Act or the offences committed by
      public servants while working in that capacity etc. cannot
      provide for any basis for quashing criminal proceedings
      involving such offences. But the criminal cases having
      overwhelmingly and predominatingly civil flavour stand on
      a     different footing for the purposes of quashing,
      particularly    the offences    arising   from  commercial,
      financial, mercantile, civil, partnership or such like
      transactions or the offences arising out of matrimony
      relating to dowry, etc. or the family disputes where the
      wrong is basically private or personal in nature and the
      parties have resolved their entire dispute. In this category
      of cases, the High Court may quash the criminal
      proceedings if in its view, because of the compromise
      between the offender and the victim, the possibility of
      conviction is remote and bleak and continuation of the
      criminal case would put the accused to great oppression
      and prejudice and extreme injustice would be caused to
      him by not quashing the criminal case despite full and
      complete settlement and compromise with the victim. In
      other words, the High Court must consider whether it
      would be unfair or contrary to the interest of justice to
      continue with the criminal proceeding or continuation of
      the Criminal proceeding would tantamount to abuse of
      process of law despite settlement and compromise
      between the victim and the wrongdoer and whether to
      secure the ends of justice,      it is appropriate that the
      criminal case is put to an end and if the answer to the
      above question(s) is in the affirmative, the High Court shall
      be well within its jurisdiction to quash the criminal
      proceeding"

In the above decision it is observed that any compromise

between victim and offender in relation to offences under

special statute like Prevention of Corruption Act or the

Crl.M.C.No.3104 of 2009
                              6

offences committed by public servants while working in that

capacity cannot be quashed.

      7.    The third respondent is a public institution which

is functioning as per the direction of the Reserve Bank of

India. The specific allegation made against the petitioner is

that he swindled huge amounts from the customers'

accounts by forging documents. On investigation it was

found that there are ingredients of cheating and forging of

documents and a charge sheet was submitted under

Sections 408, 420, 477(A) of IPC. The debt due to the bank

was already recovered. Since it is a public money petitioner

cannot contend that the third respondent who is working as

a public officer in that capacity compromised the criminal

case between the offender and the victim. Accepting the

legal principle it is not possible to accept the contention

advanced by the learned counsel appearing for the

petitioner. In Crl.M.C.No.71/2009 a learned single Judge of

this Court quashed the proceedings in C.C. No.807/2005 on

the ground that the director board of the Co-operative

Society had withdrawn the criminal prosecution. That

Crl.M.C.No.3104 of 2009
                               7

parameter cannot be adopted in this case when the third

respondent is strongly opposing the alleged compromise.

Therefore, I am of the opinion that there is no merit in the

above contention.

       Inherent jurisdiction under Section 482 Cr.P.C. can be

invoked only to make such orders as may be necessary, to

give effect to any order under this Code or to prevent the

abuse of the process of the Court or otherwise to secure the

ends of justice. In the present case, the ground alleged

does not amount to abuse of the process of the court. It is

the third respondent, who has to decide whether such a

case has to be proceeded or not. Prima facie the Bank is the

victim but the society in general and the other customers of

the bank in particular are the sufferers. Therefore, I am of

the opinion that there is no merit in this petition and it is

dismissed accordingly.

                                                      Sd/-
                                     K. ABRAHAM MATHEW
                                            JUDGE


                                             //True copy//

                                             P.A. TO JUDGE
shg/



