
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                             PRESENT:

                    THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE P.BHAVADASAN

         MONDAY, THE 6TH DAY OF JANUARY 2014/16TH POUSHA, 1935

                                  CRL.A.No. 1081 of 2005 ( )
                                   -----------------------------------


     AGAINST THE JUDGMENT IN SC 157/2000 of ADDL. SESSIONS COURT
                        (ADHOC)-1, KALPETTA DATED 17-06-2005


APPELLANT(S)/ACCUSED::
-----------------------------------

          BHASKARAN, AGED 34 YEARS,
          S/O. SEKHARAN, PALLAVAYAL HOUSE, AMBALAVAYAL,
          WYANAD.

          BY ADVS.SRI.P.VIJAYA BHANU
                         SRI.P.M.RAFIQ

RESPONDENT/RESPONDENT::
----------------------------------------

          STATE OF KERALA,
          REPRESENTED BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR,
          HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM.

        BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SRI. DHANESH MATHEW MANJOORAN


          THIS CRIMINAL APPEAL HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD ON
06-01-2014, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY DELIVERED THE FOLLOWING:




DSV/22/01


                        P.BHAVADASAN, J
               -----------------------------------------
                       Crl.A.No. 1081 of 2005
              ---------------------------------------------------
                Dated this the 6th day of January, 2014

                             J U D G M E N T

      The accused was prosecuted for the offences punishable

under Sections 498 A and 304 B of the Indian Penal Code. After

trial, he was found guilty of the offence punishable under

Section 498 A of the Indian Penal Code.                   He was therefore

convicted and sentenced to suffer 3 years simple imprisonment

and to pay fine of `15,000/- with a default clause. Set off as

per law was allowed.

            2.   The marriage between the victim and the

accused was solemnized on 25.05.1997. For nearly one and a

half years the couple resided in the matrimonial house. It is

seen from the records that by that time, the victim obtained a

job in a press nearby to her house and the couple along with

their child shifted their residence to the house of the victim. As

per the available materials, it would appear that an STD booth

was owned by the victim. The evidence would suggest that the

STD booth was to be manned by the accused after their return

to her house.      There is controversy regarding whether the

booth was actually entrusted to the accused or not. There is

allegation against the accused that the booth was entrusted to

him but due to his wayward life, it ran into loss and that was

Crl.A.No. 1081 of 2005           2

taken over by the brother of the victim namely PW4.          The

accused on the other hand would say that he was only

promised the booth but he was never put in possession of the

same. What ever that be, on 11.09.1999 the victim committed

suicide by hanging in the matrimonial house.

            3.    The brother of the accused laid the First

Information Statement which is marked as Exhibit P2. Exhibit

P2 was recorded by PW15 who registered the crime for

unnatural death as per Exhibit P2(a) First Information Report.

The investigation was taken over by PW16. He had the inquest

conducted through the Thahazildar, who furnished Exhibit P3

report. The body was sent for autopsy and PW14 conducted the

autopsy and furnished Exhibit P4 report. PW16 filed a report,

namely, Exhibit P5, seeking to have Section 498 A incorporated

in the First Information Report. He also filed a report as Exhibit

P6 to array the appellant as accused. Subsequent investigation

was taken over by PW18. He had the scene mahazar prepared.

Further investigation was conducted by PW20, who recorded

the statements of witnesses, completed the investigation and

laid charge before the court.

            4. The court before which the Final Report was laid,

took cognizance of the offence. Finding that the offences are

Crl.A.No. 1081 of 2005           3

exclusively triable by a court of Sessions, committed the case

to the Sessions Court, Wayanad under Section 209 of the

Cr.P.C.   The said court made over the case to Additional

Sessions Court (Adhoc-1), Kalpetta for trial and disposal. The

latter court on receipt of records and on appearance of the

accused, framed charges for the offences punishable under

Sections 498 A and 304 B of the Indian Penal Code. To the

charge, the accused pleaded not guilty and claimed to be tried.

The prosecution therefore had PW1 to PW20 examined and

Exhibits P1 to P9 marked. MOs 1 to 8 were got identified and

marked.    After the close of the prosecution evidence, the

accused was questioned under Section 313 of the Cr.P.C. He

denied all the incriminating circumstances brought out in

evidence against him and maintained that he is innocent.      He

filed a statement pointing out that he has not committed any

act which would constitute the offence.       Finding that the

accused could not be acquitted under Section 232 of the Cr.P.C,

he was asked to enter on his defence. He chose to adduce no

evidence.

      5. The court below presumably guided by the evidence of

PWs 1, 2, 3 and 4 and also the entries in Exhibit P1 diary, came

to the conclusion that even though the offence under Section

Crl.A.No. 1081 of 2005            4

304 B had not been made out, there are materials to show that

the offence under Section 498 A is attracted. The conviction

and the sentence as already mentioned followed.

           6. The learned counsel appearing for the appellant

assailed the conviction and sentence for the offence under

Section 498 A on several grounds. The learned counsel went

on to point out that the statement made by PWs 1 to 4

regarding the so called ill-treatment meted out by the accused

appears for the first time at the time of evidence and it did not

find a place in their previous statements. The learned counsel

went on to point out that it is significant to notice that almost

one year prior to the date of incident, the couple had been

residing with parents of the victim at her parental house and if

as a matter of fact the treatment of the victim was so brutal

and severe by the accused, it is inconceivable that the

members of the family of the victim would have kept silent. Of

course, the learned counsel pointed out that the victim might

have tolerated the ill-treatment or cruel act of the accused. But

according to the learned counsel, at any rate, the parents

would have done something to prevent the cruelty towards

their daughter. The evidence of PW2, the mother of the victim,

according to the learned counsel appearing for the appellant

Crl.A.No. 1081 of 2005            5

would show that the booth was never entrusted to the accused.

There is nothing to show, according to the learned counsel, that

the accused had mismanaged the booth and thereafter, PW4

had taken over the same. This statement made by PWs 1, 3

and 4 appear for the first time at the time of evidence. The

learned counsel went on to point out that the entries in Exhibit

P1 diary on which considerable reliance is pleaded by the

learned Trial Judge cannot support the finding.        It is not a

regularly kept diary by the victim and the evidence shows that

several people had written in the diary. Further it is pointed

out that there is no acceptable and convincing evidence to

show that 2 or 3 writings on which reliance is placed by the

court below is in the hand writing of the victim except for the

testimony of PW1. It is not as if that the diary could be relied

on and a conclusion could be drawn.          Even going by the

prosecution evidence, it contains the writings by several

persons and it is in this context the identity of the hand writing

has to be viewed.       The learned counsel for the appellant

pointed out that even assuming that the contents of the diary

are acceptable, there are only two instances; one is of the

snatching of the thali of the victim and the second is of having

assaulted her. These two incidents took place long before the

Crl.A.No. 1081 of 2005           6

commission of suicide by the victim. The learned counsel for

the appellant also pointed out that even though PWs 1 to 4

would say that the victim was physically assaulted by the

accused, they were unable to give any specific incident or

specific date or time and all of them say that the assaults had

taken place. All the 4 of them would say that they had actually

seen the incident of beating by the accused but they are not

able to give the details. Accordingly, the learned counsel for

the appellant pointed out that there is want of evidence to

come to the conclusion that Section 498 A is attracted.

      7. The learned Public Prosecutor on the other hand

pointed out that the evidence of PWs 1 and 4 are sufficient to

show that the accused used to ill-treat the victim and the

entries in Exhibit P1 corroborate the same. The entries in the

diary relating to the act committed by the accused are stated

to be in the hand writing of the victim herself as spoken to by

PW 1 and PW2. There is no serious challenge to the version

given by them. If those entries are accepted, it follows that the

accused was harsh to the victim.      At any rate, the learned

Public Prosecutor pointed out that the court below having

chosen to accept the evidence with regard to the offence under

Section 498 A, there is no reason as to why this Court should

Crl.A.No. 1081 of 2005           7

interfere at this stage.

      8. It must be remembered that it is not a stray incident of

cruelty that would come within the ambit of Section 498 A of

the IPC. It contemplates a situation that there is continuous

harassment and ill-treatment of the victim.    True, it need not

be in relation to the demand for dowry. But usual matrimonial

disputes, quarrel, squabbles do not fall within the ambit of the

said provision.

      9. The fact that the victim and the accused had taken up

residence in the house of the victim one year prior to the date

of incident is not in dispute. PWs 1, 2 , 3 and 4 speak about

their residence in the house of PW1, who is the father of the

victim.   Even though all these witnesses do say that the

accused used to physically assault the victim, they were unable

to give any details. All of them say that they had seen the

accused assaulting the victim. But as the learned counsel for

the appellant stated that they had not taken any steps to

prevent the said act committed by the accused, one must

remember that the couple were residing with PWs 1 to 4. If as

a matter of fact the accused was ill-treating the victim and the

victim was suffering from such acts of the accused, normally

the members of the family would have intervened. Further, as

Crl.A.No. 1081 of 2005             8

rightly noticed by the learned counsel for the appellant, no

specific instance or incident is spoken to in evidence.

            10. It is also significant to notice that the statement

made by these witnesses in the chief examination relating to

the ill-treatment are absent in the previous statement as it

would be evidenced by the answers in the cross-examination.

That means the statements given by these witnesses regarding

the ill-treatment appears for the first time at the time of

evidence. As rightly pointed out by the learned counsel for the

appellant, it can be treated only as a development or an

embellishment.

            11. Coming to the entries in Exhibit P1 diary, there

seems to be some substance in the contention by the learned

counsel for the appellant that the authenticity of the hand

writing is not established. It is not a regularly kept diary and

the entries are not in the chronological order. Further, the

evidence also discloses that several people had written in the

said diary and it was not a diary exclusively kept by the victim.

One has to remember the fact that PWs 1 to 4 had stated about

some other entries, with regard to the sufferings in life, in the

hand writing of the victim. But at the same time there are also

entries in Exhibit P1 which would show that the couple were

Crl.A.No. 1081 of 2005           9

affectionate to each other. The diary makes mention of an

incident in which the accused snatched the gold thali chain of

the victim and also about the physical assault. But these two

are long before the date of incident. There is nothing in Exhibit

P1 to show that the victim was being continuously physically

assaulted by the accused. Of course, it would reveal that the

life was miserable. The records will indicate that the accused

had no job and there is some force in the submissions made by

the learned counsel for the appellant that the accused was

promised the STD booth owned by the victim had not been

handed over to the accused.

           12. As already noticed, there is controversy

regarding the actual handing over of the STD booth owned by

the victim. While PWs 1, 3 and 4 would say that the accused

had run the booth, PW2, the mother, would say that it was

never entrusted to him. Whatever that be, currently the booth

is being run by PW4. The defence has a case that it was in

order to prevent the booth being run by the accused that a

false story was put up.

           13. In the light of the fact that the diary contained

the writings of several persons, it was necessary to show that

the writings which are relevant for the purpose of this case are

Crl.A.No. 1081 of 2005            10

in the hand writing of the victim. The evidence of PWs 1 and 2

may not be sufficient in this regard. There are also entries

which go in favour of the accused. In short, it could not be said

that the entries in Exhibit P1 diary inspires confidence in the

mind of the court.

           14. In the above circumstances, this Court is unable

to accept the findings of the court below that the evidence is

sufficient to come to a conclusion that the offence under

Section 498 A of the IPC is made out.

           The appeal is allowed and the conviction and

sentence passed by the court below under Section 498 A of the

Indian Penal Code against the accused are set aside and he is

acquitted of the said charges.         His bail bond shall stand

cancelled and he is set at liberty.      If he has paid the fine

amount, the same shall be refunded to him.



                                               Sd/-
                                        P.BHAVADASAN,
                                              Judge
                            // True Copy //


                            P.A. To Judge
DSV/15/01



