
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                            PRESENT:

             THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE V.K.MOHANAN

     MONDAY, THE 29TH DAY OF SEPTEMBER 2014/7TH ASWINA, 1936

                   Crl.MC.No. 4954 of 2014 ()
                   ---------------------------
     CRIME NO. 1013/2014 OF PAYYANNUR POLICE STATION, KANNUR
                         ---------------

PETITIONER(S)/ACCUSED :-
------------------------

       SONU ABRAHAM AGED 24 YEARS
       S/O.ABRAHAM, MATTATHIL, ETTUPARA
       PAYYAVOOR, NELLIKUTTY, KANNUR.

       BY ADV. SRI.M.V.AMARESAN

RESPONDENT(S)/COMPLAINANT :-
------------------------------

    1. STATE OF KERALA
       REPRESENTED BY THE PUBLIC PROSECUTOR
       HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM- 682 031.

    2. M.K. SHAJI DAS,, AGED 45 YEARS
       S/O. KUTTAPPAN, THEKKEDATH HOUSE, SIRAJ QUARTERS
       KANDOTH, VELLUR AMSOM, PIN - 670 307.

       R2 BY ADV. SRI.PHILJO VARUGHESE PHILIPS
       R1 BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SMT.R.REMA


       THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE  HAVING COME UP FOR ADMISSION ON
29-09-2014, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE FOLLOWING:




jvt

CRL.M.C.No.4954 OF 2014


                           APPENDIX


Petitioner's Exhibits           :-


Annexure 1      :-     True  copy     of F.I.R bearing  Crime
No.1013/2014 of Payyannur Police Station.

Annexure 2      :-  True copy of an affidavit dated 26.8.2014
sworn by the 2nd respondent.



Respondent's Exhibits     :-    NIL.



                         //True Copy//


                           P.A.to Judge


                     V.K.MOHANAN, J.
                    ---------------------------
                 Crl.M.C.No.4954 of 2014
              ----------------------------------------
      Dated this the 29th day of September, 2014


                           O R D E R


        The above petition is filed under Section 482 of the

Criminal Procedure Code (for short 'Cr.P.C.') at the

instance of the petitioner, who is the accused in Crime

No.1013 of 2014 of          Payyannur Police Station for the

offence punishable under Section 57 of the Kerala Police

Act with a prayer to quash all further proceedings against

the petitioner in the above crime, as the matter is settled

out of court.

        2.   The allegation in the above case is that, the 2nd

respondent's daughter, Shijitha was found missing from

9.8.2014, when all inmates in the house were not at home.

Later, police traced out and produced Shijitha before the

Crl.M.C.No.4954 of 2014

                            -: 2 :-

learned Magistrate. Finding that she had left her house on

her own will, the learned Magistrate was pleased to set

Shijitha at liberty and she went along with her father. On

tracing her out, she had given a statement to the police,

wherein she stated that she was in love with the petitioner

herein and they had decided to get married when she

attained the age of majority and that the petitioner is

innocent. Now, the case of the petitioner is that the matter

is settled out of court.

        3. Heard the learned counsel for the petitioner as

well as the 2nd respondent. I have also heard the learned

Public Prosecutor.

        4. The learned counsel for the petitioner submitted

that during the pendency of the above case, the matter is

settled amicably between the parties out of court and

therefore, the continuation of the proceedings in the above

crime is an abuse of process of law and proceedings.

Crl.M.C.No.4954 of 2014

                             -: 3 :-

        5. The learned counsel for the 2nd respondent, who

on the basis of specific instruction received       from the

respondent, submitted that the above respondent, who is

the father of the victim does not intend to proceed any

further against the petitioner and he has no grievance

against him.

        6.      I   have  carefully  considered   the   above

submissions of the respective counsel. I have verified the

documents and materials produced along with the above

petition. In the given facts and circumstances of the case

and especially in the light of the settlement arrived at

between the parties to the dispute, the learned Public

Prosecutor has also no objection in allowing the above

petition.

        7. Having regard to the facts and circumstances

involved in the case, it can be seen that the offence involved

in the above case is only under Section 57 of the Kerala

Crl.M.C.No.4954 of 2014

                                  -: 4 :-

Police Act. It is pertinent to note that though such offence

is involved, the real parties to the dispute approached this

Court after having amicably settled the matter. From the

submission made by the counsel for the 2nd respondent, it

appears to me that the the victim has no further grievance

against the petitioner in the light of the settlement arrived

by them. In this juncture, it is relevant to note the decision

of the Honourable Apex Court reported in Gian Singh v.

State of Punjab [2012(4) KLT 108(SC)], in which case, the

Supreme Court has held as follows:-




               "57. The position that emerges from the above
        discussion can be summarised thus: the power of the
        High Court in quashing a criminal proceeding or FIR
        or complaint in exercise of its inherent jurisdiction is
        distinct and different from the power given to a
        criminal court for compounding the offences under
        S.320 of the Code. Inherent power is of wide plenitude
        with no statutory limitation but it has to be exercised
        in accord with the guideline engrafted in such power
        viz;(i) to secure the ends of justice or (ii) to prevent
        abuse of the process of any Court.      In what cases
        power to quash the criminal proceeding or complaint
        or F.I.R. may be exercised where the offender and
        victim have settled their dispute would depend on the

Crl.M.C.No.4954 of 2014

                                     -: 5 :-

         facts and circumstances of each case and no category
         can be prescribed..


It is further held as follows:-

         "......... But the criminal cases having overwhelmingly
         and pre-dominatingly civil flavour stand on different
         footing for the purposes of quashing, particularly the
         offences          arising        from       commercial,
         financial,mercandile, civil, partnership or such like
         transactions or the offences arising out of matrimony
         relating to dowry etc. or the family disputes where the
         wrong is basically private or personal in nature and
         the parties have resolved their entire dispute. In this
         category of cases, High Court may quash criminal
         proceedings if in its view, because of the compromise
         between the offender and victim, the possibility of
         conviction is remote and bleak and continuation of
         criminal case would put accused to great oppression
         and prejudice and extreme injustice would be caused
         to him by not quashing the criminal case despite full
         and complete settlement and compromise with the
         victim........"


According to me, in the light of the facts and circumstances

involved in the present case and particularly in view of the

settlement arrived in the present case, the dictum laid in

the above decision is applicable in the present case. Thus, I

am of the view that as the parties to the dispute settled the

issues amicably, it is the duty of this Court to promote and

encourage such settlement, instead of compelling the

Crl.M.C.No.4954 of 2014

                             -: 6 :-

parties to go on with the dispute. It is pertinent to note that

since the matter is settled out of court, in the event of

proceeding with the trial, there would not have any fruitful

prosecution resulting the conviction of the accused, rather

the net result would be sheer waste of judicial time and

abuse of process of the court and proceedings.           Thus,

according to me, following the decisions cited supra, this

Criminal M.C. can be allowed granting the relief as sought

for.

        In the result, this Crl.M.C. is allowed, quashing

Annexure - 1 and all further proceedings pending against

the petitioner in Crime No.1013 of 2014 of Payyannur

Police Station and all further proceedings thereto.




                                              Sd/-
                                    V.K. MOHANAN, JUDGE.

jvt



