
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                             PRESENT:

                THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE P.BHAVADASAN

      TUESDAY, THE 7TH DAY OF JANUARY 2014/17TH POUSHA, 1935

                                    CRL.A.No. 320 of 2006
                                        --------------------------
    SC NO.16/2001 OF ADDL.SESSIONS COURT (ADHOC)-III, THALASSERY
                                            DATED 25-01-2006
                                                      ...

    APPELLANT(S)/ACCUSED.:
    ------------------------------------------

   1. JOSEKUTTY @ JOSE, S/O.MATHAI,
      KOTTIYOOR AMSOM, CHUNGAKKUNNU DESOM, KANNUR DISTRICT.

   2. THANKAMMA @ ANNAMMA, W/O.MATHAI,
      KOTTIYOOR AMSOM, CHUNGAKKUNNU DESOM, KANNUR DISTRICT.

   3. JANCY,W/O.JAMES, KOTTIYOOR AMSOM,
      CHUNGAKKUNNU DESOM, KANNUR DISTRICT.

      BY ADV. SRI.P.NARAYANAN

    RESPONDENT(S)/COMPLAINANT.:
    ------------------------------------------------------

      STATE OF KERALA, REP. BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR,
      HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM.

      BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SMT. P.MAYA




      THIS CRIMINAL APPEAL HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD
      ON 07-01-2014, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY DELIVERED
     THE FOLLOWING:

Kss



                     P.BHAVADASAN, J.
              ---------------------------------------
                 Crl. Appeal No.320 OF 2006
              ---------------------------------------
           Dated this the 7th day of January, 2014.


                        J U D G M E N T


     The accused, three in number, were prosecuted for the

offences punishable under Sections 498A, 304B, 306, 406 read

with Section 34 of Indian Penal Code. The 1st accused is the

husband of the deceased, 2nd accused is her mother-in-law and

3rd accused her sister-in-law.    While the appeal was pending

before this Court, the 2nd accused died on 20.03.2013 and

therefore the charge as against her stands abated.

     2. The marriage between the victim and the 1st accused

was solemnised on 24.08.1995.         The allegation is that the

accused persons used to ill-treat the victim demanding more

dowry and unable to bear the torture any more, she committed

suicide on 16.09.1996.     The father of the victim laid Ext.P1

complaint and he was no more by the time of trial. On the basis

of Ext.P1, crime was registered and investigation was taken over

Crl. Appeal No.320/2006          2


by PW15 at a later stage. In the meanwhile, inquest over the

body was conducted and Ext.P3 report was filed.              PW11

conducted postmortem and furnished Exts.P6 and P7 certificates.

Initially investigation was done by the Sub Inspector of Police

which was later taken over by Deputy Superintendent of Police as

already mentioned namely, PW15.            PW15 questioned the

witnesses, recorded their statements, verified the scene mahazar

already prepared and other records obtained by the other

investigating officers, completed the investigation and laid charge

before the court.

       3.      The court before which final report was laid took

cognizance of the offence and on finding that the offences are

exclusively triable by a Court of Sessions, the case was

committed to Sessions Court, Thalassery. The said court made

over the case to Additional Sessions Court (Adhoc-III),

Thalassery for trial and disposal. The latter court, on receipt of

records and on appearance of the accused, framed charges for

the offences punishable under Sections 498A, 304B, 306, 406

Crl. Appeal No.320/2006           3


read with Section 34 IPC. To the charge, accused pleaded not

guilty and claimed to be tried. The prosecution therefore had

PWs 1 to 18 examined and Exts.P1 to P21 marked. M.O.s 1 to 11

were got identified and marked.

       4. After the close of the prosecution evidence, the accused

were questioned under Section 313 Cr.P.C. They denied all the

incriminating circumstances brought out in evidence against them

and maintained that they were innocent. The 1st accused stated

that they had not harassed his wife. According to him, when

coming to know about delivery of Rosamma, his wife, they went

to her house and she complained about lack of care given to her

and therefore he decided to take her back to his house. She was

brought back. He would say that though Rosamma was willing to

go along with him, his kith and kin scolded her and threatened

her that if she left the house, she should not dare to come back

home. She went along with him and Rosamma and the child

were taken proper care of. The 2nd accused also stated that they

had not harassed the victim. The 3rd accused stated that they

Crl. Appeal No.320/2006          4


were on very cordial terms and deceased was very loving towards

her.

       5. On finding that the accused could not be acquitted under

Section 232 Cr.P.C, they were asked to enter on their defence.

They examined DW1 on their side.

       6. The lower court, mainly based on the evidence of PWs 1

to 4 and also the statements contained in the inquest report,

came to the conclusion that the allegations of harassment for

dowry had been established even though the other allegations

have not been proved and accordingly found the accused persons

guilty of the offence under Section 498A IPC. The conviction and

sentence as already mentioned followed. The said conviction and

sentence are assailed in this appeal.

       7. Learned counsel appearing for the appellants contended

that the court below was unjustified in convicting the accused

under Section 498A IPC both on facts and in law.          There is

absolutely no evidence to show that there was any demand for

dowry or that any harassment was meted out by any of the

Crl. Appeal No.320/2006           5


accused to the victim which had driven her to commit suicide. In

fact, a reading of the evidence of the prosecution witnesses

would       show       that Rosamma  was   threatened   with   dire

consequences if she went with the husband about 65 days after

the delivery as her kith and kin thought that time was not

reached for her to leave the house.

       8.      Learned counsel appearing for the appellants drew

attention of this Court to the fact that even though it was alleged

that the accused persons had harassed and ill-treated the victim

demanding more dowry namely, gold and money, none of the

witnesses speak about the quantum of gold or money that was

demanded. In this regard, learned counsel placed considerable

emphasis on the evidence of PW3, the mother of the victim.       A

reading of the evidence of PW3 would show that after

Rs.20,000/- was paid to the 1st accused at the time of marriage,

they had given Rs.60,000/- to him for purchasing gold and no

demands were made by the accused persons. Learned counsel

also pointed out that the statement given by PW1 at the time

Crl. Appeal No.320/2006            6


time of inquest could not have been relied on by the court below

to hold against the accused persons. Apart from the fact that

those words are spoken to by PW1 at the time of inquest, it has

no evidentiary value also.

       9.     It is true, according to the learned counsel for the

appellants, that general and vague statements of harassment are

made by most of the witnesses.          But, that, according to the

learned counsel, is insufficient in law to mulct liability on the

accused persons. There is no specific incidents of ill-treatment or

harassment spoken to by any of the witnesses and if one goes by

the evidence of PW3, there used to be petty quarrels between

the 2nd accused and the victim regarding household work.        Even

assuming it to be true, that is totally insufficient to fall under the

category of cruelty as contemplated under Section 498A IPC. In

short, according to the learned counsel, there is absolutely no

evidence to show that the victim was ill-treated demanding more

dowry and she was ill-treated to such an extent to drive her to

commit suicide.

Crl. Appeal No.320/2006            7


       10. Learned Public Prosecutor, on the other hand,

contended that the court below, on analysis of the evidence,

came to the conclusion that the demand for dowry and the ill-

treatment demanding more dowry had led the victim to commit

suicide.       That, according to the learned Public Prosecutor, is

based on the evidence on record. It is a possible view. Merely

because another view is possible by the court below, that by itself

is not a ground to interfere. Accordingly, it is contended that the

conviction and sentence have only to stand.

       11. Ext.P1 complaint was laid by the father of the victim.

He is no more. PW1 is the brother of the victim. He would say

that the marriage between the victim and 1st accused was

solemnised on 24.08.1995 and that she died on 16.09.1996.

After delivery, Rosammas was in her own house and it is stated

by him that on the 65th day of delivery, she was taken to her

husband's house. It is significant to notice that what he says is

that he understood that it is due to the harassment of accused

Nos.1 to 3 that the victim had committed suicide. He would also

Crl. Appeal No.320/2006          8


say that the accused persons were demanding Rosamma to bring

more gold and money to give away the sister of the 1st accused in

marriage.

       12. PW2 is another brother of the victim. He in fact was

cited to prove the mahazar regarding seizure of the ornaments

which belonged to Rosamma. The relevant statement as far as

he is concerned with regard to the issue in hand is that he

understood that the accused had done something to Rosamma

which led her to commit suicide.

       13. The next witness is PW3, the mother of the victim. She

would say that the demand was for Rs.1= lakhs at the time of

betrothal and after negotiation, the dowry was fixed at Rs.1 lakh.

On the date of marriage fixation, a sum of Rs.20,000/- was given

to the 1st accused and after few days, another Rs.60,000/- was

given for purchasing gold. The balance amount of Rs.20,000/-

was agreed to be paid within two years. She would say that

when the marriage of the 3rd accused was fixed and the accused

needed money for the said purpose, they demanded the balance

Crl. Appeal No.320/2006          9


amount and that was given to them. PW3 would also say that

when she used to go to the matrimonial house of her daughter,

she found that the treatment given to her was not proper. She

would also complain that the accused persons used to find fault

with her daughter regarding household work. She would further

say that on the 63rd day of delivery, her daughter was taken by

the 1st accused to matrimonial house.

       14. What is significant is that there is no whisper in the

chief examination of PW3 that there was any demand for gold or

money by anyone of the accused persons after Rs.20,000/- which

was due to them was paid. Surely and certainly if there was such

a demand made to the victim and she was ill-treated on that

count, the mother would have obviously known about the same

because her daughter would have complained to her about the

said conduct of the accused persons.

       15. PW4 is the sister of the deceased who embraced holly

order.      She did not attend the marriage of Rosamma.    When

Rosamma comes home, she claims that Rosamma used to go to

Crl. Appeal No.320/2006         10


see her and finding her weak, when she enquired about the

reason, Rosamma complained that she was being ill-treated by

the accused persons. Of course, this witness would say that they

had ill-treated Rosamma for not giving gold and cash as

demanded by them and it is because of that she had committed

suicide.

       16. PW5 is the elder   brother of the father of deceased

Rosamma. His version is that whenever Rosamma came to her

house, she used to go and meet him and she used to complain

about the conduct of the 2nd and 3rd accused. He is categoric in

his statement in chief examination that she had no complaint

about her husband namely, the 1st accused.

       17. As rightly pointed out by the learned counsel for the

appellants, except for a vague statement regarding ill-treatment

or harassment, there is no specific instance or incidents pointed

out by any of the witnesses which would throw light in this

regard. Except PW4, none of the witnesses say that there was

any demand for dowry. As already noticed, PW2, one of the

Crl. Appeal No.320/2006          11


brothers of the victim, only say that he learnt that the accused

had done something to his sister. PW1's statement regarding ill-

treatment is vague.       But, as far as PW3 is concerned, her

complaint is regarding scolding of her daughter for the household

work she was doing. At the risk of repetition, one may notice

that there is no statement in the chief examination of PW3 that

there was any demand for more gold and money from the

accused persons.

       18. It is interesting to note that during investigation, the

gold ornaments of Rosamma were seized and PW2 was a witness

to the seizure. There is no case for anyone among PWs 1 to 5

that any of the gold ornaments given to Rosamma had been

misappropriated by the accused. In fact, the evidence of PW3

would indicate that a sum of Rs.60,000/- which was part of the

dowry given to 1st accused was for the purpose of purchasing

gold ornaments for Rosamma. Obviously, the statement made

by PW1, assuming it to be true, at the time of inquest could not

have been relied on for two reasons.           One is that it is

Crl. Appeal No.320/2006          12


inadmissible in evidence and the other is that he does not speak

about that aspect in his chief examination and nor was he

confronted with the statement when he was examined before

court. At worst, what could be said is that there is some vague

and general statement regarding ill-treatment, harassment etc.

There is no specific incident or claims made mention of by any of

the witnesses regarding the so called demand.

       19. Under the above unsatisfactory state of affairs, it will

be quite improper to find the accused persons guilty of offence

under Section 498A IPC. The finding of the court below by no

stretch of imagination could be justified in this regard. True, the

incident is indeed sad.    The marriage lasted only for a short

period and the deceased left an infant child. But that by itself is

not a ground to fasten liability on the accused persons. In fact, a

reading of the evidence would suggest that when the 1st accused

went to the house of the victim on the 63rd day of delivery to

bring her back home, her mother and brothers had taken cudgels

against her.

Crl. Appeal No.320/2006          13


       20. Whatever that be, there is absolute want of evidence to

show that there was any demand for dowry or for that purpose,

Rosamma was ill-treated or that conduct of the accused persons

was such that the victim had left with no option but to commit

suicide.

       In the result, this appeal is allowed. The conviction and

sentence passed by the court below as against the accused

persons for the offence under Section 498A IPC are set aside and

they are acquitted of the said offences also. Their bail bonds

shall stand cancelled and they are set at liberty.      If the fine

amounts have been paid, the same shall be refunded to them.




                                               Sd/-

                                       P.BHAVADASAN
                                               JUDGE


smp
                                       // True Copy //


                                        P.A. to Judge.



