
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                      PRESENT:

                       THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE K.RAMAKRISHNAN

              FRIDAY,THE 28TH DAY OF FEBRUARY 2014/9TH PHALGUNA, 1935

                                           Crl.MC.No. 1061 of 2014 ()
                                                ---------------------------
    LP.NO. 144/2004 OF JUDICIAL FIRST CLASS MAGISTRATE COURT, MALAPPURAM
    CRIME NO. 243/2001 OF KONDOTTY POLICE STATION , MALAPPURAM DISTRICT
                                          --------------------------------------

PETITIONER/ACCUSED:
------------------------------------------

            MOHAMMED RAFEEK, AGED 33 YEARS,
            S/O.KUTTIHASSAN HAJI, PARASSERI HOUSE,
            PARATHAKKAD, KONDOTTY MALAPPURAM DISTRICT.

             BY ADV. SRI.P.SAMSUDIN

RESPONDENTS/STATE AND DE-FACTO COMPLAINANT :
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

        1. STATE OF KERALA,
            REPRESENTED BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR,
            HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM.PIN-682 031

        2. ALI HASSAN, AGED 30 YEARS,S/O.POCKER,
            MANGALASSERI HOUSE, OLAVATTOOR P.O - 679 302,
            KONDOTTY MALAPPURAM DISTRICT.

            R1 BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SMT.SAREENA GEORGE
            R2 BY ADV. SMT.NIMA JACOB


            THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE HAVING COME UP FOR ADMISSION
            ON 28-02-2014, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE FOLLOWING:




sts

Crl.MC.No. 1061 of 2014 ()
--------------------------------------

                                              APPENDIX

PETITIONER(S)' ANNEXURES:
--------------------------------------------

ANNEX.1 -            TRUE COPY OF THE FINAL REPORT IN CRIME NO.243/2001 OF
                     KONDOTTY POLICE STATION.

ANNEX.A2 -           TRUE COPY OF THE AFFIDAVIT SWORN IN BY THE 2ND RESPONDENT.




RESPONDENT(S)' ANNEXURES:                          NIL




                                                       /TRUE COPY/


                                                       P.A.TO.JUDGE




sts


                          K. RAMAKRISHNAN, J.
          ------------------------------------------------------------------
                       Crl. M.C. No.1061 of 2014
         ---------------------------------------------------------------------
           Dated this the 28th day of February, 2014


                                   O R D E R




          This Criminal miscellaneous case is field by the

petitioner, who is the 2nd accused in Crime No.243/2001

of   Kondotty         Police          Station,            now         pending    as

L.P.No.144/2004 on the file of the Judicial First Class

Magistrate       Court,           Malappuram,                  to       quash   the

proceedings, recording the composition under Section

482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (hereinafter called

the 'Code').

          2.      It is alleged in the petition that, the

petitioner is the 2nd accused in Crime No.243/2001 of

Kondotty Police Station, which was registered on the

basis of the statement given by the 2nd respondent,

alleging offences under Section 448, 341, 324 read with

Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code, against the

petitioner and another person. After investigation,

Crl. M.C. No.1061 of 2014
                                2

Annexure-A1 final report was filed, which was originally

taken on file as C.C.No.788/2001. Though the petitioner

appeared and enlarged on bail earlier, later he went

abroad and he could not participate in the proceedings.

So the case against the first accused was proceeded with

and ended in acquittal. The case against the present

petitioner was split up and later transferred to the

register of long pending cases as L.P.144/2004 and now it

is so pending on the files of Judicial First Class

Magistrate Court, Malappuram. Now the matter has been

settled between the petitioner and the 2nd respondent,

due to the intervention of mediators and well-wishers.

There is no possibility of any conviction being entered

into against the petitioner, even if the trial was allowed to

proceed with. The 2nd respondent filed an affidavit to that

effect as well. Since some of the offences are non-

compoundable in nature, the petitioner has no other

remedy except to approach this court, seeking the

following relief:

             "For these and other grounds to be urged at the
      time of hearing it is most humbly prayed that this

Crl. M.C. No.1061 of 2014
                                3

      Hon'ble    Court   be pleased   to   quash all  further
      proceedings against the petitioner/ Accused pursuant to
      Annexure-A1 charge sheet in Crime No.234/2001 of
      Kondotty Police Station and pending as L.P.No.144/2004
      on the files of Judicial first Class Magistrate Court,
      Malappuram, in the interest of justice."

            3.    2nd respondent appeared through counsel

and submitted that, the matter has been settled and the

defacto-complainant has no objection in quashing the

proceedings.

            4.    Learned Public Prosecutor on instructions

submitted that, except this case, there is no other case

against the petitioner and he has no criminal back ground

and the case against the first accused ended in acquittal,

and he is no more now as well.

            5.    Learned counsel for the petitioner also

submitted that, the petitioner and the 2nd respondent

were residing in the same locality and the relationship

has been restored as before due to the intervention of

mediators.

            6.    It is an admitted fact that, a case was

registered as Crime No.243/2001 of Kondotty Police

Station, on the basis of the statement given by the 2nd

Crl. M.C. No.1061 of 2014
                             4

respondent, as defacto-complainant against the present

petitioner and another person, alleging offences under

Section 448, 341, 324 read with Section 34 of the Indian

Penal Code. It is also an admitted fact that, after

investigation, Annexure-A1 final report was field and it

was taken on file as C.C.788/2001 on the file of the

Judicial First Class Magistrate Court, Malappuram. It is

mentioned in the petition that, the case against the first

accused after trial was ended in acquittal.      It is also

submitted by learned Public Prosecutor that, he is no

more now. Since the petitioner did not appear later, the

case against him was split up and later transferred to the

register of long pending cases and it is now pending as

L.P.No.144/2004 on the file of the Judicial First Class

magistrate Court, Malappuram. Now the matter has been

settled between the defacto-complainant, who is the 2nd

respondent herein and the defacto-complainant filed

Annexure-A2 affidavit stating that, due to the intervention

of mediators and well-wishers, the matter has been

settled and their relationship has been restored as before

Crl. M.C. No.1061 of 2014
                                     5

and he does not want to prosecute the case.

             7.    In the decision reported in Gian Singh v.

State of Punjab [2012(4) KLT 108 (SC)], stated as

follows:

             "The position that emerges from the above discussion
      can be summarised thus: the power of the High Court in
      quashing a criminal proceedings or FIR or complaint in
      exercise of its inherent jurisdiction is distinct and different
      from the power given to a criminal court for compounding
      the offences under S.320 of the Code. Inherent power is of
      wide plenitude with no statutory limitation but has to be
      exercised in accord with the guideline engrafted in such
      power viz; (i) to secure the ends of justice or (ii) to prevent
      abuse of the process of any Court. In what cases power to
      quash the criminal proceeding or complaint or FIR may be
      exercised where the offender and victim have settled their
      dispute would depend on the facts and circumstances of
      each case an no category can be prescribed.           However,
      before exercise of such power, the High Court must have
      due regard to the nature and gravity of the crime. Heinous
      and serious offences of mental depravity or offences like
      murder, rape, dacoity, etc., cannot be fittingly quashed
      even though the victim or victim's family and the offender
      have settled the dispute. Such offences are not private in
      nature and have serious impact on society. Similarly, any
      compromise between the victim and offender in relation to
      the offences under special statutes like Prevention of
      Corruption Act or the offences committed by public
      servants while working in that capacity etc; cannot provide
      for any basis for quashing criminal proceedings involving
      such    offences.    But   the     criminal    cases    having
      overwhelmingly and pre-dominatingly civil flavour stand on
      different footing for the purposes of quashing, particularly
      the offences arising from commercial, financial mercantile,
      civil, partnership or such like transactions or the offences
      arising out of matrimony relating to dowry, etc., or the
      family disputes where the wrong is basically private or
      personal in nature and the parties have resolved their
      entire dispute. In this category of cases, High Court may
      quash criminal proceedings if in its view, because of the
      compromise     between    the   offender    and   victim,   the
      possibility  of  conviction   is   remote    and   bleak   and
      continuation of criminal case would put accused to great
      oppression and prejudice and extreme injustice would be

Crl. M.C. No.1061 of 2014
                                     6

      caused to him by not quashing the criminal case despite full
      and complete settlement and compromise with the victim.
      In other words, the High Court must consider whether it
      would be unfair or contrary to the interest of justice to
      continue with the criminal proceedings or continuation of
      the criminal proceedings would tantamount to abuse of
      process of law despite settlement and compromise between
      the victim and wrongdoer and whether to secure the ends
      of justice, it is appropriate that criminal case is put to an
      end and if the answer to the above question(s) is in
      affirmative, the High Court shall be well within its
      jurisdiction to quash the criminal proceeding."


             8.     Considering the dictum laid down in the

decision mentioned above and also considering the fact

that, the matter has been settled between the defacto-

complainant and the present petitioner and the case

against the first accused ended in acquittal after trail,

even if the case against the petitioner is allowed to

proceed with, there is a remote chance of conviction and

doing that exercise will only a wastage of judicial time as

well. Further the petitioner and the 2nd respondent were

coming from the same locality and the matter has been

settled between them and their relationship has been

restored due to the intervention of mediators. So

considering the above circumstances, this court feels

that, it is a fit case where the power under Section 482 of

the 'Code' has to be invoked to quash the proceedings as

Crl. M.C. No.1061 of 2014
                                 7

no purpose will be served by retaining the case on file, in

view of the settlement arrived at between the parties. So,

the application is allowed and further proceedings in

L.P.No.144/2004 (Crime No.243/2001 of Kondotty Police

Station) now pending before the Judicial First Class

Magistrate Court, Malappuram, as against the petitioner

is quashed. Office is directed to communicate this order

to the concerned court, immediately for further action.




                                              Sd/-

                                       K. Ramakrishnan, Judge

                          // True Copy //

                                                     P.A. to Judge

ss



