
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                      PRESENT:

                     THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE ALEXANDER THOMAS

                 FRIDAY,THE 17TH DAY OF OCTOBER 2014/25TH ASWINA, 1936

                                           Crl.MC.No. 4450 of 2014 ()
                                                ---------------------------
        CC.NO. 1799/2012 OF JUDICIAL FIRST CLASS MAGISTRATE COURT, TIRUR
               CRIME NO. 587/2012 OF TIRUR POLICE STATION, MALAPPURAM
                                                    -------------------

PETITIONERS/ACCUSED :
--------------------------------------

        1. ZIRAS,
            S/O.IBRAHIMKUTTY, AGED 30 YRS.,
            KALATHIL HOUSE, POST MANGALAM
            TIRUR TALUK, MALAPPURAM DISTRICT.

        2. PATHUMMU
            W/O.SULAIMAN (LATE), AGED 66 YRS.,
            KALATHIL HOUSE, POST MANGALAM
            TIRUR TALUK, MALAPPURAM DISTRICT.

        3. BASHEER,
            S/O.SULAIMAN (LATE), AGED 42 YEARS
            KALATHIL HOUSE, POST MANGALAM
            TIRUR TALUK, MALAPPURAM DISTRICT.

            BY ADV. SRI.C.M.MOHAMMED IQUABAL

RESPONDENTS/STATE & DEFACTO COMPLAINANT :
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

        1. STATE OF KERALA
            REPRESENTED BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR
            HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM.

        2. THAHIRA, AGED 25 YEARS
            D/O.PULLUVALAPPIL ABDUL KHADER, MANGALAM AMSOM
            KOTTAYI DESOM, POST MANGALAM, TIRUR TALUK
            MALAPPURAM DISTRICT - 676 561


            R1 BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SRI. R. GITHESH
            R2 BY ADV. SMT. T.J. SEEMA

            THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD ON 17-10-2014,
            THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE FOLLOWING:

Mn
                                                                                ...2/-

Crl.MC.No. 4450 of 2014 ()
-------------------------------------

                                                      APPENDIX

PETITIONERS' EXHIBITS :
-------------------------------------

ANNEXURE A1 -                  THE TRUE COPY OF THE COMPLAINT IN CMP 4142/12 BEFORE
                               THE JFCM COURT,TIRUR DT. 16.5.12.

ANNEXURE A2 -                  TRUE COPY OF THE FIR IN CRIME NO. 587/12 DT. 18.5.12.

ANNEXURE A3 -                  THE TRUE COPY OF THE CHARGE IN CRIME NO. 587/12 OF
                               TIRUR POLICE STATION DT. 20.7.12.

ANNEXURE A4 -                  THE TRUE COPY OF THE MEMORANDUM OF EVIDENCE IN
                               CRIME NO. 587/2012 OF TIRUR POLICE STATION DT. 20.7.12.

ANNEXURE A5 -                  THE TRUE COPY OF THE AFFIDAVIT OF THE 2ND RESPONDENT
                               DT. 28.5.14.

RESPONDENT(S)' EXHIBITS :                                NIL
--------------------------------------------------------------

                                                                          //TRUE COPY//




                                                                         P.S. TO JUDGE
Mn


                        ALEXANDER THOMAS, J.
                     ==================
                       Crl.M.C.No. 4450 of 2014
                     ==================
              Dated this the 17th day of October, 2014
                               O R D E R

      The prayers in the above captioned Criminal Miscellaneous

Case (Crl.M.C.) are to quash the impugned Annexure A1 complaint,

Annexure A2 FIR in Crime No. 587/2012 of Tirur Police Station, the

impugned Annexure A3 final report/charge sheet and C.C.No.

1799/2012 on the file of the Judicial First Class Magistrate Court,

Tirur, etc. The petitioners herein are the three accused in Annexure

A2 FIR in Crime No. 587/2012 of Tirur Police Station, Malappuram

district, alleging offences under Section 498A read with Section 34

of the IPC. The said crime arose out of the complaint as per

Annexure A1 preferred by the defacto complainant (2nd respondent

herein) before the Judicial First Class Magistrate Court, Tirur, based

on which, the aforementioned crime was registered, whereby the

said Magistrate Court directed investigation under Section 156 (3) of

the Cr.P.C.. The gist of the prosecution case is that the 1st petitioner

CRL.M.C.4450/14                  - : 2 :-

married the 2nd respondent and while they were living as husband

and wife in the 1st petitioner's house, the petitioners ill-treated the

2nd respondent mentally and physically, which led to the impugned

Annexure A1 complaint and Annexure A2 FIR. After investigation,

the Police submitted the impugned Annexure A3 final report/charge

sheet, which led to the pendency of C.C.No.1799/2012 before the

Judicial First Class Magistrate Court, Tirur. Later, the matrimonial

disputes between the 1st petitioner and the 2nd respondent were

amicably settled through mediation and as a result of the said

mediation, the 2nd respondent has agreed that she is ready to

withdraw all the cases against the petitioners and that she does not

want to proceed with the prosecution. Annexure A5 is the affidavit

dated 28.5.2014 sworn to by the 2nd respondent, produced in this

Crl.M.C., wherein the 2nd respondent has stated that all the disputes

between her and the 1st petitioner-husband have been settled by

mediation and that as per the said settlement reached, she has

agreed to withdraw all the cases against the petitioners/accused

and that she has no longer any grievance against the accused

persons and therefore does not want to proceed with the

prosecution and that it is just and necessary that this Court may

CRL.M.C.4450/14                   - : 3 :-

quash all the impugned proceedings leading to C.C.No.1799/2012

on the file of the Judicial First Class Magistrate Court, Tirur, which

arose out of Crime No. 587/2012 of Tirur Police Station. It is in the

back    ground   of   these   facts     and  circumstances,  that   the

aforementioned Crl.M.C. has been filed.

      2.     The Crl.M.C. has been admitted and Smt.T.J.Seema has

taken notice for the 2nd respondent and the learned Public

Prosecutor has taken notice for the 1st respondent-State of Kerala.

      3.     Heard Sri. C.M.Mohammed Iquabal, the learned counsel

appearing for the petitioners, Smt.T.J.Seema, the learned counsel

appearing for R2 and the learned Public Prosecutor appearing for

the 1st respondent-State.

      4.     The learned counsel for the petitioners has submitted

that   during   the  pendency     of      the aforementioned  criminal

proceedings, the matter has been settled amicably between the

parties, which has resulted in the subject matter of the

aforementioned crime/case and that the continuation of the

proceedings in the above case/crime will cause miscarriage of

justice to both parties as the real disputants to the case have arrived

at an amicable settlement and any further continuation of the

CRL.M.C.4450/14                   - : 4 :-

criminal proceedings will amount to sheer wastage of time and

money and would unnecessarily strain the financial, administrative

and financial resources of the State.

      5.     The learned counsel appearing for the 2nd respondent

has submitted on the basis of the specific instructions furnished by

the 2nd respondent that the 2nd respondent has amicably settled the

disputes with the petitioners and that she has no objection in the

quashment of the impugned criminal proceedings and that the

complainant/victim/injured does not intend to proceed any further

against the petitioners as she has no grievance against them and

that she will not raise any dispute/compliant in future, if the prayer

for quashing the impugned final report is allowed.

      6.     The learned Public Prosecutor also was heard, who also

has not raised any serious objections and submitted that this court

may consider the prayer in this case in the light of the law well

settled by the Apex Court in that regard.

      7.     After having carefully considered the submissions of the

parties and after having perused the pleadings as well as the

documents and materials placed in this matter, it can be seen that

the offences alleged are more or less personal in nature and not

CRL.M.C.4450/14                           - : 5 :-

much element of public interest is involved. The crucial aspect of

the matter is that though such offences are involved, the real

disputants to the controversy which has led to the impugned

criminal proceedings, have actually arrived at an amicable

settlement of the matter. From the submissions made by the

learned counsel for the 2nd respondent, it is clear to the court that

the injured/victim/defacto complainant has no further grievance

against the petitioners/accused in the light of the settlement arrived

at by them. In this connection, it is relevant to note the decision of

the Apex Court in the case between Gian Singh v. State of Punjab

reported in 2013 (1) SCC (Cri) 160, para 61 = (2012) 10 SCC 303 =

2012(4) KLT 108(SC), wherein the Supreme Court has held as

follows in para 61 thereof [ See SCC (Cri)]:

                   "61.    The position that emerges from the above
            discussion can be summarised thus: the power of the High
            Court in quashing a criminal proceeding or FIR or complaint
            in exercise of its inherent jurisdiction is distinct and
            different from the power given to a criminal court for
            compounding the offences under S.320 of the Code.
            Inherent power is of wide plenitude with no statutory
            limitation but it has to be exercised in accord with the
            guideline engrafted in such power viz;(i) to secure the ends
            of justiceInor (ii) to prevent abuse of the process of any
            Court.        what cases power to quash the criminal
            proceeding or complaint or F.I.R. may be exercised where
            the offender and victim have settled their dispute would
            depend on the facts and circumstances of each case and no
            category can be prescribed..

It is further held as follows:-

CRL.M.C.4450/14                         - : 6 :-

          "......... But the criminal cases having overwhelmingly and
          pre-dominatingly civil flavour stand on different footing for
          the purposes of quashing, particularly the offences arising
          from commercial, financial,mercantile, civil, partnership or
          such like transactions or the offences arising out of
          matrimony relating to dowry etc. or the family disputes
          where the wrong is basically private or personal in nature
          and the parties have resolved their entire dispute. In this
          category of cases, High Court may quash criminal
          proceedings if in its view, because of the compromise
          between the offender and victim, the possibility of
          conviction is remote and bleak and continuation of criminal
          case would put accused to great oppression and prejudice
          and extreme injustice would be caused to him by not
          quashing the criminal case despite         full and complete
          settlement and compromise with the victim........"

Further, in the case Jitendra Raghuvanshi and Others v. Babita

Raghuvanshi and another reported in (2013) 4 SCC 58 [see 2013

(1) KLD 817 (SC)], the Apex Court has held as follows:-

                    "8. It is not in dispute that matrimonial disputes
          have been on considerable increase in recent times
          resulting in filing of complaints under Sections 498A and
          406 of I.P.C. not only against the husband but also against
          the relatives of the husband. The question is when such
          matters are resolved either by the wife agreeing to rejoin
          the matrimonial home or by mutual settlement of other
          pending disputes for which both the sides approached the
          High Court and jointly prayed for quashing of the criminal
          proceedings or the FIR or complaint by the wife under
          Sections 498A and 406 of I.P.C., whether the prayer can be
          declined on the sole ground that since the offences are
          non-compoundable under Section 320 of the Code, it
          would be impermissible for the court to quash the criminal
          proceedings or FIR or complaint.

          subsequentIttois the filing of the criminal complaint under
                    9.       not in dispute that in the case on hand

          Sections 498A and 406 of IPC and Sectionstheand 4 ofand
                                                         3         the
          Dowry      Prohibition   Act,  1961,   with        help
          intervention ofconcerned
                             family members, friends and well-wishers,
          the     parties               have    amicably  settled their
          differences and executed a compromise/ settlement.
          Pursuant thereto, the appellants filed the said compromise

CRL.M.C.4450/14                         - : 7 :-

          before the Trial Court with a request to place the same on
          record and to drop the criminal proceedings against the
          appellants herein.      It is also not in dispute that in
          additional to the mutual settlement arrived at by the
          parties, respondent/-wife has also filed an affidavit stating
          that she did not wish to pursue the criminal proceedings
          against the appellants and fully supported the contents of
          the settlement deed. It is the grievance of the appellants
          that no only the Trial Court rejected such prayer of the
          parties but also the High Court failed toe exercise its
          jurisdiction under Section 482 of the Code only on the
          ground that the criminal proceedings relate to the offences
          punishable under Sections 498A and 406 of IPC which are
          non-compoundable in nature.

                 15.   In our view, it is the duty of the Courts to
          encourage genuine settlements of matrimonial disputes,
          particularly, when the same are on considerable increase.
          Even if the offences are non-compoundable, if they relate
          to matrimonial disputes and the Court is satisfied that the
          parties have settled the same amicably and without any
          pressure, we hold that for the purpose of securing ends of
          justice, Section 320 of the Code would not be a bar to the
          exercise of power of quashing of FIR, complaint or the
          subsequent criminal proceedings.

                 16.    There has been an outburst of matrimonial
          disputes in recent times.       The institution of marriage
          occupies an important place and it has an important role to
          play in the society. Therefore, every effort should be made
          in the interest of the individuals in order to enable them to
          settle down in life and live peacefully. If the parties ponder
          over their defaults and terminate their disputes amicably
          by mutual agreement instead of fighting it out in a Court of
          law, in order to do complete justice in the matrimonial
          matters, the Courts should be less hesitant in exercising its
          extraordinary jurisdiction. It is trite to state that the power
          under Section 482 should be exercised sparingly and with
          circumspection only when the Court is convinced, on the
          basis of material on record, that allowing the proceedings
          to continue would be an abuse of the process of the Court
          or that the ends of justice require that the proceedings
          ought to be quashed."

      8.     Considering the facts and circumstances of this case, it

is seen further that the impugned criminal proceedings have arisen

CRL.M.C.4450/14                   - : 8 :-

consequent to the personal disputes between the disputants and

the disputes have been settled amicably between the parties.

Accordingly, this Court is inclined to hold that in the light of the

facts and circumstances involved in the present case and

particularly in view of the settlement arrived at between the parties,

the principles laid down in the aforementioned decisions of the

Apex Court will be squarely applicable in the present case.

Moreover, since the real disputants to the controversy have

amicably settled the disputes, which led to these impugned criminal

proceedings, it is also the duty of the court to promote such

settlement, instead of compelling the parties to go on with the

dispute. It is also pertinent to note that since the matter is settled

out of court, in the event of proceeding with the trial, there may not

be any fruitful prosecution and the chances of conviction of the

accused is rather negligible and therefore, the net result of

continuance of criminal proceedings would be sheer waste of

judicial time rather meaningless and therefore would amount to

abuse of the process of court proceedings in the larger sense.

Hence following decisions of the Apex Court cited supra, this Court

is inclined to hold that the Crl.M.C. can be allowed by granting the

CRL.M.C.4450/14                   - : 9 :-

prayers sought for.

      9.     In the result, the Crl.M.C. is allowed and the impugned

criminal proceedings in C.C.No. 1799/2012 on the file of the Judicial

First Class Magistrate's Court, Tirur, which arose out of the

impugned Annexure A3 final report/charge sheet and Annexure A2

FIR in Crime No. 587/2012 and the impugned Annexure A1

complaint and all further proceedings arising         therefrom, stand

quashed. The petitioners shall produce certified copies of this order

before the court below concerned          as well as before the Station

House Officer, Tirur Police Station.


                                                       Sd/-
sdk+                                      ALEXANDER THOMAS, JUDGE

          ///True copy///



                              P.S. to Judge



