
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                      PRESENT:

                     THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE ALEXANDER THOMAS

               TUESDAY, THE 21ST DAY OF OCTOBER 2014/29TH ASWINA, 1936

                                           Crl.MC.No. 5932 of 2014 ()
                                                ---------------------------
    CRIME NO. 64/2014 OF BINANIPURAM POLICE STATION, ERNAKULAM DISTRICT
                                                     ----------------

PETITIONERS/ACCUSED NOS. 1 TO 6 :
--------------------------------------------------------

        1. JALEEL, AGED 44 YEARS
            S/O.IBRAHIM, MANNANTHARA VEETTIL, ELOORKKARA KARAYIL
            MUPPATHADAM P.O., KADUNGALLOOR.

        2. IBRAHIM, AGED 74 YEARS,
            MANNANTHARA VEETTIL, ELOORKKARA KARAYIL
            MUPPATHADAM P.O., KADUNGALLOOR.

        3. AYISHUKUTTY, AGED 69 YEARS,
            W/O.IBRAHIM, MANNANTHARA VEETTIL, ELOORKKARA KARAYIL
            MUPPATHADAM P.O., KADUNGALLOOR.

        4. HANEEFA, AGED 52 YEARS,
            S/O.IBRAHIM, MANNANTHARA VEETTIL, ELOORKKARA KARAYIL
            MUPPATHADAM P.O., KADUNGALLOOR.

        5. SAUDA, AGED 42 YEARS,
            W/O.HANEEFA, MANNATHARA VEETTIL, ELOORKKARA KARAYIL
            MUPPATHADAM P.O., KADUNGALLOOR.

        6. NAUSHAD, AGED 50 YEARS,
            S/O.IBRAHIM, MANNANTHARA VEETTIL, ELOORKKARA KARAYIL
            MUPPATHADAM P.O., KADUNGALLOOR.

            BY ADV. SRI.P.VENUGOPAL

RESPONDENTS / DEFACTO COMPLAINANT & STATE :
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

        1. SABOORA, AGED 34 YEARS,
            D/O.ALIYAR, THENOOR VEETTIL, PALLIPRAM KARA
            MARAMPILLY VILLAGE, ERNAKULAM DISTRICT- 683 105.

        2. STATE OF KERALA
            REPRESENTED BY THE PUBLIC PROSECUTOR
            HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM - 682 031.

            R1 BY ADV. SRI.VIPIN NARAYAN
            R2 BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SRI. R. GITHESH

            THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE HAVING COME UP FOR ADMISSION
            ON 21-10-2014, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE FOLLOWING:

Mn
                                                                                  ...2/-

Crl.MC.No. 5932 of 2014 ()
-------------------------------------

                                                      APPENDIX

PETITIONER(S)' ANNEXURES :
---------------------------------------------

ANNEXURE A.                    COPY OF THE FIR IN CRIME NO.64/2014 OF BINANIPURAM
                               POLICE STATION PENDING ON THE FILE OF THE COURT OF
                               THE JUDICIAL FIRST CLASS MAGISTRATE-I, NORTH PARAVUR.

ANNEXURE B.                    THE AFFIDAVIT SWORN IN BY THE IST RESPONDENT/DEFACTO
                               COMPLAINANT SIGNIFYING THE FACTUM OF SETTLEMENT OF
                               THE DISPUTES.

RESPONDENT(S)' EXHIBITS :                            NIL
-----------------------------------------------------------

                                                                          //TRUE COPY//




                                                                         P.A. TO JUDGE
Mn


                  ALEXANDER THOMAS, J.
           =========================
                  Crl.M.C No.5932 of 2014
         ============================
          Dated this the 21st day of October, 2014

                             ORDER



      The above captioned Criminal Miscellaneous Case (Crl.M.C.),

seeking the invocation of the inherent powers conferred on this

Court under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure has

been filed to quash Annexure A FIR and all further proceedings

pursuant thereto in Crime No.64 of 2014 of Binanipuram Police

Station, Ernakulam district pending on the file of the Judicial First

Class Magistrate Court - I, North Paravur, against the petitioners.

      2. The six petitioners herein are arrayed as accused Nos.1 to

6 in Crime No.64 of 2014 of Binanipuram Police Station,

Ernakulam. The 1st petitioner is the husband of the 1st respondent

and the 2nd and 3rd petitioners are the father-in-law and mother-in-

law of the 1st respondent.    The 4th and 6th petitioners are the

brothers-in-law of the 1st respondent and the 5th petitioner is the

wife of the 4th petitioner. The offences alleged as against the

petitioners are under Sections 498A and 406 r/w Section 34 of the

Indian Penal Code.      The crime has been got registered on a

private complaint filed before the Magistrate Court concerned,

Crl.M.C No.5932 of 2014            2



which was forwarded to police under Section 156(3) of the Code

of Criminal Procedure Thereupon the instant Annexure A FIR in

Crime No.64 of 2014 of Binanipuram Police Station was

registered.

      3. The gist of the allegation is that the accused persons had

committed cruelty on the 1st respondent by demanding more

dowry and they have also misappropriated the gold ornaments

of the 1st respondent and thereby committed the aforesaid

offences. It is submitted that the impugned criminal proceeding

was initiated due to minor temperamental differences between

the parties which have all been now settled between the parties.

It is stated that all the disputes between the petitioners have now

been amicably settled.       The 1st respondent has sworn to an

affidavit dated 18.10.2014 produced as Annexure B stating that

the at the intervention of the well wishers of the locality and the

relatives, the entire disputes between the parties have been

settled and that there is no further subsisting grievance against

the petitioners and that she has no objection in quashing the

impugned criminal proceeding initiated by her, which is pending

against the petitioners.      It is further stated therein that the

Crl.M.C No.5932 of 2014          3



disputes between the parties are purely private and personal in

nature and no public conspiracy is involved in the matter and the

being such personal disputes, it is submitted that the impugned

criminal proceedings be quashed in the interest of justice. It is

in the background of these facts and circumstances that the

above Crl.M.C has been filed.

      4.    The Crl.M.C. has been admitted and Sri.Vipin

Narayan has taken notice for the 1st respondent and the learned

Public Prosecutor has taken notice for the 2nd respondent -State

of Kerala.

      5.    Heard Sri.P.Venugopal, the learned counsel appearing

for the petitioners, Sri.Vipin Narayan. learned counsel appearing

for 1st respondent and the learned Public Prosecutor appearing

for the 2nd respondent-State of Kerala.

      6.    The learned counsel for the petitioners has submitted

that during the pendency of the aforementioned criminal

proceedings, the matter has been settled amicably between the

parties, which is resulted in the subject matter of the

aforementioned crime/case and that the continuation of the

proceedings in the above case/crime will cause miscarriage of

Crl.M.C No.5932 of 2014         4



justice to both parties as the real disputants to the case have

arrived at an amicable settlement and any further continuation

of the criminal proceedings will amount to sheer wastage of time

and money and would unnecessarily strain the financial,

administrative and financial resources of the State.

      7.    Sri.Vipin Narayan, the learned counsel appearing for

the 1st respondent has submitted on the basis of the specific

instructions furnished by the 1st respondent that the 1st

respondent has amicably settled the disputes with the petitioners

and that she has no objection in the quashment of the impugned

criminal proceedings and that the complainant/victim/injured

does not intend to proceed any further against the petitioners as

she has no grievance against them and that she will not raise any

dispute/compliant in future if the prayer for quashing the

impugned final report is allowed.

      8.    The learned Public Prosecutor also was heard, who

also has not raised any serious objections and submitted that this

court may consider the prayer in this case in the light of the law

well settled by the Apex Court in that regard.

Crl.M.C No.5932 of 2014             5



      9.    After having carefully considered the submissions of

the parties and after having perused the pleadings as well as the

documents and materials placed in this matter, it can be seen

that the offences alleged are more or less personal in nature and

not much element of public interest is involved.              The crucial

aspect of the matter is that though such offences are involved,

the real disputants to the controversy which has led to the

impugned criminal proceedings, have actually arrived at an

amicable settlement of the matter. From the submissions made

by the learned counsel for the 1st respondent, it is clear to the

court that the injured/victim/defacto complainant has no further

grievance against the petitioner/accused in the light of the

settlement arrived at by them. In this connection, it is relevant to

note the decision of the Apex Court in the case between Gian

Singh v. State of Punjab reported in 2013 (1) SCC (Cri) 160,

para 61 = (2012) 10 SCC 303 = 2012(4) KLT 108(SC), wherein

the Supreme Court has held as follows in para 61 thereof [ See

SCC (Cri)]:

                "61. The position that emerges from the above
         discussion can be summarised thus: the power of the
         High Court in quashing a criminal proceeding or FIR
         or complaint in exercise of its inherent jurisdiction is

Crl.M.C No.5932 of 2014                 6



         distinct and different from the power given to a
         criminal court for compounding the offences under
         S.320 of the Code. Inherent power is of wide plenitude
         with no statutory limitation but it has to be exercised
         in accord with the guideline engrafted in such power
         viz;(i) to secure the ends of justice or (ii) to prevent
         abuse of the process of any Court.        In what cases
         power to quash the criminal proceeding or complaint
         or F.I.R. may be exercised where the offender and
         victim have settled their dispute would depend on the
         facts and circumstances of each case and no category
         can be prescribed..

It is further held as follows:-

          "......... But the criminal cases having overwhelmingly
          and pre-dominatingly civil flavour stand on different
          footing for the purposes of quashing, particularly the
          offences          arising       from        commercial,
          financial,mercantile, civil, partnership or such like
          transactions or the offences arising out of matrimony
          relating to dowry etc. or the family disputes where the
          wrong is basically private or personal in nature and
          the parties have resolved their entire dispute. In this
          category of cases, High Court may quash criminal
          proceedings if in its view, because of the compromise
          between the offender and victim, the possibility of
          conviction is remote and bleak and continuation of
          criminal case would put accused to great oppression
          and prejudice and extreme injustice would be caused
          to him by not quashing the criminal case despite full
          and complete settlement and compromise with the
          victim........"

Further, in the case Jitendra Raghuvanshi and Others v.

Babita Raghuvanshi and another reported in (2013) 4 SCC

58 [see 2013 (1) KLD 817 (SC)], the Apex Court has held as

follows:-

                   "8.    It is not in dispute that matrimonial
          disputes have been on considerable increase in recent

Crl.M.C No.5932 of 2014                7



         times resulting in filing of complaints under Sections
         498A and 406 of I.P.C. not only against the husband
         but also against the relatives of the husband.       The
         question is when such matters are resolved either by
         the wife agreeing to rejoin the matrimonial home or
         by mutual settlement of other pending disputes for
         which both the sides approached the High Court and
         jointly   prayed    for   quashing    of   the   criminal
         proceedings or the FIR or complaint by the wife under
         Sections 498A and 406 of I.P.C., whether the prayer
         can be declined on the sole ground that since the
         offences are non-compoundable under Section 320 of
         the Code, it would be impermissible for the court to
         quash the criminal proceedings or FIR or complaint.

                9. It is not in dispute that in the case on hand
         subsequent to the filing of the criminal complaint
         under Sections 498A and 406 of IPC and Sections 3
         and 4 of the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961, with the
         help and intervention of family members, friends and
         well-wishers, the parties concerned have amicably
         settled their differences and executed a compromise/
         settlement. Pursuant thereto, the appellants filed the
         said compromise before the Trial Court with a request
         to place the same on record and to drop the criminal
         proceedings against the appellants herein. It is also
         not in dispute that in additional to the mutual
         settlement arrived at by the parties, respondent/-wife
         has also filed an affidavit stating that she did not wish
         to pursue the criminal proceedings against the
         appellants and fully supported the contents of the
         settlement deed. It is the grievance of the appellants
         that no only the Trial Court rejected such prayer of
         the parties but also the High Court failed toe exercise
         its jurisdiction under Section 482 of the Code only on
         the ground that the criminal proceedings relate to the
         offences punishable under Sections 498A and 406 of
         IPC which are non-compoundable in nature.

                15. In our view, it is the duty of the Courts to
         encourage     genuine     settlements   of   matrimonial
         disputes,    particularly, when     the  same    are  on
         considerable increase. Even if the offences are non-
         compoundable, if they relate to matrimonial disputes
         and the Court is satisfied that the parties have settled
         the same amicably and without any pressure, we hold

Crl.M.C No.5932 of 2014               8



         that for the purpose of securing ends of justice,
         Section 320 of the Code would not be a bar to the
         exercise of power of quashing of FIR, complaint or the
         subsequent criminal proceedings.

                16. There has been an outburst of matrimonial
         disputes in recent times. The institution of marriage
         occupies an important place and it has an important
         role to play in the society.   Therefore, every effort
         should be made in the interest of the individuals in
         order to enable them to settle down in life and live
         peacefully. If the parties ponder over their defaults
         and terminate their disputes amicably by mutual
         agreement instead of fighting it out in a Court of law,
         in order to do complete justice in the matrimonial
         matters, the Courts should be less hesitant in
         exercising its extraordinary jurisdiction. It is trite to
         state that the power under Section 482 should be
         exercised sparingly and with circumspection only
         when the Court is convinced, on the basis of material
         on record, that allowing the proceedings to continue
         would be an abuse of the process of the Court or that
         the ends of justice require that the proceedings ought
         to be quashed."




         8. Considering the facts and circumstances of this case,

it is seen further that the impugned criminal proceedings have

arisen consequent to the matrimonial disputes between the

disputants and the disputes have been settled amicably between

the parties. Accordingly, this Court is inclined to hold that in the

light of the facts and circumstances involved in the present case

and particularly in view of the settlement arrived at between the

parties, the principles laid down in the aforementioned decisions

Crl.M.C No.5932 of 2014          9



of the Apex Court will be squarely applicable in the present case.

Moreover, since the real disputants to the controversy have

amicably settled the disputes, which led to these impugned

criminal proceedings, it is also the duty of the court to promote

such settlement, instead of compelling the parties to go on with

the dispute. It is also pertinent to note that since the matter is

settled out of court, in the event of proceeding with the trial,

there may not be any fruitful prosecution and the chances of

conviction of the accused is rather negligible and therefore, the

net result of continuance of criminal proceedings would be sheer

waste of judicial time rather meaningless and therefore would

amount to abuse of the process of court proceedings in the

larger sense. Hence following decisions of the Apex Court cited

supra, this Court is inclined to hold that the Crl.M.C. can be

allowed by granting the prayers sought for.

         In the result, the Crl.M.C. is allowed and the impugned

Annexure A FIR in Crime No.64 of 2014 of Binanipuram Police

Station, Ernakulam district and all further proceedings arising

therefrom stand quashed.          The petitioners shall produce

certified copies of this order before the court below concerned

Crl.M.C No.5932 of 2014         10



as well as before the Station House Officer, Binanipuram Police

Station, Ernakulam.



                                         Sd/-
                             ALEXANDER THOMAS, JUDGE.

vdv         //True Copy//  P.A to Judge



