
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                        PRESENT:

               THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE ALEXANDER THOMAS

         MONDAY, THE 13TH DAY OF OCTOBER 2014/21ST ASWINA, 1936

                             Crl.MC.No. 5473 of 2014 (B)
                                ---------------------------
                          CC 4261/2012 of J.M.F.C.-I, KOCHI
      CRIME NO.661/2011 OF NJARAKKAL POLICE STATION, ERNAKULAM.


PETITIONERS/ACCUSED:
--------------------------

       1. REVEENDRA PRASAD, AGED 32 YEARS,
         S/O.CHANDRAN, NIKATHIL THARA HOUSE, NAYARAMBALAM
         ERNAKULAM 682 509.

       2. RAJENDRA PRASAD, AGED 34 YEARS,
         S/O.CHANDRAN, NIKATHILTHARA HOUSE, NAYARAMBALAM
         ERNAKULAM 682 509.

       3. THILOTHEMA, AGED 57 YEARS,
         W/O.CHANDRAN, NIKATHILTHARA HOUSE, NAYARAMBALAM
         ERNAKULAM 682 509.

       4. CHANDRAN, AGED 67 YEARS,
         S/O.KARIBAN, NIKATHILTHARA HOUSE, NAYARAMBALAM
         ERNAKULAM 682 509.

         BY ADV. SRI.B.RAMACHANDRAN

RESPONDENTS/ COMPLAINANT & STATE:
--------------------------------------------

       1. STATE OF KERALA
         REPRESENTED BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR
         HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM.

       2. SITHARA, AGED 25 YEARS,
         D/O.PADMANABHAN, KARODIYIL HOUSE, NJARAKKAL P.O
         ERNAKULAM 682 505.

         R2 BY ADV. SRI.SIKHILMON S.V.
         R1 BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SRI.DHANESH MATHEW MANJOORAN

         THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE HAVING COME UP FOR ADMISSION ON
       13-10-2014, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE FOLLOWING:

Crl.MC.No. 5473 of 2014 (B)
---------------------------

                                  APPENDIX

PETITIONER(S)' EXHIBITS:
-------------------------------

ANNEXURE-I. COPY OF THE CHARGE SHEET DATED 15.6.11 NUMBERED AS CC
4261/11 OF HONOURABLE JUDICIAL IST CLASS MAGISTRATE COURT 1, KOCHI.

ANNEXURE A2. COPY OF THE AWARD DATED 28.8.14 PASSED IN OP 2036/12
AND MC 296/12 OF THE FAMILY COURT, ERNAKULAM.

ANNEXURE A3. COPY OF THE OP 1653/14 DATED 28.8.14 OF THE FAMILY COURT,
ERNAKULAM.

RESPONDENT(S)' EXHIBITS:              NIL
--------------------------------




                                               // TRUE COPY //




                                               P.A TO JUDGE.


                    ALEXANDER THOMAS, J.
                    -----------------------------
                    Crl.M.C.No.5473 Of 2014
                  ---------------------------------
           Dated this the 13th day of October, 2014.

                             O R D E R

      The above Criminal Miscellaneous Case (Crl.M.C) has

been filed with the prayer to quash Annexure-I Charge Sheet

which is taken into file as C.C.No.4261/2011 on the file of the

Judicial First Class Magistrate Court-I, Kochi. Petitioners are

the accused in C.C.No.4261/2011 on the file of the Judicial

First Class Magistrate Court-I, Kochi. The said Calender Case

arose out of a private criminal complaint filed by the 2nd

respondent     wife    before     the     Magistrate Court   as

Crl.M.P.No.1315/2011 alleging offences under Sections 498(A),

403, 406 and 34 of the Indian Penal Code. The Magistrate

Court forwarded the complaint under Section 156 Cr.P.C for

investigation through the Sub Inspector of Police, Njarakkal

Police Station, Ernakulam District consequent to which the

police   has    registered     Crime     No.661/2011  for  the

aforementioned offences. The 1st petitioner/1st accused is the

husband of the 2nd respondent and petitioners 2 to 4/accused

Nos.2 to 4 are the brother, mother and father of the 1st

petitioner/1st accused. Annexure-1 is the charge sheet which

                              ::2::

Crl.M.C.No.5473 Of 2014

has resulted in C.C.No.4261/2011 before the above said

Magistrate Court.     The brief of the case is that the 1st

petitioner/1st accused married the 2nd respondent-defacto

complainant on 9.5.2010 after prolonged love affair between

them and with the permission of both families as per the Hindu

religious rites and there arose serious matrimonial disputes

between the spouses which resulted in litigations before the

Family Court concerned for return of gold ornaments and

money and for maintenance etc. Spouses decided to amicably

settle the disputes by resorting to file joint petition for divorce

on mutual consent and award was passed in the litigations in

the Family Court and the spouses filed joint petition for

divorce. In Annexure-III joint petition entered into between

the 1st petitioner and the 2nd respondent herein they have

agreed    to   terminate   the     impugned     proceedings      in

C.C.No.4261/2011 which is pending before the Judicial First

Class Magistrate Court-I, Kochi. The other terms of settlement

are elaborated in Annexure-III.     The real disputants to the

controversy have decided to amicably settle all the pending

disputes between them and therefore no purpose would be

served in continuing the impugned criminal proceedings, it is

                                ::3::

Crl.M.C.No.5473 Of 2014

stated. It is in the background of this facts and circumstances,

that the aforementioned Crl.M.C has been filed.

      2.   The     Crl.M.C.     has     been    admitted      and

Sri.S.V.Sikhilmon has taken notice for the 2nd respondent and

the learned Public Prosecutor has taken notice for the 1st

respondent State of Kerala.

      3.   Heard Sri. B.Ramachandran, learned counsel for the

petitioners, Sri.S.V.Sikhilmon, learned counsel for the 2nd

respondent and the learned Public Prosecutor appearing for the

1st respondent State of Kerala.

      4.   The    learned   counsel   for  the   petitioners  has

submitted that during the pendency of the aforementioned

criminal proceedings, the matter has been settled amicably

between the parties, and that the continuation of the

proceedings in the above case/crime will cause miscarriage of

justice to both parties as the real disputants to the controversy

have arrived at an amicable settlement and any further

continuation of the criminal proceedings will amount to sheer

wastage of time and money and would unnecessarily strain the

judicial, administrative and financial resources of the State.

                               ::4::

Crl.M.C.No.5473 Of 2014

      5.   Sri.S.V.Sikhilmon, learned counsel appearing for the

2nd respondent has submitted, on the basis of the specific

instructions furnished by the 2nd respondent, that the 2nd

respondent has amicably settled the disputes with the

petitioners as stated above and that she has no objection in

the quashment of the impugned criminal proceedings and that

the complainant/victim/injured does not intend to proceed any

further against the petitioners as she has no grievance against

them and that she will not raise any dispute/complaint in

future if the prayer for quashing the impugned criminal

proceedings is allowed.

      6.   The learned Public Prosecutor also was heard, who

also has not raised any serious objections and submitted that

the court may consider the prayer in this case in the light of

the law well settled by the Apex Court in that regard.

      7.   After having carefully considered the submissions of

the parties and after having perused the pleadings as well as

the documents and materials placed in this matter, it can be

seen that the offences alleged are more or less personal in

nature and not much element of public interest is involved.

The crucial aspect of the matter is that though such offences

                                ::5::

Crl.M.C.No.5473 Of 2014

are involved, the real disputants to the controversy, which has

led to the impugned criminal proceedings, have actually

arrived at an amicable settlement of the matter. From the

submissions made by the learned counsel for the 2nd

respondent,    it   is    clear    to    the    Court     that the

injured/victim/defacto complainant has no further grievance

against the petitioners/accused in the light of the settlement

arrived at by them. In this connection, it is relevant to note

the decision of the Apex Court in the case between Gian

Singh v. State of Punjab reported in 2013 (1) SCC (Cri)

160, para 61 = (2012) 10 SCC 303 = 2012(4) KLT 108(SC),

wherein the Supreme Court has held as follows in para 61

thereof [ See SCC (Cri)]:

              "61. The position that emerges from the

        above discussion can be summarised thus: the

        power of the High Court in quashing a criminal

        proceeding or FIR or complaint in exercise of its

        inherent jurisdiction is distinct and different

        from the power given to a criminal court for

        compounding the offences under S.320 of the

        Code. Inherent power is of wide plenitude with

        no statutory limitation but it has to be exercised

        in accord with the guideline engrafted in such

        power viz;(i) to secure the ends of justice or (ii)

                                  ::6::

Crl.M.C.No.5473 Of 2014

         to prevent abuse of the process of any Court.

         In what cases power to quash the criminal

         proceeding or complaint or F.I.R. may be

         exercised where the offender and victim have

         settled their dispute would depend on the facts

         and circumstances of each case and no category

         can be prescribed..

It is further held as follows:-

          "......... But   the  criminal    cases   having

          overwhelmingly    and    pre-dominatingly    civil

          flavour stand on different footing for the

          purposes of quashing, particularly the offences

          arising from commercial, financial, mercantile,

          civil, partnership or such like transactions or

          the offences arising out of matrimony relating

          to dowry etc. or the family disputes where the

          wrong is basically private or personal in nature

          and the parties have resolved their entire

          dispute. In this category of cases, High Court

          may quash criminal proceedings if in its view,

          because of the compromise between the

          offender and victim, the possibility of conviction

          is remote and bleak and continuation of

          criminal case would put accused to great

          oppression and prejudice and extreme injustice

          would be caused to him by not quashing the

          criminal    case  despite    full and   complete

          settlement     and   compromise       with    the

          victim........"

                                 ::7::

Crl.M.C.No.5473 Of 2014

Further, in the case Jitendra Raghuvanshi and Others v.

Babita Raghuvanshi and another reported in (2013) 4 SCC

58 [see 2013 (1) KLD 817 (SC)], the Apex Court has held as

follows:-

               "8. It is not in dispute that matrimonial

         disputes have been on considerable increase in

         recent times resulting in filing of complaints

         under Sections 498A and 406 of I.P.C. not only

         against the husband but also against the

         relatives of the husband. The question is when

         such matters are resolved either by the wife

         agreeing to rejoin the matrimonial home or by

         mutual settlement of other pending disputes for

         which both the sides approached the High

         Court and jointly prayed for quashing of the

         criminal proceedings or the FIR or complaint by

         the wife under Sections 498A and 406 of I.P.C.,

         whether the prayer can be declined on the sole

         ground that since the offences are non-

         compoundable under Section 320 of the Code,

         it would be impermissible for the court to

         quash the criminal proceedings or FIR or

         complaint.

               9. It is not in dispute that in the case on

         hand subsequent to the filing of the criminal

         complaint under Sections 498A and 406 of IPC

         and Sections 3 and 4 of the Dowry Prohibition

         Act, 1961, with the help and intervention of

                                   ::8::

Crl.M.C.No.5473 Of 2014

         family members, friends and well-wishers, the

         parties concerned have amicably settled their

         differences   and    executed    a   compromise/

         settlement.    Pursuant thereto, the appellants

         filed the said compromise before the Trial Court

         with a request to place the same on record and

         to drop the criminal proceedings against the

         appellants herein. It is also not in dispute that

         in additional to the mutual settlement arrived

         at by the parties, respondent/-wife has also

         filed an affidavit stating that she did not wish to

         pursue the criminal proceedings against the

         appellants and fully supported the contents of

         the settlement deed. It is the grievance of the

         appellants that no only the Trial Court rejected

         such prayer of the parties but also the High

         Court failed toe exercise its jurisdiction under

         Section 482 of the Code only on the ground

         that the criminal proceedings relate to the

         offences punishable under Sections 498A and

         406 of IPC which are non-compoundable in

         nature.

                15. In our view, it is the duty of the

         Courts to     encourage genuine settlements

         of matrimonial disputes, particularly, when

         the same are on considerable increase.

         Even if the offences are non-compoundable,

         if they relate to matrimonial disputes and

         the Court is satisfied that the parties have

                               ::9::

Crl.M.C.No.5473 Of 2014

         settled the same amicably and without any

         pressure, we hold that for the purpose of

         securing ends of justice, Section 320 of the

         Code would not be a bar to the exercise of

         power of quashing of FIR, complaint or the

         subsequent criminal proceedings.

               16.  There has been an outburst of

         matrimonial disputes in recent times. The

         institution   of   marriage    occupies    an

         important place and it has an important

         role to play in the society. Therefore, every

         effort should be made in the interest of the

         individuals in order to enable them to settle

         down in life and live peacefully.      If the

         parties ponder over their defaults and

         terminate their disputes amicably by mutual

         agreement instead of fighting it out in a

         Court of law, in order to do complete justice

         in the matrimonial matters, the Courts

         should be less hesitant in exercising its

         extraordinary jurisdiction.   It is trite to

         state that the power under Section 482

         should be exercised sparingly and with

         circumspection only when the Court is

         convinced, on the basis of material on

         record, that allowing the proceedings to

         continue would be an abuse of the process

                               ::10::

Crl.M.C.No.5473 Of 2014

         of the Court or that the ends of justice

         require that the proceedings ought to be

         quashed."

        8.        Considering the facts and circumstances of

this case, it is seen further that the impugned criminal

proceedings have arisen consequent to the matrimonial

disputes between the disputants and the disputes have been

settled amicably between the parties. Accordingly, this Court is

inclined to hold that in the light of the facts and circumstances

involved in the present case and particularly in view of the

settlement arrived at between the parties, the principles laid

down in the aforementioned decisions of the Apex Court will be

squarely applicable in the present case. Moreover, since the

real disputants to the controversy have amicably settled the

disputes, which led to these impugned criminal proceedings, it

is also the duty of the court to promote such settlement,

instead of compelling the parties to go on with the dispute. It

is also pertinent to note that since the matter is settled out of

court, in the event of proceeding with the trial, there may not

be any fruitful prosecution and the chances of conviction of the

accused is rather negligible and therefore, the net result of

                              ::11::

Crl.M.C.No.5473 Of 2014

continuance of criminal proceedings would be sheer waste of

judicial time rather meaningless and therefore would amount

to abuse of the process of court proceedings in the larger

sense. Hence following decisions of the Apex Court cited supra,

this Court is inclined to hold that the Crl.M.C. can be allowed

by granting the prayers sought for.

      9.   In the result, the Crl.M.C. is allowed and the

impugned     Annexure-I     Charge    Sheet    which   led   to

C.C.No.4261/2011 on the file of the Judicial First Class

Magistrate Court-I, Kochi in Crime No.661/2011 of Njarakkal

Police Station and all further proceedings therefrom stands

quashed. The petitioner shall produce certified copies of this

order before the court below, Judicial First Class Magistrate

Court-I, Kochi as well as before the Station House Officer,

Njarakkal, Ernakulam District.




                                         ALEXANDER THOMAS,
                                                  Judge.

bkn/-



