
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALAAT ERNAKULAM

                                             PRESENT:

                         THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE ANTONY DOMINIC
                                                    &
                            THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE P.D.RAJAN

                MONDAY,THE 13TH DAY OF JANUARY 2014/23RD POUSHA, 1935

                                   Mat.Appeal.No. 424 of 2012 ()
                                      ------------------------------
        AGAINST THE JUDGMENT IN OP 1281/2004 of FAMILY COURT,TRIVANDRUM
                                        DATED 30-04-2012


APPELLANT(S)/PETITIONER:
------------------------

            MOHANAKUMAR, AGED 48 YEARS
            HOUSE NO 186/285, M.M.K. ELLOM,
            MEENAKSHIPURAM N.M.C NAGARAJA CROSS ROAD,
            NAGERCOIL, KANYAKUMARI DIST

            BY ADVS.SRI.G.VENUGOPAL
                          SRI.L.RAJESH NARAYAN

RESPONDENT(S):
----------------------------

        1. SOBHA @ SWARNALATHA, AGED 38 YEARS,
            D/O.PRABHAVATHI NATARAJA BHAVAN T.C. NO.41/8241
            PUTHENKOTTA, THIRUVANANTHAPURAM DIST.

        2. AJI(MINOR), AGED 15 YEARS
            REPRESENTED BY SWARNALATHA (MOTHER)

            R1 BY ADV. SRI.BASANT BALAJI

            THIS MATRIMONIAL APPEAL HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD ON 13-01-2014,
THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY DELIVERED THE FOLLOWING:


           ANTONY  DOMINIC & P.D.RAJAN, JJ.
          ----------------------------------
                 Mat.A.No.424 of 2012
          ----------------------------------
        Dated this the 13th day of January, 2014

                       JUDGMENT

Antony Dominic, J.


1.This appeal is filed against the judgment rendered by

 the Family Court, Trivandrum in OP.1281/04.



2.The OP was filed by the respondents herein, who are

 the wife and child of the appellant husband.     Going

 by the pleadings, the marriage between the first

 respondent   and  the  appellant   was  solemnized  on

 23.2.1995 and in the wedlock, the second respondent

 was born.   According to the first respondent, at the

 time of marriage, the appellant had demanded 100

 sovereigns of gold ornaments and Rs.1,00,000/- as

 dowry.   However, she was given only 75 sovereigns of

 gold   ornaments,   Rs.75,000/-    towards   patrimony,

 furniture worth Rs.50,000/- and household utensils

 for Rs.30,000/-.   It is stated that after marriage,

 the appellant utilized the entire gold ornaments and

 the money for constructing a building in his property

 at Nagarcoil.    She alleged that on 29.9.2003, the

MA.424/12
                          2




 appellant sent her to her house at Trivandrum to

 fetch an amount of Rs.1,00,000/- from her father.

 However, she returned to the matrimonial home on

 5.10.2003 with her mother and informed the appellant

 of her inability to pay the amount.   Thereupon, she,

 the child and her mother were brutally attacked and

 were ousted from the house.  They took refuge in the

 neighbour's residence and got admitted in a hospital

 on 6.10.2003.   She made a complaint to the police.

 It is subsequently that she filed the OP seeking

 return of 75 sovereigns of gold ornaments, household

 articles worth Rs.80,000/- and also past and future

 maintenance for her and for the child at the rate of

 Rs.3,000/- and Rs.2,500/- respectively.



3.The appellant filed a written statement contesting

 the claims of the respondents.     Before the Family

 Court, PWs.1 to 3, the first respondent, her father

 and mother, were examined and the appellant was

 examined as CPW1.   Exts.A1 to A7 and B1 to B5 were

 also marked.    The Family Court, by the impugned

 judgment and decree dated 30.4.2012, directed the

 appellant to return 50 sovereigns of gold ornaments

MA.424/12
                           3




 or its market value at the rate of Rs.21,500/- per

 sovereign and Rs.75,000/- towards patrimony and to

 pay past and future maintenance at the rate of

 Rs.2,000/- to the first respondent and Rs.1,500/- to

 the second respondent child.  It is aggrieved by this

 judgment and decree passed by the Family Court that

 the appellant husband has filed this appeal.



4.We heard the learned counsel for the appellant and

 the learned counsel appearing for the respondents.



5.In so far as the maintenance ordered is concerned, as

 we have already stated, past and future maintenance

 claimed was at the rate of Rs.3,000/- and Rs.2,500/-

 respectively and the Family Court, by the impugned

 order, decreed maintenance at the rate of Rs.2,000/-

 and Rs.1,500/- respectively to the first and second

 respondents.   The status of the first respondent as

 the wife of the appellant and the paternity of the

 second respondent child are not matters of dispute.

 The fact that the appellant is a bus conductor in the

 Tamil Nadu State Transport Corporation is also not

 disputed.   The evidence before the Family Court also

MA.424/12
                          4




 shows that even according to the appellant, who was

 examined as CPW1, he was earning a carry-home salary

 of Rs.10,000/- and he also admitted his willingness

 to pay maintenance to the respondents at the rate as

 ordered by the court.



6.As far as the income of the first respondent is

 concerned, attempt of the appellant was to contend

 that she owns a photocopying shop.   However, in her

 cross examination, she has denied the ownership of

 the shop and according to her, the shop is owned by

 her father.  Her father, who was examined as PW2, has

 also confirmed that the shop is owned by him.    The

 appellant also contended that the respondent owns a

 two storeyed building and that the first floor was

 let out on rent.  However, in her evidence, the first

 respondent has denied the ownership of the building

 and PW2, her father, deposed that the building is

 owned by him.    The appellant did not produce any

 evidence to prove his case that the photocopying shop

 or the building mentioned above are owned by the

 first respondent.    In other words, there was no

MA.424/12
                           5




 evidence to show that the first respondent had any

 independent source of income to maintain herself.



7.As regards the income of the second respondent child,

 at the time of evidence, the child was a 10th standard

 student who would not have any income of its own.   It

 was considering these circumstances that the Family

 Court awarded payment of past and future maintenance

 at       the rate   of   Rs.2,000/-  and    Rs.1,500/-

 respectively.     Having considered the case in its

 entirety, we are unable to find any illegality in the

 conclusion of the Family Court regarding maintenance.



8.The second issue that arises for consideration is the

 correctness of the decree passed by the Family Court

 directing return of 50 sovereigns of gold ornaments

 or its market value of Rs.21,500/- per sovereign.   It

 is true that there is no document except Ext.A4

 series of photographs and the oral evidence of Pws.1

 to      3 to substantiate the  claim  that  the  first

 respondent had 75 sovereigns of gold at the time of

 her marriage.   However, it is to be noted that in the

 pleadings, she had specifically contended that at the

MA.424/12
                           6




 time of her marriage, although the appellant had

 demanded   100  sovereigns  of  gold  ornaments,   her

 parents could give her only 75 sovereigns of gold.

 Though such a specific averment is made in paragraph

 2 of the petition, there is no denial of this

 assertion in paragraph 5 of the written statement, in

 which, paragraph 2 of the OP was answered by the

 appellant.   In other words, the appellant did not

 deny the fact that the respondent had 75 sovereigns

 of gold ornaments at the time of her marriage.



9.On the other hand, the appellant attempted to contend

 that the respondent left the matrimonial home on her

 own and that at the time of leaving the matrimonial

 home, she had taken whatever ornaments she owned.   In

 this context, the consistent evidence of PWs.1 and 2

 together with Ext.A3 series of letters written by the

 first respondent to her father show that she was

 subjected to various types of matrimonial cruelties

 at her matrimonial home.   The contents of Ext.A3 and

 the oral evidence, as rightly pointed out by the

 Family Court, substantiate her case that it was on

 account of the matrimonial cruelties that she had to

MA.424/12
                           7




 leave the house of the appellant.   It is evident from

 the pleadings that the first respondent, her child

 and her mother were ousted from the matrimonial home

 at the night of 5.10.2003 when they were assaulted by

 the appellant.    If such a thing had happened, it

 would be imprudent to think that the first respondent

 thereupon took with her the gold ornaments at the

 time of leaving the house.     The appellant did not

 also adduce any independent evidence to substantiate

 his plea that the first respondent had taken away the

 gold ornaments.   Evidently therefore, the fact that

 she had gold ornaments at the time of her marriage

 and that she did not take the gold ornaments in

 question at the time of leaving the matrimonial home

 stand proved in this case.



10.Another question to be considered is the quantity of

 gold ornaments that the first respondent had.       We

 have already found that there is no documentary

 evidence regarding the quantum of gold possessed by

 her.      However, Ext.A4  wedding  photographs,   the

 genuineness   of  which  were  not  disputed  by   the

 appellant,   showed that   the  first  respondent  was

MA.424/12
                            8




 wearing a substantial quantity of gold ornaments and

 referring to this material, the Family Court reached

 a conservative estimate that the first respondent

 wore at least 50 sovereigns of gold ornaments at the

 time of her marriage.    This estimate, though a rough

 one, was the only manner of quantification of gold

 that was possible in the circumstances of this case

 and we do not think that the appellant has succeeded

 in pointing out any vitiating circumstances in such

 quantification.        We,   therefore,  uphold   that

 conclusion of the Family Court.



11.Now what remains is the decree enabling the first

 respondent to recover Rs.75,000/- paid as patrimony.

 In so far as this appeal is concerned, in paragraph 2

 of the petition, the wife has stated that at the time

 of      her marriage, she  was  given  Rs.75,000/-  as

 patrimony.     In paragraph 5 of the written statement

 filed by the appellant, there is no specific denial

 of this claim.       That apart, evidence tendered by

 PWs.1 and 2 and a photograph produced along with

 Ext.A4 series show that at the time of her betrothal,

 the amount was paid to the appellant.   Apart from the

MA.424/12
                          9




 attempt made by the appellant during the course of

 his evidence to deny the receipt of patrimony, he did

 not adduce any evidence in that regard.     It is in

 this circumstance that the Family Court accepted this

 claim also and we are unable to find any fault in

 that conclusion also.



 In      the result, we do  not  find  any   vitiating

 circumstances justifying interference with the order

 of the Family Court.     The appeal fails.     It is

 accordingly dismissed.



                                   Sd/-
                              ANTONY DOMINIC, Judge.


                                    Sd/-
                                 P.D.RAJAN, Judge.
 kkb.



