
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                        PRESENT:

               THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE ALEXANDER THOMAS

       THURSDAY, THE 30TH DAY OF OCTOBER 2014/8TH KARTHIKA, 1936

                              Crl.MC.No.6136 of 2014 ()
                                ---------------------------
           CRIME NO.179/2014 OF KUNDARA POLICE STATION, KOLLAM


PETITIONERS/ACCUSED 1 & 2:
-----------------------------------

       1. SHAHUL HAMEED AGED 39 YEARS
         S/O.ABOOBEKKER KUNJU, IRSHAD MANZIL, CHANDANATHOPPU
         KOTTAMKARA, KOLLAM.

       2. DILSHAD BEEGAM, AGED 18 YEARS
         D/O.SHAHUL HAMEED, S/O.ABOOBEKKER KUNJU, IRSHAD MANZIL
         CHANDANATHOPPU, KOTTAMKARA, KOLLAM.

         BY ADV. SRI.AJAYA KUMAR. G

RESPONDENTS/STATE & DEFACTO COMPLAINANT:
---------------------------------------------------------

       1. STATE OF KERALA
         REPRESENTED BY THE PUBLC PROSECUTOR
         HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM.

       2. RAHMATH BEEVI, AGED 42 YEARS
         D/O.MOIDEENKUTTY, IRSHAD MANZIL, CHANDANATHOPPU
         KOTTAMKARA, KOLLAM. FROM ILAKKARA KUNNUMALI
         CHEMMANITA.P.O., MALAPPURAM. PIN-676 505.

         R2 BY ADV. SRI.M.R.SARIN
         R1 BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SRI.R.GITHESH

         THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD ON 30-10-
       2014, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE FOLLOWING:

Crl.MC.No. 6136 of 2014 ()
---------------------------

                                   APPENDIX

PETITIONER(S)' EXHIBITS:
------------------------------

ANNEXURE 1- CERTIFIED COPY OF THE FIR IN CRIME NO.179/2014 OF KUNDARA
POLICE STATION, KOLLAM.

ANNEXURE 2- TRUE COPY OF THE SETTLEMENT DATED 23.9.2014.

ANNEXURE 3- AFFIDAVIT SWORN BY THE 2ND RESPONDENT.


RESPONDENT(S)' EXHIBITS:               NIL
---------------------------------




                                                // TRUE COPY //




                                                P.A TO JUDGE


                    ALEXANDER THOMAS, J.
                    -----------------------------
                    Crl.M.C.No.6136 Of 2014
                 ---------------------------------
           Dated this the 30th day of October, 2014.

                             O R D E R


      The above captioned Criminal Miscellaneous Case (Crl.M.C),

invoking the inherent powers conferred on this Court under

Section 482 Cr.P.C, has been filed with the prayer to quash the

impugned Annexure-1 FIR in Crime No.179/2014 of Kundara

Police Station, Kollam District and all further proceedings arising

therefrom. The two petitioners herein are the two accused in

impugned Annexure-1 FIR in Crime No.179/2014 of Kundara

Police Station registered for offences under Sections 498A, 294

(b), 323, 325 r/w 34 Indian Penal Code. 2nd respondent (defacto

complainant) is the wife of the 1st petitioner and 2nd petitioner is

the daughter of the 1st petitioner in his first marriage. The 1st

petitioner married the 2nd respondent on 28.11.2010 at her

residence. The 1st petitioner had an earlier marriage and his first

wife is no more. After the marriage, the 1st petitioner and 2nd

respondent were living together at the 1st petitioner's house.

Later, due to difference of opinion the 2nd respondent (defacto

complainant) filed a complaint before the Sub inspector of Police,

Kundara     and  consequently,      Annexure-1    FIR   in   Crime

No.179/2014 of Kundara Police Station was registered for the

                               ::2::

Crl.M.C.No.6136 Of 2014

aforementioned offences. The brief of the prosecution case is

that the accused ill-treated the defacto complainant with cruelty

and harassed her demanding dowry.       It is further stated that

other legal proceedings are also pending before the Judicial First

Class Magistrate Court-I, Kollam and Munsiff Court, Kollam. It is

stated that now all the disputes between the parties were settled

amicably in the mediation held at the Legal Service Authority,

Kollam and the parties have agreed to terminate all the disputes

against the petitioner and the 2nd respondent has also agreed to

terminate the impugned criminal proceedings pending against the

petitioners in the aforementioned crime and that the 2nd

respondent has no surviving grievance against the petitioners

and she has no objection in quashing Annexure-1 FIR in Crime

No.179/2014 of Kundara Police Station. Annexure-2 is the copy

of the memorandum of agreement entered into between the 2nd

respondent and the 1st petitioner before the District Mediation

Centre, Kollam.      Various clauses have been stipulated in

Annexure-2 mediation agreement for the termination of the

various cases between the petitioners. It is stipulated in clause

(v) of Annexure-A2 agreement that for quashing Annexure-A1

FIR in Crime No.179/2014, the parties will seek for quashing FIR

in the impugned crimeby approaching this Court.          The 2nd

                                ::3::

Crl.M.C.No.6136 Of 2014

respondent has also sworn to an affidavit which is produced as

Annexure-A3 in this Crl.M.C stating the above aspects and that

all the disputes have been amiably settled in the mediation held

at the District Mediation Centre, Kollam and the parties have

agreed to terminate all legal proceedings against the petitioners

and agreed to terminate all the criminal proceedings against the

petitioners herein who are the accused in the above said crime

and that the 2nd respondent has no complaint against all the

accused in the above crime and she has no objection in quashing

FIR in Crime No.179/2014 and that she has no surviving

grievance against the petitioners herein. It is in the background

of these facts and circumstances, this Crl.M.C has been filed.

      2.   The Crl.M.C. has been admitted and Sri.M.R.Sarin has

taken notice for the 2nd respondent and the learned Public

Prosecutor has taken notice for the 1st respondent-State of

Kerala.




      3.   Heard Sri.Ajaya Kumar G., learned counsel for the

petitioners, Sri.M.R.Sarin, learned counsel for the 2nd respondent

and the learned Public Prosecutor appearing for the 1st

respondent-State of Kerala.

      4.   The learned counsel for the petitioners has submitted

                                ::4::

Crl.M.C.No.6136 Of 2014

that during the pendency of the aforementioned criminal

proceedings, the matter has been settled amicably between the

parties, and that the continuation of the proceedings in the above

case/crime will cause miscarriage of justice to both parties as the

real disputants to the controversy have arrived at an amicable

settlement and any further continuation of the criminal

proceedings will amount to sheer wastage of time and money

and would unnecessarily strain the judicial, administrative and

financial resources of the State.

      5.    Sri.M.R.Sarin, learned counsel appearing for the 2nd

respondent has submitted, on the basis of the specific

instructions furnished by the 2nd respondent, that the 2nd

respondent has amicably settled the disputes with the petitioners

as stated above and that she has no objection in the quashment

of   the   impugned     criminal    proceedings   and   that   the

complainant/victim/injured does not intend to proceed any

further against the petitioners as she has no grievance against

them and that she will not raise any dispute/complaint in future if

the prayer for quashing the impugned criminal proceedings is

allowed.

      6.    The learned Public Prosecutor also was heard, who

also has not raised any serious objections and submitted that the

                               ::5::

Crl.M.C.No.6136 Of 2014

court may consider the prayer in this case in the light of the law

well settled by the Apex Court in that regard.

      7.   After having carefully considered the submissions of

the parties and after having perused the pleadings as well as the

documents and materials placed in this matter, it can be seen

that the offences alleged are more or less personal in nature and

not much element of public interest is involved.       The crucial

aspect of the matter is that though such offences are involved,

the real disputants to the controversy, which has led to the

impugned criminal proceedings, have actually arrived at an

amicable settlement of the matter. From the submissions made

by the learned counsel for the 2nd respondent, it is clear to the

Court that the injured/victim/defacto complainant has no further

grievance against the petitioners/accused in the light of the

settlement arrived at by them. In this connection, it is relevant

to note the decision of the Apex Court in the case between Gian

Singh v. State of Punjab reported in 2013 (1) SCC (Cri) 160,

para 61 = (2012) 10 SCC 303 = 2012(4) KLT 108(SC), wherein

the Supreme Court has held as follows in para 61 thereof [ See

SCC (Cri)]:

           "61. The position that emerges from the above
      discussion can be summarised thus: the power of the
      High Court in quashing a criminal proceeding or FIR or

                                   ::6::

Crl.M.C.No.6136 Of 2014

       complaint in exercise of its inherent jurisdiction is
       distinct and different from the power given to a criminal
       court for compounding the offences under S.320 of the
       Code.     Inherent power is of wide plenitude with no
       statutory limitation but it has to be exercised in accord
       with the guideline engrafted in such power viz;(i) to
       secure the ends of justice or (ii) to prevent abuse of
       the process of any Court.        In what cases power to
       quash the criminal proceeding or complaint or F.I.R.
       may be exercised where the offender and victim have
       settled their dispute would depend on the facts and
       circumstances of each case and no category can be
       prescribed..

It is further held as follows:-

       "......... But the criminal cases having overwhelmingly
       and pre-dominatingly civil flavour stand on different
       footing for the purposes of quashing, particularly the
       offences arising from commercial, financial, mercantile,
       civil, partnership or such like transactions or the
       offences arising out of matrimony relating to dowry
       etc. or the family disputes where the wrong is basically
       private or personal in nature and the parties have
       resolved their entire dispute. In this category of cases,
       High Court may quash criminal proceedings if in its
       view, because of the compromise between the offender
       and victim, the possibility of conviction is remote and
       bleak and continuation of criminal case would put
       accused to great oppression and prejudice and
       extreme injustice would be caused to him by not
       quashing the criminal case despite full and complete
       settlement and compromise with the victim........"

Further, in the case Jitendra Raghuvanshi and Others v.

Babita Raghuvanshi and another reported in (2013) 4 SCC

58 [see 2013 (1) KLD 817 (SC)], the Apex Court has held as

follows:-

              "8. It is not in dispute that matrimonial disputes
       have been on considerable increase in recent times

                                  ::7::

Crl.M.C.No.6136 Of 2014

      resulting in filing of complaints under Sections 498A
      and 406 of I.P.C. not only against the husband but also
      against the relatives of the husband. The question is
      when such matters are resolved either by the wife
      agreeing to rejoin the matrimonial home or by mutual
      settlement of other pending disputes for which both
      the sides approached the High Court and jointly prayed
      for quashing of the criminal proceedings or the FIR or
      complaint by the wife under Sections 498A and 406 of
      I.P.C., whether the prayer can be declined on the sole
      ground that since the offences are non-compoundable
      under Section 320        of the Code, it would be
      impermissible for the court to quash the criminal
      proceedings or FIR or complaint.

            9. It is not in dispute that in the case on hand
      subsequent to the filing of the criminal complaint under
      Sections 498A and 406 of IPC and Sections 3 and 4 of
      the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961, with the help and
      intervention of family members, friends and well-
      wishers, the parties concerned have amicably settled
      their   differences   and   executed    a   compromise/
      settlement. Pursuant thereto, the appellants filed the
      said compromise before the Trial Court with a request
      to place the same on record and to drop the criminal
      proceedings against the appellants herein. It is also
      not in dispute that in additional to the mutual
      settlement arrived at by the parties, respondent/-wife
      has also filed an affidavit stating that she did not wish
      to pursue the criminal proceedings against the
      appellants and fully supported the contents of the
      settlement deed. It is the grievance of the appellants
      that no only the Trial Court rejected such prayer of the
      parties but also the High Court failed toe exercise its
      jurisdiction under Section 482 of the Code only on the
      ground that the criminal proceedings relate to the
      offences punishable under Sections 498A and 406 of
      IPC which are non-compoundable in nature.
            15. In our view, it is the duty of the Courts to
      encourage     genuine    settlements    of   matrimonial
      disputes,   particularly,  when    the   same    are  on
      considerable increase. Even if the offences are non-
      compoundable, if they relate to matrimonial disputes
      and the Court is satisfied that the parties have settled
      the same amicably and without any pressure, we hold

                                ::8::

Crl.M.C.No.6136 Of 2014

      that for the purpose of securing ends of justice,
      Section 320 of the Code would not be a bar to the
      exercise of power of quashing of FIR, complaint or the
      subsequent criminal proceedings.
            16. There has been an outburst of matrimonial
      disputes in recent times. The institution of marriage
      occupies an important place and it has an important
      role to play in the society.   Therefore, every effort
      should be made in the interest of the individuals in
      order to enable them to settle down in life and live
      peacefully.  If the parties ponder over their defaults
      and terminate their disputes amicably by mutual
      agreement instead of fighting it out in a Court of law,
      in order to do complete justice in the matrimonial
      matters, the Courts should be less hesitant in
      exercising its extraordinary jurisdiction. It is trite to
      state that the power under Section 482 should be
      exercised sparingly and with circumspection only when
      the Court is convinced, on the basis of material on
      record, that allowing the proceedings to continue
      would be an abuse of the process of the Court or that
      the ends of justice require that the proceedings ought
      to be quashed."


      8.    Considering the facts and circumstances of this case,

it is seen further that the impugned criminal proceedings have

arisen consequent to the matrimonial disputes between the

disputants and the disputes have been settled amicably between

the parties. Accordingly, this Court is inclined to hold that in the

light of the facts and circumstances involved in the present case

and particularly in view of the settlement arrived at between the

parties, the principles laid down in the aforementioned decisions

of the Apex Court will be squarely applicable in the present case.

Moreover, since the real disputants to the controversy have

                                 ::9::

Crl.M.C.No.6136 Of 2014

amicably settled the disputes, which led to these impugned

criminal proceedings, it is also the duty of the court to promote

such settlement, instead of compelling the parties to go on with

the dispute. It is also pertinent to note that since the matter is

settled out of court, in the event of proceeding with the trial,

there may not be any fruitful prosecution and the chances of

conviction of the accused is rather negligible and therefore, the

net result of continuance of criminal proceedings would be sheer

waste of judicial time rather meaningless and therefore would

amount to abuse of the process of court proceedings in the larger

sense. Hence following decisions of the Apex Court cited supra,

this Court is inclined to hold that the Crl.M.C. can be allowed by

granting the prayers sought for.

      In the result, the Crl.M.C is allowed and the impugned

Annexure-1 FIR in Crime No.179/2014 of Kundara Police Station

and all further proceedings arising therefrom stand quashed. The

petitioners shall produce certified copies of this order before the

Magistrate Court concerned as well as before the Station House

Officer concerned.




                                            ALEXANDER THOMAS,
                                                     Judge.

bkn/-



