
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                      PRESENT:

                     THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE ALEXANDER THOMAS

               TUESDAY, THE 21ST DAY OF OCTOBER 2014/29TH ASWINA, 1936

                                           Crl.MC.No. 5953 of 2014 ()
                                                ---------------------------
                                    CC 348/2014 of C.J.M.,KASARAGOD
            CRIME NO. 207/2012 OF MANJESWAR POLICE STATION , KASARGOD

PETITIONER(S)/ACCUSED:
------------------------------------------

        1. ABDUL RAUF AGED 26 YEARS
            S/O.ABBAS, THIMMANADUKKA, PAIVALIKE VILLAGE
            KASARAGOD DISTRICT.

        2. K.P.ABBAS AGED 66 YEARS
            S/O.YOOSUF, THIMMANADUKKA, PAIVALIKE VILLAGE
            KASARAGOD DISTRICT.

        3. AYISUMMA, AGED 55 YEARS,
            W/O.P.K.ABBAS, THIMMANADUKKA, PAIVALIKE VILLAGE
            KASARAGOD DISTRICT.

        4. SAFIYA, AGED 28 YEARS
            W/O.ABOOBACKER SIDDIQUE, THIMMANADUKKA
            PAIVALIKE VILLAGE, KASARAGOD DISTRICT.

            BY ADV. SRI.S.JIJI

RESPONDENT(S)/STATE & DEFACTO COMPLAINANT:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

        1. STATE OF KERALA
            REPRESENTED BY THE PUBLIC PROSECUTOR
            HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM-682 031.

        2. FATHIMATH SAUDA
            W/O.ABDUL RAUF, THIMMANADUKKA, PAIVALIKE VILLAGE
            KASARAGOD DISTRICT.

            R2 BY ADV. SMT.K.S.SANTHI
            BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SRI.R.GITHESH

            THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE HAVING COME UP FOR ADMISSION ON 21-10-
2014, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE FOLLOWING:

Crl.MC.No. 5953 of 2014 ()
---------------------------

                                           APPENDIX

PETITIONER(S)' EXHIBITS
-------------------------------------

ANNEXURE-A1. TRUE COPY OF THE FIR IN CRIME NO.207/2012 OF MANJESHWAR
POLICE STATION, KASARAGOD.
ANNEXURE-A2. CERTIFIED COPY OF THE CHARGE SHEET IN .CRIME NO.207/2012 OF
MANJESHWAR POLICE STATION, KASARAGOD.
ANNEXURE-A3.AFFIDAVIT DATED 9/10/2014 SWORN BY THE 2ND RESPONDENT

RESPONDENT(S)' EXHIBITS
---------------------------------------
          NIL.

sdk+


                     ///True copy///




                                          P.S. to Judge


                       ALEXANDER THOMAS, J.
                    ==================
                      Crl.M.C.No. 5953 of 2014
                    ==================
             Dated this the 21st day of October, 2014
                              O R D E R

      The above captioned Criminal Miscellaneous Case (Crl.M.C.)

seeking invocation of the inherent powers conferred on this Court as

per Section 482 of the Cr.P.C., has been filed with the prayer to

quash the impugned Annexure-A2 final report/charge sheet in

Crime No. 207/2012 of Manjeshwar Police Station, which has led to

institution of Calendar Case, C.C.No. 348/2014 on the file of the

Judicial First Class Magistrate's Court, Kasargod, and all further

proceedings arising therefrom. The four petitioners herein are

accused Nos.1 to 4 in the above Crime No.207/2012 of Manjeshwar

Police Station, Kasargod district, for offence registered under

Section 498A of the IPC. The above crime was initiated on a

complaint filed by the 2nd respondent, which led to the registration

of the above said crime. The prosecution allegation is that after the

marriage between the 1st petitioner and the 2nd respondent-defacto

complainant, the 1st petitioner had taken away the gold ornaments

and money given to the 2nd respondent by her father, for his

expenses and had assaulted her after consuming alcohol. That she

CRL.M.C.5953/2014                - : 2 :-

was assaulted by the 1st petitioner and other petitioners in the

house of the 1st petitioner. The police, after investigation, filed the

impugned Annexure-A2 final report/charge sheet and later the

jurisdictional Magistrate had taken cognizance of the offence and

numbered the calendar case as C.C.No. 348/2014 on the file of the

Chief Judicial Magistrate's Court, Kasargod. It is submitted that now

the matter has been amicably settled between the parties and that

the 2nd respondent has no complaint against the petitioners and that

the 1st petitioner and the 2nd respondent are now living together as

husband and wife and leading a happy married life. That the matter

was settled by the mediatory intervention of well-wishers and their

relatives and now the spouses have come under one roof again and

living together as man and wife. The 2nd respondent has sworn to

affidavit dated 9.10.2014, produced as Annexure-A3 in this

Crl.M.C., stating the above said facts and further stating that the

matter has been amicably settled as stated above and that the case

was registered due to the misunderstanding and minor matrimonial

issues and after mediatory intervention of relatives and well-

wishers, the 1st petitioner and the 2nd respondent are now living

together as man and wife. That the petitioners have not committed

CRL.M.C.5953/2014                 - : 3 :-

any illegal acts against her and that all the gold ornaments are in

her custody, etc. and that she has no existing grievance in this case

and that the continuation of the impugned criminal proceedings

against the petitioners herein in the above case would seriously

affect the matrimonial relationship of the 1st petitioner and the

deponent (R2) and that she does not wish to prosecute against the

petitioners herein any further and that she has no objection to

quash the impugned criminal proceedings pending against the

petitioners/accused Nos.1 to 4 in C.C.No. 348/2014 on the file of

the Chief Judicial Magistrate Court, Kasargod, arising out of Crime

No. 207/2012 of Manjeshwar Police Station and it is accordingly

prayed by the 2nd respondent in the said affidavit that the above

said impugned criminal proceedings in the above said calendar case

arising out of the above said crime, may be quashed in the interests

of justice. It is in the background of these facts and circumstances

that the aforementioned Crl.M.C. has been filed.

      2.     The Crl.M.C. has been admitted and Smt.K.S.Santhi has

taken notice for the 2nd respondent and the learned Public

Prosecutor has taken notice for the 1st respondent-State of Kerala.

      3.     Heard Sri.Jiji.S., the learned counsel appearing for the

CRL.M.C.5953/2014                - : 4 :-

petitioners, Smt.K.S.Santhi, learned counsel appearing for R2 and

the learned Public Prosecutor appearing for the 1st respondent-

State.

      4.     The learned counsel for the petitioners has submitted

that   during    the pendency     of     the aforementioned   criminal

proceedings, the matter has been settled amicably between the

parties,   which   is  resulted   in     the subject  matter   of   the

aforementioned crime/case and that the continuation of the

proceedings in the above case/crime will cause miscarriage of

justice to both parties as the real disputants to the case have arrived

at an amicable settlement and any further continuation of the

criminal proceedings will amount to sheer wastage of time and

money and would unnecessarily strain the judicial, administrative

and financial resources of the State.

      5.     The learned counsel appearing for the 2nd respondent

has submitted on the basis of the specific instructions furnished by

the 2nd respondent that the 2nd respondent has amicably settled the

disputes with the petitioners and that she has no objection in the

quashment of the impugned criminal proceedings and that the

complainant/victim/injured does not intend to proceed any further

CRL.M.C.5953/2014                 - : 5 :-

against the petitioners as she has no grievance against them and

that she will not raise any dispute/compliant in future, if the prayer

for quashing the impugned final report is allowed.

      6.     The learned Public Prosecutor also was heard, who also

has not raised any serious objections and submitted that this court

may consider the prayers in this case in the light of the law well

settled by the Apex Court in that regard.

      7.     After having carefully considered the submissions of the

parties and after having perused the pleadings as well as the

documents and materials placed in this matter, it can be seen that

the offences alleged are more or less personal in nature and not

much element of public interest is involved. The crucial aspect of

the matter is that though such offences are involved, the real

disputants to the controversy which has led to the impugned

criminal proceedings, have actually arrived at an amicable

settlement of the matter. From the submissions made by the

learned counsel for the 2nd respondent, it is clear to the court that

the injured/victim/defacto complainant has no further grievance

against the petitioners/accused in the light of the settlement arrived

at by them. In this connection, it is relevant to note the decision of

CRL.M.C.5953/2014                        - : 6 :-

the Apex Court in the case between Gian Singh v. State of Punjab

reported in 2013 (1) SCC (Cri) 160, para 61 = (2012) 10 SCC 303 =

2012(4) KLT 108(SC), wherein the Supreme Court has held as

follows in para 61 thereof [ See SCC (Cri)]:

        can be"61.     The position that emerges from the above discussion
                  summarised thus: the power of the High Court in quashing
        a criminal proceeding or FIR or complaint in exercise of its
        inherent jurisdiction is distinct and different from the power given
        to a criminal court for compounding the offences under S.320 of
        the Code. Inherent power is of wide plenitude with no statutory
        limitation but it has to be exercised in accord with the guideline
        engrafted in such power viz;(i) to secure the ends of justice or (ii)
        to prevent abuse of the process of any Court. In what cases power
        to quash the criminal proceeding or complaint or F.I.R. may be
        exercised where the offender and victim have settled their dispute
        would depend on the facts and circumstances of each case and no
        category can be prescribed.."

It is further held as follows:-

        "......... But the criminal cases having overwhelmingly and pre-
        dominatingly civil flavour stand on different footing for the
        purposes of quashing, particularly the offences arising from
        commercial, financial,mercantile, civil, partnership or such like
        transactions or the offences arising out of matrimony relating to
        dowry etc. or the family disputes where the wrong is basically
        private or personal in nature and the parties have resolved their
        entire dispute. In this category of cases, High Court may quash
        criminal proceedings if in its view, because of the compromise
        between the offender and victim, the possibility of conviction is
        remote and bleak and continuation of criminal case would put
        accused to great oppression and prejudice and extreme injustice
        wouldand caused to himsettlement
                  be               by not quashing the criminal case despite
        full
        victim........"complete                  and compromise    with  the


Further, in the case Jitendra Raghuvanshi and Others v. Babita

Raghuvanshi and another reported in (2013) 4 SCC 58 [see 2013

(1) KLD 817 (SC)], the Apex Court has held as follows:-

CRL.M.C.5953/2014                      - : 7 :-

             "8. It is not in dispute that matrimonial disputes have been
      on considerable increase in recent times resulting in filing of
      complaints under Sections 498A and 406 of I.P.C. not only against
      the husband but also against the relatives of the husband. The
      question is when such matters are resolved either by the wife
      agreeing to rejoin the matrimonial home or by mutual settlement
      of other pending disputes for which both the sides approached the
      High Court and jointly prayed for quashing of the criminal
      proceedings or the FIR or complaint by the wife under Sections
      498A and 406 of I.P.C., whether the prayer can be declined on the
      sole ground that since the offences are non-compoundable under
      Section 320 of the Code, it would be impermissible for the court
      to quash the criminal proceedings or FIR or complaint.

      to the 9.IPC of the criminal complaint under Sections 498A and
                 It is not in dispute that in the case on hand subsequent
      406 offilingand Sections 3 and 4 of the Dowry Prohibition Act,
      1961, with the help and intervention of family members, friends
      and well-wishers, the parties concerned have amicably settled
      their differences and executed a compromise/ settlement.
      Pursuant thereto, the appellants filed the said compromise before
      the Trial Court with a request to place the same on record and to
      drop the criminal proceedings against the appellants herein. It is
      also not in dispute that in additional to the mutual settlement
      arrived at by the parties, respondent/-wife has also filed an
      affidavit stating that she did not wish to pursue the criminal
      proceedings against the appellants Itand fully supported the
      contents of the settlement deed.            is the grievance of the
      appellants that no only the Trial Court rejected such prayer of the
      parties but also the High Court failed toe exercise its jurisdiction
      under Section 482 of the Code only on the ground that the
      criminal proceedings relate to the offences punishable under
      Sections 498A and 406 of IPC which are non-compoundable in
      nature.

             15. In our view, it is the duty of the Courts to encourage
      genuine settlements of matrimonial disputes, particularly, when
      the same are on considerable increase. Even if the offences are
      non-compoundable, if they relate to matrimonial disputes and the
      Court is satisfied that the parties have settled the same amicably
      and without any       pressure, we hold that for the purpose of
      securing ends of justice, Section 320 of the Code would not be a
      bar to the exercise of power of quashing of FIR, complaint or the
      subsequent criminal proceedings.

      recent 16.  There has been an outburst of matrimonial disputes in
             times. The institution of marriage occupies an important

CRL.M.C.5953/2014                    - : 8 :-

      place and it has an important role to play in the society.
      Therefore, every effort should be made in the interest of the
      individuals in order to enable them to settle down in life and live
      peacefully. If the parties ponder over their defaults and terminate
      their disputes amicably by mutual agreement instead of fighting it
      out in a Court of law, in order to do complete justice in the
      matrimonial matters, the Courts should be less hesitant in
      exercising its extraordinary jurisdiction. It is trite to state that the
      power under Section 482 should be exercised sparingly and with
      circumspection only when the Court is convinced, on the basis of
      material on record, that allowing the proceedings to continue
      would be an abuse of the process of the Court or that the ends of
      justice require that the proceedings ought to be quashed."

      8.     Considering the facts and circumstances of this case, it

is seen further that the impugned criminal proceedings have arisen

consequent to the personal disputes between the disputants and

the disputes have been settled amicably between the parties.

Accordingly, this Court is inclined to hold that in the light of the

facts and circumstances involved in the present case and

particularly in view of the settlement arrived at between the parties,

the principles laid down in the aforementioned decisions of the

Apex Court will be squarely applicable in the present case.

Moreover, since the real disputants to the controversy have

amicably settled the disputes, which led to these impugned criminal

proceedings, it is also the duty of the court to promote such

settlement, instead of compelling the parties to go on with the

dispute. It is also pertinent to note that since the matter is settled

CRL.M.C.5953/2014                 - : 9 :-

out of court, in the event of proceeding with the trial, there may not

be any fruitful prosecution and the chances of conviction of the

accused is rather negligible and therefore, the net result of

continuance of criminal proceedings would be sheer waste of

judicial time rather meaningless and therefore would amount to

abuse of the process of court proceedings in the larger sense.

Hence following decisions of the Apex Court cited supra, this Court

is inclined to hold that the Crl.M.C. can be allowed by granting the

prayers sought for.

      9.     In the result, the Crl.M.C. is allowed and the impugned

Annexure-A2 final report/charge sheet and all further proceedings

taken thereon pending against the petitioners in C.C.No.348/2014

on the file of the Chief Judicial Magistrate Court, Kasargod, in Crime

No.207/2012 of Manjeshwar Police Station, are quashed. The

petitioners shall produce certified copies of this order before the

court below concerned as well as before the Station House Officer,

Manjeshwar Police Station.

                                                      Sd/-
sdk+                                      ALEXANDER THOMAS, JUDGE
          ///True copy///


                              P.S. to Judge

CRL.M.C.5953/2014    - : 10 :-



