
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                         PRESENT:

                  THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE ALEXANDER THOMAS

            TUESDAY, THE 21ST DAY OF OCTOBER 2014/29TH ASWINA, 1936

                                Crl.MC.No. 5944 of 2014 ()
                                    ---------------------------
 LP.NO.37/2012 OF JUDICIAL FIRST CLASS MAGISTRATE COURT, THIRUVALLA.
                   CRIME NO. 299/2008 OF THIRUVALLA POLICE STATION.
                                               ......

PETITIONER:
-------------------

           SHIBU @ JOHN THOMAS, AGED 36 YEARS,
           S/O.LATE THOMAS, PULLELIL HOUSE, MUTHOOR MURI,
           THIRUVALLA VILLAGE, THIRUVALLA TALUK,
           PATHANAMTHITTA DISTRICT.

           BY ADV. SRI.K.JAYARAJ.

RESPONDENTS:
------------------------

        1. ROSAMMA THOMAS, AGED 56 YEARS,
           W/O.LATE THOMAS, PULLELIL HOUSE, MUTHOOR MURI,
           THIRUVALLA VILLAGE, THIRUVALLA TALUK,
           PATHANAMTHITTA DISTRICT.

        2. STATE OF KERALA,
           REPRESENTED BY SUB INSPECTOR OF POLICE,
           THIRUVALLA, THROUGH PUBLIC PROSECUTOR,
           HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM.


           R1 BY ADV. SRI.K.M.ANEESH.
           R2 BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SRI.R. GITHESH.


           THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD
           ON 21-10-2014, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED
           THE FOLLOWING:


rs.

Crl.MC.No. 5944 of 2014


                               APPENDIX

PETITIONER'S ANNEXURES:-


ANNEXURE A1         CERTIFIED COPY OF THE FINAL REPORT.




RESPONDENT'S ANNEXURES:-             NIL.




                                           //TRUE COPY//


                                           P.A. TO JUDGE

rs.


                  ALEXANDER THOMAS, J.
            =========================
                  Crl.M.C No.5944 of 2014
         ============================
          Dated this the 21st day of October, 2014

                            ORDER



      The above Criminal Miscellaneous Case (Crl.M.C.) seeking

the invocation of the inherent powers conferred on this Court

under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure has been

filed with the prayer to quash the impugned criminal proceedings

in L.P No.37 of 2012 (arising out of the impugned Annexure A1

final report/charge sheet in Crime No.299 of 2008 of Thiruvalla

Police Station) now pending on the file of the Judicial First Class

Magistrate    Court,   Thiruvalla  and    all  proceedings  arising

therefrom. The 1st respondent herein is the de facto complainant

in this case and she is the mother of the petitioner.

      2. The prosecution case is that the petitioner had pushed

down his mother and had beaten her with hands and inflicted

injuries with a chopper on 13.04.2008 at about 11 p.m, in the

house of de facto complainant. That the petitioner destroyed the

furnitures and caused damage to the tune of Rs.2,000/- and thus

committed the above said offences.           On the basis of these

allegations, Crime No.299 of 2008 of Thiruvalla Police Station was

Crl.M.C No.5944 of 2014         2



registered arraying the petitioner herein as accused for offences

punishable under Sections 341, 323, 324 and 427 of Indian Penal

Code. The police after investigation submitted the impugned

Annexure A1 final report/charge sheet and the case is now

pending as L.P No.37 of 2012 on the file of Judicial First Class

Magistrate Court, Thiruvalla. It is stated that the petitioner is

working in Technopark in Thiruvananthapuram and he used to

visit the family house in Thiruvalla in every week and as he used

to come very often late in the night, this caused friction in the

family and caused serious differences of opinion between him

and his mother, who is the de facto complainant. It is stated that

now the matter has been amicably settled out of court and the 1st

respondent de facto complainant now does not want to prosecute

and punish the petitioner.      The 1st respondent has entered

appearance through counsel and has filed affidavit dated

06.10.2014 before this Court in this Crl.M.C wherein it is stated

that the dispute that arose out of the impugned criminal

proceedings between the petitioner and the 1st respondent has

been amicably and peacefully settled and that she is not

interested in prosecuting and punishing the petitioner, who is

Crl.M.C No.5944 of 2014           3



her son. That she is a widow and the petitioner is the only

person to take care and maintain her at her old age and that if

petitioner is punished there is nobody to look after her and as

the matter is amicably settled she is not interested to pursue the

impugned criminal proceedings. It is in the background of these

facts and circumstances that the aforementioned Crl.M.C has

been filed.

      3.    The Crl.M.C. has been admitted and Sri.K.N.Aneesh

has taken notice for the 1st respondent and the learned Public

Prosecutor has taken notice for the 2nd respondent-State of

Kerala.

      4.    Heard Sri.K.Jayaraj, the learned counsel appearing for

the petitioner, Sri.K.M.Aneesh, learned counsel appearing for 1st

respondent and the learned Public Prosecutor appearing for the

2nd respondent-State of Kearla.

      5.    The learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted

that during the pendency of the aforementioned criminal

proceedings, the matter has been settled amicably between the

parties, which is resulted in the subject matter of the

aforementioned crime/case and that the continuation of the

Crl.M.C No.5944 of 2014          4



proceedings in the above case/crime will cause miscarriage of

justice to both parties as the real disputants to the case have

arrived at an amicable settlement and any further continuation

of the criminal proceedings will amount to sheer wastage of time

and money and would unnecessarily strain the financial,

administrative and financial resources of the State.

      6.    Sri.K.M.Aneesh, the learned counsel appearing for the

1st respondent has submitted on the basis of the specific

instructions furnished by the 1st respondent that the 1st

respondent has amicably settled the disputes with the petitioner

and that she has no objection in the quashment of the impugned

criminal proceedings and that the complainant/victim/injured

does not intend to proceed any further against the petitioner as

she has no grievance against him and that she will not raise any

dispute/compliant in future if the prayer for quashing the

impugned final report is allowed.

      7.    The learned Public Prosecutor also was heard, who

also has not raised any serious objections and submitted that this

court may consider the prayer in this case in the light of the law

well settled by the Apex Court in that regard.

Crl.M.C No.5944 of 2014             5



      8.    After having carefully considered the submissions of

the parties and after having perused the pleadings as well as the

documents and materials placed in this matter, it can be seen

that the offences alleged are more or less personal in nature and

not much element of public interest is involved. The crucial

aspect of the matter is that though such offences are involved,

the real disputants to the controversy which has led to the

impugned criminal proceedings, have actually arrived at an

amicable settlement of the matter. From the submissions made

by the learned counsel for the 1st respondent, it is clear to the

court that the injured/victim/defacto complainant has no further

grievance against the petitioner/accused in the light of the

settlement arrived at by them. In this connection, it is relevant to

note the decision of the Apex Court in the case between Gian

Singh v. State of Punjab reported in 2013 (1) SCC (Cri) 160,

para 61 = (2012) 10 SCC 303 = 2012(4) KLT 108(SC), wherein

the Supreme Court has held as follows in para 61 thereof [ See

SCC (Cri)]:

                "61. The position that emerges from the above
         discussion can be summarised thus: the power of the
         High Court in quashing a criminal proceeding or FIR
         or complaint in exercise of its inherent jurisdiction is

Crl.M.C No.5944 of 2014                 6



          distinct and different from the power given to a
          criminal court for compounding the offences under
          S.320 of the Code. Inherent power is of wide plenitude
          with no statutory limitation but it has to be exercised
          in accord with the guideline engrafted in such power
          viz;(i) to secure the ends of justice or (ii) to prevent
          abuse of the process of any Court.       In what cases
          power to quash the criminal proceeding or complaint
          or F.I.R. may be exercised where the offender and
          victim have settled their dispute would depend on the
          facts and circumstances of each case and no category
          can be prescribed..

It is further held as follows:-

          "......... But the criminal cases having overwhelmingly
          and pre-dominatingly civil flavour stand on different
          footing for the purposes of quashing, particularly the
          offences          arising       from        commercial,
          financial,mercantile, civil, partnership or such like
          transactions or the offences arising out of matrimony
          relating to dowry etc. or the family disputes where the
          wrong is basically private or personal in nature and
          the parties have resolved their entire dispute. In this
          category of cases, High Court may quash criminal
          proceedings if in its view, because of the compromise
          between the offender and victim, the possibility of
          conviction is remote and bleak and continuation of
          criminal case would put accused to great oppression
          and prejudice and extreme injustice would be caused
          to him by not quashing the criminal case despite full
          and complete settlement and compromise with the
          victim........"

       In the decision reported in the case Yogendra Yadav &

others v. The State of Jharkhand & another reported in 2014

(8) Scale 634 = III (2014) Current Criminal Reports CCR 426

(SC), the Apex Court has held as follows:

             "When the High Court is convinced that the offences are
       entirely personal in nature and, therefore, do not affect public

Crl.M.C No.5944 of 2014              7



      peace or tranquility and where it feels that quashing of such
      proceedings on account of compromise would bring about peace
      and would secure ends of justice, it should not hesitate to quash
      them".

      The Apex Court in the above case was dealing with a case

involving offences under Sections 341, 323, 324, 504 & 307 r/w

Section 34 Indian Penal Code.

         9. Considering the facts and circumstances of this case,

it is seen further that the impugned criminal proceedings have

arisen consequent to the matrimonial disputes between the

disputants and the disputes have been settled amicably between

the parties. Accordingly, this Court is inclined to hold that in the

light of the facts and circumstances involved in the present case

and particularly in view of the settlement arrived at between the

parties, the principles laid down in the aforementioned decisions

of the Apex Court will be squarely applicable in the present case.

Moreover, since the real disputants to the controversy have

amicably settled the disputes, which led to these impugned

criminal proceedings, it is also the duty of the court to promote

such settlement, instead of compelling the parties to go on with

the dispute. It is also pertinent to note that since the matter is

settled out of court, in the event of proceeding with the trial,

Crl.M.C No.5944 of 2014           8



there may not be any fruitful prosecution and the chances of

conviction of the accused is rather negligible and therefore, the

net result of continuance of criminal proceedings would be sheer

waste of judicial time rather meaningless and therefore would

amount to abuse of the process of court proceedings in the

larger sense. Hence following decisions of the Apex Court cited

supra, this Court is inclined to hold that the Crl.M.C. can be

allowed by granting the prayers sought for.

         In the result, the Crl.M.C. is allowed and the impugned

Annexure A1 final report/charge sheet in the impugned Crime

No.299 of 2008 of Thiruvalla Police Station which has led to the

pendency of L.P No.37 of 2012 on the file of Judicial First Class

Magistrate Court, Thiruvalla and all further proceedings arising

therefrom stand quashed. The petitioner shall produce certified

copies of this order before the court below concerned as well as

before the Station House Officer, Thiruvalla Police Station.

                                            Sd/-
                               ALEXANDER THOMAS, JUDGE.

vdv         //True Copy//   P.A to Judge



