
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                      PRESENT:

                     THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE ALEXANDER THOMAS

               TUESDAY, THE 21ST DAY OF OCTOBER 2014/29TH ASWINA, 1936

                                           Crl.MC.No. 5943 of 2014 ()
                                                ---------------------------
                                     CC 1349/2012 of J.M.F.C.,ALATHUR
               CRIME NO. 339/2012 OF ALATHUR POLICE STATION , PALAKKAD

PETITIONER/ACCUSED:
-----------------------------------

            BALAKRISHNAN AGED 42 YEARS
            S/O.RAJAN NAIR, PUNATH HOUSE, CHUNGAM
            KAVASSERY, AAITHUR, PALAKKAD

            BY ADV. SRI.V.A.JOHNSON (VARIKKAPPALLIL)

RESPONDENTS/DEFACTO COMPLAINANT AND STATE:
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

        1. SAJITHA, AGED 33 YEARS
            W/O.BALAKRISHNAN, ARANGATTU HOUSE, KAVASSERY
            AALTHUR, PALAKKAD 678 541

        2. STATE OF KERALA
            REPRESENTED BY PUBLIC PROSCUTOR
            HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERENAKULAM 682 031

            R1 BY ADV. SRI.AJEESH K.SASI
            R2 BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SRI.R.GITHESH

            THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD ON 21-10-2014,
THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE FOLLOWING:

Crl.MC.No. 5943 of 2014 ()
---------------------------

                                           APPENDIX

PETITIONER(S)' EXHIBITS
-------------------------------------

ANNEXURE A TRUE COPY OF THE FINAL REPORT IN CRIME NO 339/2012 OF
ALATHUR POLICE STATION IN PALAKKAD DISTRICT IN C.C NO 1349/2012 ON THE
FILE OF THE COURT OF JUDICIAL FIRST CLASS MAGISTRATE,ALATHUR
ANNEXURE B AFFIDAVIT SWORN BY THE 1ST RESPONDENT HEREIN EVIDENCING
THE AFORESAID SETTLEMENT

RESPONDENT(S)' EXHIBITS
---------------------------------------

          NIL.


sdk+


                     ///True copy///




                                          P.S. to Judge


                       ALEXANDER THOMAS, J.
                    ==================
                      Crl.M.C.No. 5943 of 2014
                    ==================
             Dated this the 21st day of October, 2014
                              O R D E R

      The above captioned Criminal Miscellaneous Case (Crl.M.C.),

seeking the invocation of the inherent powers conferred on this

Court under Section 482 of the Cr.P.C.      has been filed with the

prayers to quash the impugned Annexure-A final report/charge

sheet, which led to the institution of the calendar case,

C.C.No.1349/2012 on the file of the Judicial First Class Magistrate's

Court, Alathur against the petitioner and all further proceedings

therefrom, to secure the ends of justice. The petitioner is arrayed as

the sole accused in C.C.No.1349/2012 on the file of the Court of

Judicial First Class Magistrate, Alathur, Palakkad district. The said

calender case arose out of Crime No. 339/2012 of Alathur Police

Station, Palakkad district, wherein the accused has been charge

sheeted for offences under Section 498A IPC. The prosecution case

is that the accused (petitioner) being the husband of the defacto

complainant (1st respondent herein) subjected her to both physical

CRLMC.5943/14                   - : 2 :-

and mental cruelties demanding more money and therefore it is

alleged that the petitioner is guilty of the above said offence. On

the basis of the above said allegations raised by the 1st respondent,

Crime No. 339/2012 of Alathur Police Station, was registered for the

above said offences and after investigation, the above said

impugned Annexure A final report/charge sheet was filed, which led

to the institution of the above said Calender Case. It is stated that

the case arose due to minor temperamental differences, which have

already been amicably settled now and that now the petitioner and

the 1st respondent have already withdrawn Guardianship O.P.No.

474/2012 and have filed an interim application under Section 13B

(2) of the Hindu Marriage Act in O.P.No.215/2014 on the file of the

Family Court, Palakkad, as par of the above settlement between the

parties. The defacto complainant has sworn to an affidavit dated

18.10.2014, produced as Annexure-B in this Crl.M.C., stating about

the above said facts and stating that after the intervention of well-

wishers, the entire disputes between her and the petitioner have

been settled and that she has no surviving grievance whatsoever

against the petitioner and that details are also given about the

position in the above said Family Court proceedings and that all

CRLMC.5943/14                   - : 3 :-

matters are amicably settled and that petition has been filed for

withdrawing the Guardianship O.P. and steps have been taken for

seeking divorce with mutual consent. That the offences being purely

personal and private, disputes are arisen purely out of personal and

private disputes between and as the matter is settled, the impugned

criminal proceedings may be quashed and that she does not

propose to continue with the above said case against the petitioner

and it is prayed that the impugned criminal proceedings in C.C.No.

1349/2012 on the file of the Court of Judicial First Class Magistrate,

Alathur, and all further proceedings pursuant thereto against the

petitioner may be quashed so as to secure the ends of justice. It is

in the background of these facts and circumstances that the

aforementioned Crl.M.C. has been filed.

      2.     The Crl.M.C. has been admitted and Sri.Ajeesh.K.Sasi

has taken notice for the 1st respondent and the learned Public

Prosecutor has taken notice for the 2nd respondent-State of Kerala.

      3.     Heard Sri. V.A.Johnson Varikkappallil, the learned

counsel appearing for the petitioner, Sri.Ajeesh K.Sasi, the learned

counsel appearing for R1 and the learned Public Prosecutor

appearing for the 2nd respondent-State.

CRLMC.5943/14                    - : 4 :-

      4.     The learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted that

during the pendency of the aforementioned criminal proceedings,

the matter has been settled amicably between the parties, which has

resulted in the subject matter of the aforementioned crime/case and

that the continuation of the proceedings in the above case/crime

will cause miscarriage of justice to both parties as the real

disputants to the case have arrived at an amicable settlement and

any further continuation of the criminal proceedings will amount to

sheer wastage of time and money and would unnecessarily strain

the judicial, administrative and financial resources of the State.

      5.     The learned counsel appearing for the 1st respondent has

submitted on the basis of the specific instructions furnished by the

1st respondent that the 1st respondent has amicably settled the

disputes with the petitioner and that she has no objection in the

quashment of the impugned criminal proceedings and that the

complainant/victim/injured does not intend to proceed any further

against the petitioner as she has no grievance against him and that

she will not raise any dispute/compliant in future if the prayer for

quashing the impugned final report is allowed.

      6.     The learned Public Prosecutor also was heard, who also

CRLMC.5943/14                     - : 5 :-

has not raised any serious objections and submitted that this court

may consider the prayer in this case in the light of the law well

settled by the Apex Court in that regard.

      7.     After having carefully considered the submissions of the

parties and after having perused the pleadings as well as the

documents and materials placed in this matter, it can be seen that

the offences alleged are more or less personal in nature and not

much element of public interest is involved. The crucial aspect of

the matter is that though such offences are involved, the real

disputants to the controversy which has led to the impugned

criminal proceedings, have actually arrived at an amicable

settlement of the matter. From the submissions made by the

learned counsel for the 1st respondent, it is clear to the court that

the injured/victim/defacto complainant has no further grievance

against the petitioner/accused in the light of the settlement arrived

at by them. In this connection, it is relevant to note the decision of

the Apex Court in the case between Gian Singh v. State of Punjab

reported in 2013 (1) SCC (Cri) 160, para 61 = (2012) 10 SCC 303 =

2012(4) KLT 108(SC), wherein the Supreme Court has held as

follows in para 61 thereof [ See SCC (Cri)]:

CRLMC.5943/14                              - : 6 :-

        can be"61.     The position that emerges from the above discussion
                  summarised thus: the power of the High Court in quashing
        a criminal proceeding or FIR or complaint in exercise of its
        inherent jurisdiction is distinct and different from the power given
        to a criminal court for compounding the offences under S.320 of
        the Code. Inherent power is of wide plenitude with no statutory
        limitation but it has to be exercised in accord with the guideline
        engrafted in such power viz;(i) to secure the ends of justice or (ii)
        to prevent abuse of the process of any Court. In what cases power
        to quash the criminal proceeding or complaint or F.I.R. may be
        exercised where the offender and victim have settled their dispute
        would depend on the facts and circumstances of each case and no
        category can be prescribed.."

It is further held as follows:-

        "......... But the criminal cases having overwhelmingly and pre-
        dominatingly civil flavour stand on different footing for the
        purposes of quashing, particularly the offences arising from
        commercial, financial,mercantile, civil, partnership or such like
        transactions or the offences arising out of matrimony relating to
        dowry etc. or the family disputes where the wrong is basically
        private or personal in nature and the parties have resolved their
        entire dispute. In this category of cases, High Court may quash
        criminal proceedings if in its view, because of the compromise
        between the offender and victim, the possibility of conviction is
        remote and bleak and continuation of criminal case would put
        accused to great oppression and prejudice and extreme injustice
        wouldand caused to himsettlement
                  be                 by not quashing the criminal case despite
        full
        victim........"complete                    and compromise    with  the


Further, in the case Jitendra Raghuvanshi and Others v. Babita

Raghuvanshi and another reported in (2013) 4 SCC 58 [see 2013

(1) KLD 817 (SC)], the Apex Court has held as follows:-

                  "8. It is not in dispute that matrimonial disputes have been
        on considerable increase in recent times resulting in filing of
        complaints under Sections 498A and 406 of I.P.C. not only against
        the husband but also against the relatives of the husband. The
        question is when such matters are resolved either by the wife
        agreeing to rejoin the matrimonial home or by mutual settlement
        of other pending disputes for which both the sides approached the
        High Court and jointly prayed for quashing of the criminal

CRLMC.5943/14                          - : 7 :-

      proceedings or the FIR or complaint by the wife under Sections
      498A and 406 of I.P.C., whether the prayer can be declined on the
      sole ground that since the offences are non-compoundable under
      Section 320 of the Code, it would be impermissible for the court
      to quash the criminal proceedings or FIR or complaint.

      to the 9.IPC of the criminal complaint under Sections 498A and
                 It is not in dispute that in the case on hand subsequent
      406 offilingand Sections 3 and 4 of the Dowry Prohibition Act,
      1961, with the help and intervention of family members, friends
      and well-wishers, the parties concerned have amicably settled
      their differences and executed a compromise/ settlement.
      Pursuant thereto, the appellants filed the said compromise before
      the Trial Court with a request to place the same on record and to
      drop the criminal proceedings against the appellants herein. It is
      also not in dispute that in additional to the mutual settlement
      arrived at by the parties, respondent/-wife has also filed an
      affidavit stating that she did not wish to pursue the criminal
      proceedings against the appellants and fully supported the
      contents of the settlement deed.
      appellants that no only the Trial CourtItrejected such prayer of the
                                                  is the grievance of the

      parties but also the High Court failed toe exercise its jurisdiction
      under Section 482 of the Code only on the ground that the
      criminal proceedings relate to the offences punishable under
      Sections 498A and 406 of IPC which are non-compoundable in
      nature.

             15. In our view, it is the duty of the Courts to encourage
      genuine settlements of matrimonial disputes, particularly, when
      the same are on considerable increase. Even if the offences are
      non-compoundable, if they relate to matrimonial disputes and the
      Court is satisfied that the parties have settled the same amicably
      and without any       pressure, we hold that for the purpose of
      securing ends of justice, Section 320 of the Code would not be a
      bar to the exercise of power of quashing of FIR, complaint or the
      subsequent criminal proceedings.

      recent 16.  There has been an outburst of matrimonial disputes in
             times. The institution of marriage occupies an important
      place and it has an important role to play in the society.
      Therefore, every effort should be made in the interest of the
      individuals in order to enable them to settle down in life and live
      peacefully. If the parties ponder over their defaults and terminate
      their disputes amicably by mutual agreement instead of fighting it
      out in a Court of law, in order to do complete justice in the
      matrimonial matters, the Courts should be less hesitant in
      exercising its extraordinary jurisdiction. It is trite to state that the

CRLMC.5943/14                        - : 8 :-

      power under Section 482 should be exercised sparingly and with
      circumspection only when the Court is convinced, on the basis of
      material on record, that allowing the proceedings to continue
      would be an abuse of the process of the Court or that the ends of
      justice require that the proceedings ought to be quashed."

      8.     Considering the facts and circumstances of this case, it

is seen further that the impugned criminal proceedings have arisen

consequent to the personal disputes between the disputants and

the disputes have been settled amicably between the parties.

Accordingly, this Court is inclined to hold that in the light of the

facts and circumstances involved in the present case and

particularly in view of the settlement arrived at between the parties,

the principles laid down in the aforementioned decisions of the

Apex Court will be squarely applicable in the present case.

Moreover, since the real disputants to the controversy have

amicably settled the disputes, which led to these impugned criminal

proceedings, it is also the duty of the court to promote such

settlement, instead of compelling the parties to go on with the

dispute. It is also pertinent to note that since the matter is settled

out of court, in the event of proceeding with the trial, there may not

be any fruitful prosecution and the chances of conviction of the

accused is rather negligible and therefore, the net result of

CRLMC.5943/14                     - : 9 :-

continuance of criminal proceedings would be sheer waste of

judicial time rather meaningless and therefore would amount to

abuse of the process of court proceedings in the larger sense.

Hence following decisions of the Apex Court cited supra, this Court

is inclined to hold that the Crl.M.C. can be allowed by granting the

prayers sought for.

      9.     In the result, the Crl.M.C. is allowed and the impugned

Annexure-A final report/charge sheet and all further proceedings

taken thereon pending against the petitioner in C.C.No.1349/2012

on the file of the Judicial First Class Magistrate Court, Alathur,

arising out of Crime No.339/2012 of Alathur Police Station,

Palakkad district, are quashed. The petitioner shall produce certified

copies of this order before the court below concerned as well as

before the Station House Officer, Alathur Police Station.

                                                      Sd/-
sdk+                                      ALEXANDER THOMAS, JUDGE

          ///True copy///




                              P.S. to Judge



