
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                            PRESENT:

             THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE V.K.MOHANAN

     MONDAY, THE 29TH DAY OF SEPTEMBER 2014/7TH ASWINA, 1936

                   Crl.MC.No. 5103 of 2014 ()
                   ---------------------------
    CRIME NO. 348/2014 OF MALAMPUZHA POLICE STATION, PALAKKAD
                          ------------

PETITIONERS/ACCUSED :-
-------------------------

       SIBICHAN AGED 45 YEARS
       S/O CHACKOCHAN, MATHUR HOUSE, AANAKKAL P.O.
       MALAMPUZHA, PALAKKAD DISTRICT.

       BY ADV. SRI.M.L.SURESH KUMAR

RESPONDNETS/DEFACTO COMPLAINANT AND STATE :-
------------------------------------------------

    1. STATE OF KERALA
       REPRESENTED BY THE PUBLIC PROSECUTOR
       HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM-682031.

    2. BIJI, AGED 27 YEARS
       D/O SUNNY VARGHESE, MATHUR HOUSE, AANAKKAL P.O.
       MALAMPUZHA, PALAKKAD DISTRICT-678651.

       R2 BY ADV. SRI.A.R.GANGADAS
       R1 BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SRI.C.K.JAYAKUMAR


       THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE  HAVING COME UP FOR ADMISSION ON
29-09-2014, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE FOLLOWING:



jvt

Crl.MC.No. 5103 of 2014 ()
---------------------------

                            APPENDIX

PETITIONER(S)' EXHIBITS :-
----------------------------

ANNEXURE A: THE TRUE COPY OF THE FIRST INFORMATION REPORT IN
CRIME NO.348/2014 OF MALAMPUZHA POLICE STATION.

ANNEXURE B: THE TRUE COPY OF THE FIRST INFORMATION STATEMENT IN
CRIME NO.348/2014 OF MALAMPUZHA POLICE STATION.

ANNEXURE C: TRUE COPY OF THE AFFIDAVIT SWORN BY THE 2ND
RESPONDENT.


RESPONDENT(S)' EXHIBITS :- NIL
--------------------------------



                          //TRUE COPY//


                          P.A. TO JUDGE


                        V.K.MOHANAN, J.
                      -----------------------------
                   Crl.M.C. No.5103 of 2014
                  -------------------------------------
          Dated this the 29th day of September 2014


                             O R D E R


      The above petition is filed under Section 482 of the

Criminal Procedure Code (for short 'Cr.P.C.') at the instance of

the petitioner, who is sole accused in Crime No.348 of 2014 of

Malampuzha Police Station for the offence punishable under

Section 498A of I.P.C. with a prayer to quash the proceedings

against the petitioner, as the matter is settled out of court.

        2.      The allegation in the above case is that the

petitioner used to harass the 2nd respondent, his wife after

marriage demanding more dowry and also finding that she is not

beautiful and now, the case of the petitioner is that the matter is

settled out of court.

        3. Heard the learned counsel for the petitioner as well

as the 2nd respondent.      I have also heard the learned Public

Prosecutor.

        4. The learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that

Crl.M.C. No.5103 of 2014

                               -: 2 :-

the matter is settled amicably between the parties out of court.

Therefore, the continuation of the proceedings in the above

crime is an abuse of process of law and proceedings.

         5.   The learned counsel for the 2nd respondent, who on

the basis of specific instruction received from the respondent,

submitted that the above respondent, who is the de facto

complainant does not intend to proceed any further against the

petitioner and she has no grievance against him.

         6.   I have carefully considered the above submissions

of the respective counsel. I have verified the documents and

materials produced along with the above petition. In the given

facts and circumstances of the case and especially in the light of

the settlement arrived at between the parties to the dispute, the

learned Public Prosecutor has also no objection in allowing the

above petition.

         7.   Both the counsel for the petitioner and the 2nd

respondent submitted that in pursuance to the settlement

arrived at between the petitioner, who is the husband and the 2nd

respondent, now they are residing together as husband and wife.

Crl.M.C. No.5103 of 2014

                              -: 3 :-

So, according to the counsel, the continuance of the criminal

proceedings will adversely affect the family life of the petitioner

as well as the 2nd respondent. I do endorse the view expressed

by the learned counsel for the petitioner as well as the 2nd

respondent. After having settled the family dispute, when the

parties, who are husband and wife residing together, certainly

the continuance of the criminal case will create unnecessary

harassment and inconvenience to them. It is likely to affect their

matrimonial life. As the 2nd respondent has settled the dispute

with the petitioner, no purpose would be served if the criminal

case is proceeded and therefore, the same would amount to

abuse of process of court and for that reason also, the

proceedings now pending against the petitioner is liable to be

quashed.

         8.   Having regard to the facts and circumstances

involved in the case, it can be seen that the offence involved in

the above case is only 498A of IPC which is more or less

personal in nature and no public interest is involved.         It is

pertinent to note that though such offence is involved, the real

Crl.M.C. No.5103 of 2014

                                    -: 4 :-

parties to the dispute approached this Court after having

amicably settled the matter. From the submission made by the

counsel for the 2nd respondent, it appears to me that the de facto

complainant has no further grievance against the petitioner in

the light of the settlement arrived by them. In this juncture, it is

relevant to note that the Honourable Apex Court, in the decision

reported in Jitendra Raghuvanshi and Others v. Babita

Raghuvanshi and another [2013 (1) KLD 817(SC)], has held

as follows:-

                "7.   It is not in dispute that matrimonial
         disputes have been on considerable increase in recent
         times resulting in filing of complaints under Sections
         498A and 406 of I.P.C. not only against the husband
         but also against the relatives of the husband.      The
         question is when such matters are resolved either by
         the wife agreeing to rejoin the matrimonial home or
         by mutual settlement of other pending disputes for
         which both the sides approached the High Court and
         jointly  prayed    for   quashing    of   the   criminal
         proceedings or the FIR or complaint by the wife under
         Sections 498A and 406 of I.P.C., whether the prayer
         can be declined on the sole ground that since the
         offences are non-compoundable under Section 320 of
         the Code, it would be impermissible for the court to
         quash the criminal proceedings or FIR or complaint.
                8. It is not in dispute that in the case on hand
         subsequent to the filing of the criminal complaint
         under Sections 498A and 406 of IPC and Sections 3
         and 4 of the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961, with the
         help and intervention of family members, friends and
         well-wishers, the parties concerned have amicably

Crl.M.C. No.5103 of 2014

                                   -: 5 :-

         settled   their    differences     and    executed      a
         compromise/settlement.        Pursuant    thereto,   the
         appellants filed the said compromise before the Trial
         Court with a request to place the same on record and
         to  drop   the   criminal   proceedings    against   the
         appellants herein.   It is also not in dispute that in
         additional to the mutual settlement arrived at by the
         parties, respondent/-wife has also filed an affidavit
         stating that she did not wish to pursue the criminal
         proceedings    against   the    appellants   and    fully
         supported the contents of the settlement deed. It is
         the grievance of the appellants that no only the Trial
         Court rejected such prayer of the parties but also the
         High Court failed toe exercise its jurisdiction under
         Section 482 of the Code only on the ground that the
         criminal proceedings relate to the offences punishable
         under Sections 498A and 406 of IPC which are non-
         compoundable in nature."
                "12. In our view, it is the duty of the Courts to
         encourage    genuine    settlements    of   matrimonial
         disputes,  particularly,  when     the  same    are   on
         considerable increase. Even if the offences are non-
         compoundable, if they relate to matrimonial disputes
         and the Court is satisfied that the parties have settled
         the same amicably and without any pressure, we hold
         that for the purpose of securing ends of justice,
         Section 320 of the Code would not be a bar to the
         exercise of power of quashing of FIR, complaint or the
         subsequent criminal proceedings.
                  13.     There has been an outburst of
         matrimonial disputes in recent times. The institution
         of marriage occupies an important place and it has an
         important role to play in the society. Therefore, every
         effort should be made in the interest of the individuals
         in order to enable them to settle down in life and live
         peacefully. If the parties ponder over their defaults
         and terminate their disputes amicably by mutual
         agreement instead of fighting it out in a Court of law,
         in order to do complete justice in the matrimonial
         matters, the Courts should be less hesitant in
         exercising its extraordinary jurisdiction. It is trite to
         state that the power under Section 482 should be
         exercised sparingly and with circumspection only

Crl.M.C. No.5103 of 2014

                                   -: 6 :-

         when the Court is convinced, on the basis of material
         on record, that allowing the proceedings to continue
         would be an abuse of the process of the Court or that
         the ends of justice require that the proceedings ought
         to be quashed."

In the present case, the only offence involved is under Section

498A of I.P.C. The criminal proceedings for the said offence

originated from the matrimonial issues, which are now settled.

Consequently, the parties want a quietus to the criminal case as

well.

         9.        According to me, in the light of the facts and

circumstances involved in the present case and particularly in

view of the settlement arrived in the present case, the dictum

laid in the above decision will be squarely applicable in the

present case. According to me, as the parties to the dispute

settled the issues amicably, it is the duty of this Court to promote

such settlement, instead of compelling the parties to go on with

the dispute.    It is pertinent to note that since the matter is

settled out of court, in the event of proceeding with the trial,

there would not have any fruitful prosecution resulting the

conviction of the accused, rather the net result would be sheer

Crl.M.C. No.5103 of 2014

                              -: 7 :-

waste of judicial time and abuse of process of the court and

proceedings.    Thus, according to me, following the decisions

cited supra, this Crl.M.C. can be allowed granting the relief as

sought for.

         In the result, this Crl.M.C. is allowed, quashing

Annexure - A and all further proceedings pending against the

petitioner in   Crime No.348 of 2014 of    Malampuzha Police

Station.

                                                    Sd/-
                                           V.K.MOHANAN,
                                                 Judge.



jvt



