
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                        PRESENT:

               THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE ALEXANDER THOMAS

      TUESDAY, THE 11TH DAY OF NOVEMBER 2014/20TH KARTHIKA, 1936

                             Crl.MC.No.5606 of 2014 (A)
                                ---------------------------
                          CP 5/2014 of J.M.F.C.-II, KOCHI
         CRIME NO.1838/2013 OF KASABA POLICE STATION, ERNAKULAM


PETITIONER)/SOLE ACCUSED:
---------------------------------

         KOSHI @ VINOD, AGED 45 YEARS
         S/O.JACOB, THOTTATHIL HOUSE, KUMBALANGI POST
         KOCHI 682 007

         BY ADV. SRI.S.U.NAZAR

RESPONDENTS/STATE & DEFACTO COMPLAINANT:
--------------------------------------------------------

       1. STATE OF KERALA
         REPRESENTED BY THE PUBLIC PROSECUTOR
         HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM.

       2. AMMINI, W/O.KRISHNAN, AGED 60 YEARS
         KATTUPURAM HOUSE, WARD NO.XII
         KANDAKADAVU KARA KUMBALANGI VILLAGE
         ERNAKULAM DISTRICT- 682 007

         R2 BY ADV. SRI.JAI GEORGE
         R2 BY ADV. SMT.DANSY A.PHILIPOSE
         R1 BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SRI.DHANESH MATHEW MANJOORAN

         THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD ON 09-11-
2014, THE COURT ON 11-11-2014 PASSED THE FOLLOWING:

Crl.MC.No. 5606 of 2014 (A)
---------------------------

                                  APPENDIX

PETITIONER'S EXHIBITS:
-----------------------------

ANNX.A1 - A TRUE COPY OF THE FINAL REPORT IN CRIME NO.1838/2013 OF
KASBA POLICE STATION KOCHI WHICH IS NOW PENDING AS C.P.NO.5/2014 ON
THE FILES OF JUDICIAL FIRST CLASS MAGISTRATE COURT-II KOCHI.

ANNX.A2 - THE AFFIDAVIT SWORN BY THE 2ND RESPONDENT.

RESPONDENT(S)' EXHIBITS:              NIL
--------------------------------




                                                // TRUE COPY //




                                                P.A TO JUDGE.


                    ALEXANDER THOMAS, J.
                    -----------------------------
                    Crl.M.C.No.5606 Of 2014
                  ---------------------------------
          Dated this the 11th day of November, 2014.

                             O R D E R

      The   above    captioned    Criminal    Miscellaneous  Case

(Crl.M.C) has been filed with the prayer to quash the impugned

Annexure-A1 Final Report in Crime No.1838/2013 of Kasaba

Police Station, Kochi which is now pending as C.P.No.5/2014

on the file of the Judicial First Class Magistrate Court-II, Kochi

and all further proceedings arising therefrom in the interest of

justice. Petitioner is the sole accused in Crime No.1838/2013

of Kasaba Police Station, Kochi alleging offences under

Sections 294(b) Indian Penal Code and Section 3(i)(x) of the

Schedules Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of

Atrocities) Act, 1989.      The 2nd respondent is the defacto

complainant in this case. The gist of the prosecution allegation

is that on 5.7.2013 at about 10:00 am the 2nd respondent

defacto complainant, belonging to Schedule Caste community,

while vending fish at Pazhagattupally market at Kumbalangi, a

dispute arose in respect of the price of fish purchased by the

petitioner and thereby there occurred a wordy altercation and

that time the petitioner made a statement that he will not

                              ::2::

Crl.M.C.No.5606 Of 2014

permit anyone who belongs to "pulaya community" (SC) to do

their business and thereby committed the offences as alleged.

Later, the entire dispute between the petitioner and 2nd

respondent have been amicably settled through mediation at

the instance of relatives of both parties and in view of the

amicable settlement, the 2nd respondent has no existing

grievances against the petitioner. It is pointed out that the

entire dispute arose in the context of a wordy altercation

between the 2nd respondent who was vending fish in the fish

market and the petitioner who intended to purchase fish from

her and that the entire disputes which arose in this case is due

to the wordy altercation between them as to the price of the

fish. The petitioner was prepared to offer only ` 20/- for the

fish purchased, whereas the 2nd respondent had demanded for

` 10/- more etc. The 2nd respondent has sworn to affidavit

dated 1.10.2014 produced as Annexure-A2 herein stating that

the entire disputes between her and the petitioner have been

settled in mediation and at the instance of the relatives and in

view of such amicable settlement, she has no subsisting

grievance against the petitioner, that the dispute is purely

                              ::3::

Crl.M.C.No.5606 Of 2014

personal in nature and that she wants to maintain a healthy

relationship with the petitioner and she is not interested to

prosecute the matter further and that if the impugned criminal

proceedings are continued in spite of the amicable settlement,

it would adversely affect the well being of both parties and to

maintain the relation further since both parties are close

neighbours and that no use and purpose will be served in

continuing the impugned criminal proceedings in the light of

the settlement. Accordingly, it is prayed by her in Annexure-2

affidavit that she has no objection in quashing the impugned

final report in the aforementioned crime which is now pending

as C.P.No.5/2014 on the file of the Judicial First Class

Magistrate Court-II, Kochi. It is in the background of these

facts and circumstances, the aforementioned Crl.M.C has been

filed.

      2.   The Crl.M.C. has been admitted and Sri.Jai George

has taken notice for the 2nd respondent and the learned Public

Prosecutor has taken notice for the 1st respondent State of

Kerala.

      3.   Heard Sri.S.U.Nazar,     learned counsel    for the

                               ::4::

Crl.M.C.No.5606 Of 2014

petitioner, Sri.Jai George, learned counsel for the 2nd

respondent and the learned Public Prosecutor appearing for the

1st respondent State of Kerala.

      4.   The learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted

that during the pendency of the aforementioned criminal

proceedings, the matter has been settled amicably between

the parties, and that the continuation of the proceedings in the

above case/crime will cause miscarriage of justice to both

parties as the real disputants to the controversy have arrived

at an amicable settlement and any further continuation of the

criminal proceedings will amount to sheer wastage of time and

money     and   would    unnecessarily    strain  the  judicial,

administrative and financial resources of the State.

      5.   Sri.Jai George, learned counsel appearing for the 2nd

respondent has submitted, on the basis of the specific

instructions furnished by the 2nd respondent, that the 2nd

respondent has amicably settled the disputes with the

petitioner as stated above and that she has no objection in the

quashment of the impugned criminal proceedings and that the

complainant/victim/injured does not intend to proceed any

                               ::5::

Crl.M.C.No.5606 Of 2014

further against the petitioner as she has no grievance against

him and that she will not raise any dispute/complaint in future

if the prayer for quashing the impugned criminal proceedings is

allowed.

      6.   The learned Public Prosecutor also was heard, who

also has not raised any serious objections and submitted that

the court may consider the prayer in this case in the light of

the law well settled by the Apex Court in that regard.

      7.   After having carefully considered the submissions of

the parties and after having perused the pleadings as well as

the documents and materials placed in this matter, it can be

seen that the offences alleged are more or less personal in

nature and not much element of public interest is involved.

The crucial aspect of the matter is that though such offences

are involved, the real disputants to the controversy, which has

led to the impugned criminal proceedings, have actually

arrived at an amicable settlement of the matter. From the

submissions made by the learned counsel for the 2nd

respondent,     it  is   clear    to  the   Court    that   the

injured/victim/defacto complainant has no further grievance

                                  ::6::

Crl.M.C.No.5606 Of 2014

against the petitioners/accused in the light of the settlement

arrived at by them. In this connection, it is relevant to note

the decision of the Apex Court in the case between Gian

Singh v. State of Punjab reported in 2013 (1) SCC (Cri)

160, para 61 = (2012) 10 SCC 303 = 2012(4) KLT 108(SC),

wherein the Supreme Court has held as follows in para 61

thereof [ See SCC (Cri)]:

             "61.   The position that emerges from the above
      discussion can be summarised thus: the power of the
      High Court in quashing a criminal proceeding or FIR or
      complaint in exercise of its inherent jurisdiction is distinct
      and different from the power given to a criminal court for
      compounding the offences under S.320 of the Code.
      Inherent power is of wide plenitude with no statutory
      limitation but it has to be exercised in accord with the
      guideline engrafted in such power viz;(i) to secure the
      ends of justice or (ii) to prevent abuse of the process of
      any Court. In what cases power to quash the criminal
      proceeding or complaint or F.I.R. may be exercised
      where the offender and victim have settled their dispute
      would depend on the facts and circumstances of each
      case and no category can be prescribed..
      It is further held as follows:-
      "......... But the criminal cases having overwhelmingly
      and pre-dominatingly civil flavour stand on different
      footing for the purposes of quashing, particularly the
      offences arising from commercial, financial, mercantile,
      civil, partnership or such like transactions or the offences
      arising out of matrimony relating to dowry etc. or the
      family disputes where the wrong is basically private or
      personal in nature and the parties have resolved their
      entire dispute. In this category of cases, High Court may
      quash criminal proceedings if in its view, because of the
      compromise between the offender and victim, the
      possibility of conviction is remote and bleak and

                                  ::7::

Crl.M.C.No.5606 Of 2014

      continuation of criminal case would put accused to great
      oppression and prejudice and extreme injustice would be
      caused to him by not quashing the criminal case despite
      full and complete settlement and compromise with the
      victim........"


In the decision reported in the case Yogendra Yadav &

others v. The State of Jharkhand & another reported in

2014 (8) Scale 634 = III (2014) Current Criminal Reports

(CCR) 426 (SC), the Apex Court has held as follows:

            "When the High Court is convinced that the
      offences are entirely personal in nature and, therefore,
      do not affect public peace or tranquility and where it
      feels that quashing of such proceedings on account of
      compromise would bring about peace and would secure
      ends of justice, it should not hesitate to quash them".

The Apex Court in the above case was dealing with a case

involving offences under Sections 341, 323, 324, 504 & 307

r/w Section 34 Indian Penal Code.

      8. Considering the facts and circumstances of this case,

it is seen that the impugned criminal proceedings have arisen

consequent     to    certain   personal     disputes   between the

petitioners and the 2nd respondent due to some family dispute

and they have arrived at a harmonious settlement of such

disputes whereby it has also been agreed to terminate the

criminal proceedings. Hence following decisions of the Apex

                                ::8::

Crl.M.C.No.5606 Of 2014

Court cited supra, this Court is inclined to hold that the

Crl.M.C. can be allowed by granting the prayers sought for.

      Accordingly, Crl.M.C is allowed and the impugned

Annexure-A1 Final Report in Crime No.1838/2013 of Kasaba

Police Station, Kochi which is now pending as C.P.No.5/2014

on the file of the Judicial First Class Magistrate Court-II, Kochi

and all further proceedings arising therefrom stand quashed.

The petitioner shall produce certified copies of this order before

the court below concerned as well as before the Station House

Officer concerned.




                                          ALEXANDER THOMAS,
                                                    Judge.

bkn/-



