
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                      PRESENT:

                     THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE ALEXANDER THOMAS

                 FRIDAY,THE 10TH DAY OF OCTOBER 2014/18TH ASWINA, 1936

                                            Crl.MC.No. 5686 of 2014
                                                ---------------------------

       CC.NO. 1795/2014 OF JUDICIAL FIRST CLASS MAGISTRATE - I, KASARAGOD.
                                                           ......


PETITIONER(S)/ACCUSED 1 TO 3 & DEFACTO COMPLAINANT:
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

        1. KALANDER U., S/O. SOOPI HAJEE,
            KALANDER MANZIL, UKKINADKA,
            P.O.PERDALA, PIN - 671 551, KASARAGOD DISTRICT.

        2. SOOPI HAJEE, S/O. MAMMU,
            KALANDER MANZIL, UKKINADKA,
            P.O.PERDALA, PIN - 671 551, KASARAGOD DISTRICT.

        3. SAYEEDA, D/O. SOOPI HAJEE,
             KALANDER MANZIL, UKKINADKA,
             P.O.PERDALA, PIN - 671 551, KASARAGOD DISTRICT.

        4. SUBAIDA, D/O. IBRAHIM,
             RESIDING AT BEEJANTHADKA, P.O.ERDALA,
            KASARAGOD DISTRICT,PIN - 671 551.


            BY ADVS.SRI.K.V.SOHAN
                          SMT.SREEJA SOHAN.K.
                          SRI.ROVIN RODRIGUES


RESPONDENT/STATE:
--------------------------------

            STATE OF KERALA,
            REP. BY SUB INSPECTOR OF POLICE,
            BADIADKA POLICE STATION, KASARAGOD DISTRICT,
            (CRIME NO.741/2013)
             REP.BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR,
             HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM, PIN - 682 031.

             BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SMT.R.REMA


            THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD
            ON 10-10-2014, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE
            FOLLOWING:
mbr/

Crl.MC.No. 5686 of 2014
---------------------------------

                                               APPENDIX

PETITIONER(S)' ANNEXURES:
------------------------------------------

ANNEXURE A1 - TRUE COPY OF THE CHARGE SHEET/FINAL REPORT
                        DATED 28.12.2013 UNDER SECTION 173 CR.P.C.

ANNEXURE A2- ORIGINAL COPY OF THE AGREEMENT, DATED 07.5.2014 SETTLING
                       ALL DISPUTES WHICH LED TO ANNEXURE - I CHARGE IN
                      CRIME NO. 741/2013.


RESPONDENT(S)' ANNEXURES:                               -  NIL
--------------------------------------------

                                                                  /TRUE COPY/


                                                                  P.S. TO JUDGE
mbr/


                        ALEXANDER THOMAS, J.
                    ==================
                      Crl.M.C.No. 5686 of 2014
                    ==================
             Dated this the 10th day of October, 2014
                               O R D E R

      C.C.No.1795/2014 on the file of the Judicial First Class

Magistrate's Court-I, Kasargod, arose out of crime registered at the

instance of the 4th petitioner herein, who is wife of the 1st petitioner.

The matter was investigated by the Police and later filed final report

in the matter, which led to C.C.No.1795/2014 on the file of the

aforementioned court. The 4th petitioner has filed Annexure A2

copy of settlement/deed of agreement between the parties and the

parties have chosen to arrive at a mediated settlement of their

disputes and found that they could not continue their matrimonial

relationship any further and agreed for divorce. On that basis, the

1st petitioner has pronounced thalaque and issued letter of divorce

dated 7.5.2014 to the 4th petitioner and that the 4th petitioner has

received all her claims under the Muslim Women Protection of

Rights on Divorce Act, 1986, including her fair provision for past

and future maintenance and that nothing more is due to the 4th

CRLMC.5686/14                     - : 2 :-

petitioner from the 1st petitioner and that Rs. 4,50,000/- (rupees

four lakhs and fifty thousand only) has been paid to the 4th

petitioner by the 1st petitioner in cash. It is in the background of

these facts and circumstances that both the husband and wife

jointly filed this Crl.M.C. praying to quash Annexure 1 final report

and all further proceedings in C.C.No.1795/2014 on the file of the

Judicial First Class Magistrate's Court-I, Kasargod.

      2.     The Crl.M.C. has been admitted and the learned Public

Prosecutor has taken notice for the respondent-State of Kerala.

      3.     Heard Sri.K.V.Sohan, the learned counsel appearing for

the petitioners and the learned Public Prosecutor appearing for the

respondent-State.

      4.     The learned counsel for the petitioners has submitted

that   during    the  pendency    of      the aforementioned  criminal

proceedings, the matter has been settled amicably between the

parties,   which   is  resulted   in      the subject matter   of   the

aforementioned crime/case and that the continuation of the

proceedings in the above case/crime will cause miscarriage of

justice to both parties as the real disputants to the case have arrived

at an amicable settlement and any further continuation of the

CRLMC.5686/14                     - : 3 :-

criminal proceedings will amount to sheer wastage of time and

money and would unnecessarily strain the judicial administrative

and financial resources of the State.

      5.     The learned counsel appearing for the petitioners has

submitted that the disputes between the parties have been amicably

settled and that the 4th petitioner-wife has no objection in the

quashment of the impugned criminal proceedings and that the

complainant/victim/injured does not intend to proceed any further

against petitioners 1 to 3 as she has no grievance against them and

that she will not raise any dispute/compliant in future if the prayer

for quashing the impugned criminal proceedings is allowed.

      6.     The learned Public Prosecutor also was heard, who also

has not raised any serious objections and submitted that that court

may consider the prayer in this case in the light of the law well

settled by the Apex Court in that regard.

      7.     After having carefully considered the submissions of the

parties and after having perused the pleadings as well as the

documents and materials placed in this matter, it can be seen that

the offences alleged are more or less personal in nature and not

much element of public interest is involved. The crucial aspect of

CRLMC.5686/14                        - : 4 :-

the matter is that though such offences are involved, the real

disputants to the controversy which has led to the impugned

criminal proceedings, have actually arrived at an amicable

settlement of the matter. From the submissions made by the

learned counsel for the petitioners, it is clear to the court that the

injured/victim/defacto complainant has no further grievance against

petitioner Nos. 1 to 3 in the light of the settlement arrived at by

petitioners 1 to 3 on the one hand and the 4th petitioner on the

other. In this connection, it is relevant to note the decision of the

Apex Court in the case between Gian Singh v. State of Punjab

reported in 2013 (1) SCC (Cri) 160, para 61 = (2012) 10 SCC 303 =

2012(4) KLT 108(SC), wherein the Supreme Court has held as

follows in para 61 thereof [ See SCC (Cri)]:

                "61. The position that emerges from the above
         discussion can be summarised thus: the power of the
         High Court in quashing a criminal proceeding or FIR or
         complaint in exercise of its inherent jurisdiction is
         distinct and different from the power given to a criminal
         court forInherent
                   compounding the offences under S.320 of the
         Code.
         statutory limitationpoweritishas to be exercised in accord
                                       of wide plenitude with no
                              but
         with the guideline engrafted in such power viz;(i) to
         secure the ends of justice or (ii) to prevent abuse of the
         process of any Court. In what cases power to quash the
         criminal proceeding or complaint or F.I.R. may be
         exercised wherewouldoffender andonvictim have settled
                            the
         their
         circumstances of each case and no category canand
                dispute            depend          the  facts
                                                                 be
         prescribed..

CRLMC.5686/14                             - : 5 :-

It is further held as follows:-

           "......... But the criminal cases having overwhelmingly and
           pre-dominatingly civil flavour stand on different footing
           for the purposes of quashing, particularly the offences
           arising from commercial, financial,mercantile, civil,
           partnership or such like transactions or the offences
           arising out of matrimony relating to dowry etc. or the
           family disputes where the wrong is basically private or
           personal in nature and the parties have resolved their
           entire dispute. In this category of cases, High Court may
           quash criminal proceedings if in its view, because of the
           compromise between the offender and victim, the
           possibility of conviction is remote and bleak and
           continuation of criminal case would put accused to great
           oppression and prejudice and extreme injustice would
           be caused to him by not quashing the criminal case
           despite full and complete settlement and compromise
           with the victim........"

Further, in the case Jitendra Raghuvanshi and Others v. Babita

Raghuvanshi and another reported in (2013) 4 SCC 58 [see 2013

(1) KLD 817 (SC)], the Apex Court has held as follows:-

                    "8. It is not in dispute that matrimonial disputes
           have been on considerable increase in recent times
           resulting in filing of complaints under Sections 498A
           and 406 of I.P.C. not only against the husband but also
           against the relatives of the husband. The question is
           when such matters are resolved either by the wife
           agreeing to rejoin the matrimonial home or by mutual
           settlement of other pending disputes for which both the
           sides approached the High Court and jointly prayed for
           quashing of the criminal proceedings or the FIR or
           complaint by the wife under Sections 498A and 406 of
           I.P.C., whether thethe  prayer can be declined on the sole
           ground that since320 offences arequashitthe
                                                    non-compoundable
           under
           impermissible for the court toCode,
                      Section          of   the             would   be
                                                              criminal
           proceedings or FIR or complaint.

                    9. It is not in dispute that in the case on hand
           subsequent to the filing of the criminal complaint under
           Sections 498A and 406 of IPC and Sections 3 and 4 of

CRLMC.5686/14                         - : 6 :-

          the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961, with the help and
          intervention of family members, friends and well-
          wishers,differences
          their     the partiesand
                                 concerned have amicably settled
                                       executed     a   compromise/
          settlement.   Pursuant thereto, the appellants filed the
          said compromise before the Trial Court with a request to
          place the same on record and to drop the criminal
          proceedings against the appellants herein. It is also not
          in dispute that in additional to the mutual settlement
          arrived at by the parties, respondent/-wife has also filed
          an affidavit stating that she did not wish to pursue the
          criminal proceedings against the appellants and fully
          supported the contents of the settlement deed. It is the
          grievance of the appellants that no only the Trial Court
          rejected such prayer of the parties but also the High
          Court failed toe exercise its jurisdiction under Section
          482 of the Code only on the ground that the criminal
          proceedings relate to the offences punishable under
          Sections 498A and 406 of IPC which are non-
          compoundable in nature.

                 15. In our view, it is the duty of the Courts to
          encourage genuine settlements of matrimonial disputes,
          particularly, when the same are on considerable
          increase. Even if the offences are non-compoundable, if
          they relate to matrimonial disputes and the Court is
          satisfied that the parties have settled the same amicably
          and without any pressure, we hold that for the purpose
          of securing ends of justice, Section 320 of the Code
          would not be a bar to the exercisesubsequent quashing
                                                of power of
          of   FIR,   complaint    or   the                  criminal
          proceedings.

                 16. There has been an outburst of matrimonial
          disputes in recent times.
          occupies an important placeThe it has an important role
                                              institution of marriage
                                         and
          to play in the society. Therefore, every effort should be
          made in the interest of the individuals in order to enable
          them to settle down in life and live peacefully. If the
          parties ponder over their defaults and terminate their
          disputes amicably by mutual agreement instead of
          fighting it out in a Court of law, in order to do complete
          justice in the matrimonial matters, the Courts should be
          less hesitant in exercising its extraordinary jurisdiction.
          It is trite to state that the power under Section 482
          should be exercised sparingly and with circumspection
          only when the Court is convinced, on the basis of

CRLMC.5686/14                        - : 7 :-

          material on record, that allowing the proceedings to
          continue would be an abuse of the process of the Court
          or that the ends of justice require that the proceedings
          ought to be quashed."

      8.     Considering the facts and circumstances of this case, it

is seen further that the impugned criminal proceedings have arisen

consequent to the matrimonial disputes between the disputants and

the disputes have been settled amicably between the parties.

Accordingly, this Court is inclined to hold that in the light of the

facts and circumstances involved in the present case and

particularly in view of the settlement arrived at between the parties,

the principles laid down in the aforementioned decisions of the

Apex Court will be squarely applicable in the present case.

Moreover, since the real disputants to the controversy have

amicably settled the disputes, which led to these impugned criminal

proceedings, it is also the duty of the court to promote such

settlement, instead of compelling the parties to go on with the

dispute. It is also pertinent to note that since the matter is settled

out of court, in the event of proceeding with the trial, there may not

be any fruitful prosecution and the chances of conviction of the

accused is rather negligible and therefore, the net result of

continuance of criminal proceedings would be sheer wastage of

CRLMC.5686/14                     - : 8 :-

judicial time rather meaningless and therefore would amount to

abuse of the process of court proceedings in the larger sense.

Hence following decisions of the Apex Court cited supra, this Court

is inclined to hold that the Crl.M.C. can be allowed by granting the

prayers sought for.

      9.     In the result, the Crl.M.C. is allowed and the impugned

Annexure I final report/charge sheet and all further proceedings

pending against petitioners 1 to 3 in C.C.No.1795/2014 on the file

of the Judicial First Class Magistrate Court-K, Kasargod are

quashed. The petitioners 1 to 3 shall produce certified copies of this

order before the court below concerned, as well as before the

Station House Officer, Badiadka Police Station.


                                                      Sd/-
sdk+                                      ALEXANDER THOMAS, JUDGE

          ///True copy///



                              P.S. to Judge



