
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                        PRESENT:

               THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE ALEXANDER THOMAS

     WEDNESDAY, THE 5TH DAY OF NOVEMBER 2014/14TH KARTHIKA, 1936

                              Crl.MC.No.6209 of 2014 ()
                                ---------------------------
    CRIME NO.2165/2014 OF CHANGANASSERY POLICE STATION, KOTTAYAM


PETITIONER/ACCUSED NOS. 1 AND 2:
-------------------------------------------

       1. SHAJIMON C.H., AGED 27 YEARS,
         S/O. HAMEED, CHERUKARACHIRA HOUSE, VANDIPETTA
         VAZHAPPALLY EAST VILLAGE, CHANGANACHERRY TALUK.

       2. KRISHNAKUMARI, AGED 44 YEARS
         CHERUKARACHIRA HOUE, VANDIPETTA
         VAZHAPPALLY EAST VILLAGE, CHANGANACHERRY TALUK.

         BY ADVS.SRI.K.SHAJ
                      SRI.SAJJU.S
                      SRI.RENJIT GEORGE
                      SRI.RENJITH.R.NAIR
                      SMT.ANJU MOHAN
                      SRI.S.K.SUJITH KRISHNA
                      SRI.S.VISHNU (ARIKKATTIL)

RESPONDENTS/STATE AND DEFACTO COMPLAINANT:
-----------------------------------------------------------

       1. STATE OF KERALA
         REPRESENTED BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR
         HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM-682031.

       2. SAUMYA, AGED 27 YEARS
         W/O. SHAJIMON, CHERUKARACHIRA HOUSE, VANDIPETTA
         VAZHAPPALLY EAST VILLAGE
         CHANGANACHERRY TALUK FROM KOCHUPARAMBIL VEEDU
         MANAPPADY KARA, RAMANKARY, ALAPPUZHA-681006.

         R2 BY ADV. SRI.SERGI JOSEPH THOMAS
         R1 BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SRI.R.GITHESH

         THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD 05-11-2014,
       THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE FOLLOWING:

Crl.MC.No.6209 of 2014 ()
---------------------------

                                  APPENDIX

PETITIONER(S)' EXHIBITS:
-------------------------------

ANNEXURE A1- THE CERTIFIED COPY OF FIR IN CRIME NO. 2165/2014 OF
CHANGANACHERRY POLICE STATION BEFORE THE JUDICIAL FIRST CLASS
MAGISTRATE COURT, CHANGANACHERRY.

ANNEXURE A2- AFFIDAVIT SWORN IN BY THE SECOND RESPONDENT SETTLING
ALL THE DISPUTES WITH THE FIRST PETITIONER.


RESPONDENT(S)' EXHIBITS:              NIL
-------------------------------




                                                      // TRUE COPY //




                                                      P.A TO JUDGE.


                   ALEXANDER THOMAS, J.
                   -----------------------------
                   Crl.M.C.No.6209 Of 2014
                 ---------------------------------
           Dated this the 5th day of November, 2014.

                            O R D E R


      The two petitioners herein are the accused Nos.1 & 2 in

the impugned Annexure-A1 FIR in Crime No.2165/2014 of

Changanasserry Police Station registered for offences alleged

under Sections 294(b), 498A r/w Sec. 34 IPC and 3(1)(x)(xi)

of the Scheduled Castes & Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of

Atrocities) Act, 1989. The said crime was registered on the

basis of the statement filed by the 2nd respondent before the

Sub Inspector of Police, Changanasserry.         The 1st petitioner

(A1) is the husband of the 2nd respondent (defacto

complainant) and 2nd petitioner is the mother of the 1st

petitioner. The gist of the prosecution allegation is that the 2nd

respondent-defacto complainant belongs to Hindu Pulaya

community (SC) and that the 1st petitioner belongs to Hindu

Ezhava community and that from 2008 onwards the petitioners

insulted and intimidated the 2nd respondent calling her caste

name and they are physically and mentally harassing her that

no sufficient dowry was given at the time of marriage and that

on 3.9.2014 at about 3:00 p.m. the accused persons abused

                                ::2::

Crl.M.C.No.6209 Of 2014

her using obscene words and caused annoyance to her and

that on 8.9.2014 at about 8:00 a.m. The 2nd petitioner (A2) hit

her on her back and the 1st petitioner (A1) kicked her on her

lower abdomen and the 2nd respondent sustained injuries and

thus the accused have committed the aforesaid offences. It is

stated that during the pendency of the impugned criminal

proceedings, the well wishers in their families and friends

intervened and the matter has been amicably settled between

the rival parties and that the petitioners and 2nd respondent

settled all their disputes relating to the filing of the complaint

and registration of the crime and the filing of Annexure-A1 FIR

against the petitioners and 2nd respondent has no subsisting

grievance against the petitioners and she has no intention to

proceed with the case against the petitioners and that the 2nd

respondent defacto complainant is living with the 1st petitioner

in his house. The 2nd respondent-defacto complainant sworn to

affidavit dated 31.10.2014 produced as Annexure-A2 in this

Crl.M.C stating the above aspects and stating that she has no

grievance against the petitioners and it was on the mistaken

impression that the complaint was happened to be lodged

before the police and she has no grievance against the

                               ::3::

Crl.M.C.No.6209 Of 2014

petitioners and that she has no objection in quashing the

impugned criminal proceedings against the petitioners and that

she does not wish to proceed with the prosecution etc. It is in

the background of these facts and circumstances, this Crl.M.C

has been instituted with the prayer to quash the impugned

criminal proceedings.

      2.    The Crl.M.C. has been admitted and Sri.Sergi

Joseph Thomas has taken notice for the 2nd respondent and the

learned Public Prosecutor has taken notice for the 1st

respondent-State of Kerala.

      3.    Heard    Sri.K.Shaj,    learned  counsel    for  the

petitioners, Sri. Sergi Joseph Thomas, learned counsel for the

2nd    respondent and the learned Public Prosecutor appearing

for the 1st respondent-State of Kerala.

      4.    The   learned   counsel   for  the   petitioners has

submitted that during the pendency of the aforementioned

criminal proceedings, the matter has been settled amicably

between the parties, and that the continuation of the

proceedings in the above case/crime will cause miscarriage of

justice to both parties as the real disputants to the controversy

have arrived at an amicable settlement and any further

                                ::4::

Crl.M.C.No.6209 Of 2014

continuation of the criminal proceedings will amount to sheer

wastage of time and money and would unnecessarily strain the

judicial, administrative and financial resources of the State.

      5.   Sri.   Sergi   Joseph     Thomas,   learned    counsel

appearing for the 2nd respondent has submitted, on the basis of

the specific instructions furnished by the 2nd respondent, that

the 2nd     respondent has amicably settled the disputes with

the petitioners as stated above and that she has no objection

in the quashment of the impugned criminal proceedings and

that the     complainant/victim/injured does not intend to

proceed any further against the petitioners as she has no

grievance against them and that she will not raise any

dispute/complaint in future if the prayer for quashing the

impugned criminal proceedings is allowed.

      6.   The learned Public Prosecutor also was heard, who

also has not raised any serious objections and submitted that

the court may consider the prayer in this case in the light of

the law well settled by the Apex Court in that regard.

      7.   After having carefully considered the submissions of

the parties and after having perused the pleadings as well as

the documents and materials placed in this matter, it can be

                                     ::5::

Crl.M.C.No.6209 Of 2014

seen that the offences alleged are more or less personal in

nature and not much element of public interest is involved.

The crucial aspect of the matter is that though such offences

are involved, the real disputants to the controversy, which has

led to the impugned criminal proceedings, have actually

arrived at an amicable settlement of the matter. From the

submissions made by the learned counsel for the 2nd

respondent,      it     is    clear     to     the      Court      that  the

injured/victim/defacto complainant has no further grievance

against the petitioners/accused in the light of the settlement

arrived at by them. In this connection, it is relevant to note

the decision of the Apex Court in the case between Gian

Singh v. State of Punjab reported in 2013 (1) SCC (Cri)

160, para 61 = (2012) 10 SCC 303 = 2012(4) KLT 108(SC),

wherein the Supreme Court has held as follows in para 61

thereof [ See SCC (Cri)]:

            "61.    The position that emerges from the above
      discussion can be summarised thus: the power of the High
      Court in quashing a criminal proceeding or FIR or complaint
      in exercise of its inherent jurisdiction is distinct and different
      from the power given to a criminal court for compounding
      the offences under S.320 of the Code. Inherent power is of
      wide plenitude with no statutory limitation but it has to be
      exercised in accord with the guideline engrafted in such
      power viz;(i) to secure the ends of justice or (ii) to prevent
      abuse of the process of any Court. In what cases power to

                                     ::6::

Crl.M.C.No.6209 Of 2014

       quash the criminal proceeding or complaint or F.I.R. may be
       exercised where the offender and victim have settled their
       dispute would depend on the facts and circumstances of
       each case and no category can be prescribed..

It is further held as follows:-

       "......... But the criminal cases having overwhelmingly and
       pre-dominatingly civil flavour stand on different footing for
       the purposes of quashing, particularly the offences arising
       from commercial, financial, mercantile, civil, partnership or
       such like transactions or the offences arising out of
       matrimony relating to dowry etc. or the family disputes
       where the wrong is basically private or personal in nature
       and the parties have resolved their entire dispute. In this
       category of cases, High Court may quash criminal
       proceedings if in its view, because of the compromise
       between the offender and victim, the possibility of
       conviction is remote and bleak and continuation of criminal
       case would put accused to great oppression and prejudice
       and extreme injustice would be caused to him by not
       quashing the criminal case despite full and complete
       settlement and compromise with the victim........"

Further, in the case Jitendra Raghuvanshi and Others v.

Babita Raghuvanshi and another reported in (2013) 4 SCC

58 [see 2013 (1) KLD 817 (SC)], the Apex Court has held as

follows:-

               "8.  It is not in dispute that matrimonial disputes
       have been on considerable increase in recent times
       resulting in filing of complaints under Sections 498A and
       406 of I.P.C. not only against the husband but also against
       the relatives of the husband. The question is when such
       matters are resolved either by the wife agreeing to rejoin
       the matrimonial home or by mutual settlement of other
       pending disputes for which both the sides approached the
       High Court and jointly prayed for quashing of the criminal
       proceedings or the FIR or complaint by the wife under
       Sections 498A and 406 of I.P.C., whether the prayer can be
       declined on the sole ground that since the offences are non-
       compoundable under Section 320 of the Code, it would be

                                     ::7::

Crl.M.C.No.6209 Of 2014

      impermissible     for  the   court   to  quash    the   criminal
      proceedings or FIR or complaint.
             9.   It is not in dispute that in the case on hand
      subsequent to the filing of the criminal complaint under
      Sections 498A and 406 of IPC and Sections 3 and 4 of the
      Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961, with the help and intervention
      of family members, friends and well-wishers, the parties
      concerned have amicably settled their differences and
      executed a compromise/ settlement. Pursuant thereto, the
      appellants filed the said compromise before the Trial Court
      with a request to place the same on record and to drop the
      criminal proceedings against the appellants herein.        It is
      also not in dispute that in additional to the mutual
      settlement arrived at by the parties, respondent/-wife has
      also filed an affidavit stating that she did not wish to pursue
      the criminal proceedings against the appellants and fully
      supported the contents of the settlement deed. It is the
      grievance of the appellants that no only the Trial Court
      rejected such prayer of the parties but also the High Court
      failed toe exercise its jurisdiction under Section 482 of the
      Code only on the ground that the criminal proceedings
      relate to the offences punishable under Sections 498A and
      406 of IPC which are non-compoundable in nature.
             15.   In our view, it is the duty of the Courts to
      encourage genuine settlements of matrimonial disputes,
      particularly, when the same are on considerable increase.
      Even if the offences are non-compoundable, if they relate to
      matrimonial disputes and the Court is satisfied that the
      parties have settled the same amicably and without any
      pressure, we hold that for the purpose of securing ends of
      justice, Section 320 of the Code would not be a bar to the
      exercise of power of quashing of FIR, complaint or the
      subsequent criminal proceedings.
             16.    There has been an outburst of matrimonial
      disputes in recent times.        The institution of marriage
      occupies an important place and it has an important role to
      play in the society. Therefore, every effort should be made
      in the interest of the individuals in order to enable them to
      settle down in life and live peacefully. If the parties ponder
      over their defaults and terminate their disputes amicably by
      mutual agreement instead of fighting it out in a Court of
      law, in order to do complete justice in the matrimonial
      matters, the Courts should be less hesitant in exercising its
      extraordinary jurisdiction. It is trite to state that the power
      under Section 482 should be exercised sparingly and with
      circumspection only when the Court is convinced, on the
      basis of material on record, that allowing the proceedings to
      continue would be an abuse of the process of the Court or

                                  ::8::

Crl.M.C.No.6209 Of 2014

      that the ends of justice require that the proceedings ought
      to be quashed."

      8.    Considering the facts and circumstances of this

case, it is seen further that the impugned criminal proceedings

have arisen consequent to the matrimonial disputes between

the disputants and the disputes have been settled amicably

between the parties. Accordingly, this Court is inclined to hold

that in the light of the facts and circumstances involved in the

present case and particularly in view of the settlement arrived

at between the parties, the principles laid down in the

aforementioned decisions of the Apex Court will be squarely

applicable in the present case. Moreover, since the real

disputants to the controversy have amicably settled the

disputes, which led to these impugned criminal proceedings, it

is also the duty of the court to promote such settlement,

instead of compelling the parties to go on with the dispute. It

is also pertinent to note that since the matter is settled out of

court, in the event of proceeding with the trial, there may not

be any fruitful prosecution and the chances of conviction of the

accused is rather negligible and therefore, the net result of

continuance of criminal proceedings would be sheer waste of

                               ::9::

Crl.M.C.No.6209 Of 2014

judicial time rather meaningless and therefore would amount

to abuse of the process of court proceedings in the larger

sense. Hence following decisions of the Apex Court cited supra,

this Court is inclined to hold that the Crl.M.C. can be allowed

by granting the prayers sought for.

      In the result, Crl.M.C is allowed and it is accordingly

ordered in the interest of justice that the impugned Annexure-

A1 FIR in Crime No.2165/2014 of Changanasserry Police

Station and all further proceedings arising therefrom stand

quashed. Petitioners shall forward certified copies of this order

to the Station House Officer concerned as well as to the

jurisdictional Magistrate concerned.




                                          ALEXANDER THOMAS,
                                                  Judge.

bkn/-



