
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                    PRESENT:

                     THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE ALEXANDER THOMAS

            WEDNESDAY, THE 15TH DAY OF OCTOBER 2014/23RD ASWINA, 1936

                                          Crl.MC.No. 5787 of 2014
                                           ----------------------------------

              SC 215/2013 OF SUB COURT III (II ADDL. ASST.SESSIONS COURT),
                                          THIRUVANANTHAPURAM
    CRIME NO. 73/2012 OF POONTHURA POLICE STATION, THIRUVANANTHAPURAM
                                                         ......

PETITIONER(S)/ACCUSED:
--------------------------------------

            ABHILASH, AGED 27 YEARS,
            S/O. THANKAPPAN, ABHILASH BHAVAN, TC 48/321,
            MITRA NAGAR, PARUTHIKUZHI, MUTTATHARA VILLAGE,
            THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

            BY ADVS.SRI.SUMAN CHAKRAVARTHY
                          SRI.SANDEEP T.GEORGE

RESPONDENT(S)/STATE :
------------------------------------------

        1. THE STATE OF KERALA,
            REPRESENTED BY ITS PUBLIC PROSECUTOR,
            HIGH COURT OF KERALA,
            ERNAKULAM-682 031.

        2. RESHMIMOL M.S.,
            D/O. REMANI, KARUNJIPLAV, MUTHANIKKAL HOUSE,
            MOONILAVU P.O., MEENACHIL, KOTTAYAM-686 586.

            R2 BY ADV. SRI.ASHOK SURESH
            R1 BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SMT.R.REMA

            THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE HAVING COME UP FOR ADMISSION ON
            15-10-2014, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE FOLLOWING:




msv/

Crl.MC.No. 5787 of 2014
----------------------------------

                                            APPENDIX

PETITIONER(S)' ANNEXURES:
-----------------------------------------

ANNEXURE A: CERTIFIED COPY OF THE FINAL REPORT IN CRIME NO.73/12.

ANNEXURE B : COPY OF THE CERTIFICATE ISSUED BY THE TEMPLE TRUST.

ANNEXURE C : COPY OF THE MARRIAGE CERTIFICATE.

ANNEXURE D : ORIGINAL AFFIDAVIT EXECUTED BY THE 2ND RESPONDENT
DTD.11.10.2014.

ANNEXURE E : COPY OF THE AADHAR CARD OF THE 2ND RESPONDENT.

RESPONDENT(S)' ANNEXURES
---------------------------------------

                                            NIL

                                                     //TRUE COPY//




                                                     P.S.TO JUDGE.


Msv/


                  ALEXANDER THOMAS, J.
            =========================
                  Crl.M.C No.5787 of 2014
          ============================
          Dated this the 15th day of October, 2014

                           ORDER



      The above captioned Criminal Miscellaneous Case (Crl.M.C.),

seeking the invocation of the inherent powers conferred on this

Court under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure has

been filed to quash Annexure A final report (arising out of Crime

No.73 of 2012 of Poonthura Police Station, Thiruvananthapuram

district) now pending as S.C No.215 of 2013 on the file of the 2nd

Additional Assistant Sessions Court, Thiruvananthapuram.

      2. The gist of the allegation is that the petitioner and the

second respondent were in love for quite some time and they

developed the relationship when the second respondent usually

travelled in the bus of Kerala State Road Transport Corporation

(K.S.R.T.C), wherein the petitioner was employed as conductor.

According to the 2nd respondent, when the petitioner had

promised to marry her, she allowed the maintenance of sexual

relationship with him on many occasions from 2009 onwards and

that when the petitioner retracted from his promise, the 2nd

respondent submitted a First Information Statement alleging the

Crl.M.C No.5787 of 2014          2



commission of offence punishable under Section 376 of Indian

Penal Code, which led to the registration of Crime No.73 of 2012

of Poonthura Police Station, Thiruvananthapuram

      3.     After completion of the investigation, impugned

Annexure A final report was filed, which led to the institution of

S.C No.215 of 2013 on the file of the 2nd Additional Assistant

Sessions Court, Thiruvananthapuram. Later, on the intervention

of relatives, the dispute between the petitioner and 2nd

respondent was settled and the petitioner married the 2nd

respondent on 03.03.2013 at Sree Krishna Swamy Temple,

Thodupuzha as evidenced by Annexure B marriage certificate

dated 07.03.2013 issued by the temple trust. Annexure C is the

certificate dated 15.04.2013 which shows the registration of the

marriage under the Kerala Registration of Marriages (Common)

Rules 2008. The 2nd respondent has sworn to an affidavit dated

11.10.2014 produced as Annexure D in this Crl.M.C stating that

she was in love with the petitioner and that she had involved in

sexual relationship with the petitioner as he had told her that he

would marry her. But, later, when the petitioner retracted from

such promise, she was constrained to give the FIS which led to

the registration of the instant crime No. 73 of 2012 of Poonthura

Crl.M.C No.5787 of 2014           3



Police Station for offence under Section 376 of Indian Penal

Code. That it is only due to misunderstanding and influence of

others that she had given the statement to the police and that

later, the relatives have intervened and resolved her issues with

the petitioner and that on 03.03.2013, she had married the

petitioner in the Sree Krishna Swamy Temple, Thodupuzha in

accordance with the religious and community rites and

ceremonies and that the marriage has been registered as per

Rules and that they are living together as husband and wife. It is

further stated by the 2nd respondent in Annexure D that any

further continuance of the impugned criminal proceedings

before     the     2nd  Additional Assistant   Sessions   Court,

Thiruvananthapuram will detrimentally affect her matrimonial

life and future life and that the impugned proceedings in S.C

No.215 of 2013 on the file of the aforementioned court below

may be quashed by this Court and that this has been sworn to by

her keeping in view her welfare and better future and

accordingly, it is prayed that the impugned proceedings in S.C

No.215 of 2013 pending before the court below may be quashed

by this Court.

      4.    The Crl.M.C. has been admitted and Sri.Ashok Suresh

Crl.M.C No.5787 of 2014          4



has taken notice for the 2nd respondent and the learned Public

Prosecutor has taken notice for the 1st     respondent -State of

Kerala.

      5.    Heard Sri.Suman Chakravarthy, the learned counsel

appearing for the petitioners, Sri. Ashok Suresh, learned counsel

appearing for 2nd respondent and the learned Public Prosecutor

appearing for the 1st respondent-State of Kerala.

      6.    Sri.Ashok Suresh, learned counsel appearing for the

2nd respondent submitted on the basis of the specific instructions

furnished by the 2nd respondent that the 2nd respondent has

amicably settled the disputes with the petitioner and that

whatever is stated by her in Annexure D affidavit are truthful

and correct and that the marriage between the parties was

conducted on 03.03.2013 in the Sree Krishna Swamy Temple,

Thodupuzha as stated above and that any further continuance of

the impugned criminal proceedings before the court below would

adversely affect her matrimonial life and future and that the 2nd

respondent is now living happily with the petitioner and it is only

in her on interest for her better future the impugned

proceedings pending before the court below may be quashed by

this Court.        Otherwise, there will be disharmony in the

matrimonial life and it will be very painful for her to continue

Crl.M.C No.5787 of 2014         5



with the impugned proceedings, which was initiated by her

against the petitioner, who is now her husband. Accordingly,

Sri.Ashok Suresh, learned counsel for the 2nd respondent, would

submit that she will not raise any dispute or complaint in future

if the prayer for quashing the impugned criminal proceedings is

allowed.

      7. The learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted

that during the pendency of the aforementioned criminal

proceedings, the matter has been settled amicably between the

parties, which is resulted in the subject matter of the

aforementioned crime/case and that the continuation of the

proceedings in the above case/crime will cause miscarriage of

justice to both parties as the real disputants to the case have

arrived at an amicable settlement and any further continuation

of the criminal proceedings will amount to sheer wastage of time

and money and would unnecessarily strain the financial,

administrative and financial resources of the State.

      8.    The learned Public Prosecutor also was heard, who

also has not raised any serious objections and submitted that this

court may consider the prayer in this case in the light of the law

well settled by the Apex Court in that regard.

Crl.M.C No.5787 of 2014             6



      9.    After having carefully considered the submissions of

the parties and after having perused the pleadings as well as the

documents and materials placed in this matter, it can be seen

that the offences alleged are more or less personal in nature and

not much element of public interest is involved. The crucial

aspect of the matter is that though such offences are involved,

the real disputants to the controversy which has led to the

impugned criminal proceedings, have actually arrived at an

amicable settlement of the matter. From the submissions made

by the learned counsel for the 1st respondent, it is clear to the

court that the injured/victim/defacto complainant has no further

grievance against the petitioner/accused in the light of the

settlement arrived at by them. In this connection, it is relevant to

note the decision of the Apex Court in the case between Gian

Singh v. State of Punjab reported in 2013 (1) SCC (Cri) 160,

para 61 = (2012) 10 SCC 303 = 2012(4) KLT 108(SC), wherein

the Supreme Court has held as follows in para 61 thereof [ See

SCC (Cri)]:

                "61. The position that emerges from the above
         discussion can be summarised thus: the power of the
         High Court in quashing a criminal proceeding or FIR
         or complaint in exercise of its inherent jurisdiction is
         distinct and different from the power given to a
         criminal court for compounding the offences under

Crl.M.C No.5787 of 2014                 7



         S.320 of the Code. Inherent power is of wide plenitude
         with no statutory limitation but it has to be exercised
         in accord with the guideline engrafted in such power
         viz;(i) to secure the ends of justice or (ii) to prevent
         abuse of the process of any Court.         In what cases
         power to quash the criminal proceeding or complaint
         or F.I.R. may be exercised where the offender and
         victim have settled their dispute would depend on the
         facts and circumstances of each case and no category
         can be prescribed..

It is further held as follows:-

          "......... But the criminal cases having overwhelmingly
          and pre-dominatingly civil flavour stand on different
          footing for the purposes of quashing, particularly the
          offences          arising       from        commercial,
          financial,mercantile, civil, partnership or such like
          transactions or the offences arising out of matrimony
          relating to dowry etc. or the family disputes where the
          wrong is basically private or personal in nature and
          the parties have resolved their entire dispute. In this
          category of cases, High Court may quash criminal
          proceedings if in its view, because of the compromise
          between the offender and victim, the possibility of
          conviction is remote and bleak and continuation of
          criminal case would put accused to great oppression
          and prejudice and extreme injustice would be caused
          to him by not quashing the criminal case despite full
          and complete settlement and compromise with the
          victim........"

       In the decision reported in the case Yogendra Yadav &

others v. The State of Jharkhand & another reported in 2014

(8) Scale 634 = III (2014) Current Criminal Reports CCR 426

(SC), the Apex Court has held as follows:

                  "When the High Court is convinced that the
         offences are entirely personal in nature and, therefore,
         do not affect public peace or tranquility and where it
         feels that quashing of such proceedings on account of
         compromise would bring about peace and would secure
         ends of justice, it should not hesitate to quash them".

Crl.M.C No.5787 of 2014         8



      The Apex Court in the above case was dealing with a case

involving offences under Sections 341, 323, 324, 504 & 307 r/w

Section 34 Indian Penal Code.

         10.    After   due consideration   of   the  facts   and

circumstances of this case, this Court is convinced as the 2nd

respondent has married the petitioner and as her main complaint

and grouse against the petitioner which led to the registration of

the instant crime was due to her insistence that she should

marry the petitioner and as both of them are living as husband

and wife under the same roof in harmony, it will not be proper to

refuse the prayer made by both parties for quashing the

impugned criminal proceedings in the interest of justice,

considering the facts and circumstances of this case otherwise it

will amount to creating disharmony in the matrimonial life of the

2nd respondent who was all along insisting that she should get

married to the petitioner at any cost and her main grouse was

that the petitioner was not prepared to marry her.         Social

interest and public interest would also to subserved by the peace

and harmony that is now restored between the parties through

the solemnization of marriage and as both the petitioner and the

2nd respondent are now living together as husband and wife, it is

Crl.M.C No.5787 of 2014          9



more convincing in the interest of matrimonial life for the wife

that the matter is quashed so that it does not obstruct,

disharmonize the matrimonial relationship. Accordingly, this

Court is inclined to hold that the Crl.M.C. can be allowed by

granting the prayers sought for.

         In the result, the Crl.M.C. is allowed and the impugned

Annexure A final report in Crime No.73 of 2012 of Poonthura

Police Station, Thiruvananthapuram district, which has led to the

institution of S.C No.215 of 2013 on the file of the 2nd Additional

Assistant Sessions Court, Thiruvananthapuram and all further

proceedings arising therefrom stand quashed.       The petitioner

shall produce certified copies of this order before the court

below concerned as well as before the Station House Officer,

Poonthura Police Station, Thiruvananthapuram.




                               ALEXANDER THOMAS, JUDGE.

vdv



