
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                     PRESENT:

                     THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE ALEXANDER THOMAS

                 FRIDAY,THE 17TH DAY OF OCTOBER 2014/25TH ASWINA, 1936

                                           Crl.MC.No. 5868 of 2014 ()
                                               ---------------------------
        CC 2040/2013 of JUDICIAL FIRST CLASS MAGISTRATE COURT, PARAVOOR
                                                      ------------
PETITIONER/ACCUSED :
---------------------------------

            NIAZ S., AGED 39 YEARS, S/O.M.SALIM, NIZHA MANZIL,
            NEAR KOLLAM.S.N.COLLEGE JUNCTION, MUNDAKKAL VILLAGE,
            KOLLAM DISTRICT 691 001
            PRESENTLY RESIDING AT AASHIANA, ULIYAKOVIL, KOLLAM 691 019.

            BY ADV. SRI.S.MOHAMMED AL RAFI

RESPONDENTS/COMPLAINANTS :
-----------------------------------------------

        1. REMYA M.NAIK, AGED 28 YEARS
            W/O.MAHESH.K.N, NO.709, PUSHPA HOUSE,
            E & F BLOCK, KUVEMPU NAGAR, MYSORE DISTRICT
            KARNATAKA STATE - 570 023.

        2. STATE OF KERALA
            REPRESENTED BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR,
            HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM

            R1 BY ADV. SRI.AJITH KRISHNAN
            R2 BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SRI.R. GITHESH

            THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE HAVING COME UP FOR ADMISSION
            ON 17-10-2014, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE
            FOLLOWING:


bp

Crl.MC.No. 5868 of 2014 ()
---------------------------

                                            APPENDIX

PETITIONER(S)' EXHIBITS
-------------------------------------

ANNEXURE A: CERTIFIED COPY OF THE FIRST INFORMATION REPORT IN CRIME
                     NUMBER 51/2012 OF RAILWAY POLICE STATION, KOLLAM
                     DATED 21/10/2012

ANNEXURE B: CERTIFIED COPY OF THE FINAL REPORT IN CRIME NUMBER 51/2012
                     OF RAILWAY POLICE STATION, KOLLAM.

ANNEXURFE C: AFFIDAVIT SWORN BY THE IST RESPONDENT

RESPONDENT(S)' EXHIBITS                    :    NIL.
---------------------------------------


                                                        //TRUE COPY//




                                                        P.A. TO JUGE

bp


                  ALEXANDER THOMAS, J.
         =========================
                  Crl.M.C No.5868 of 2014
       ============================
         Dated this the 17th day of October, 2014

                          ORDER


     The above Criminal Miscellaneous Case (Crl.M.C.) seeking

the invocation of the inherent powers conferred on this Court

under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure has been

filed with the prayer to quash the impugned Annexure B final

report/charge sheet filed in the impugned Annexure A FIR in

Crime No.51 of 2012 of Railway Police Station, Kollam, which

has led to the pendency of C.C No.2040 of 2013 on the file of

the Judicial First Class Magistrate Court, Paravur, Kollam and

all further proceedings arising therefrom, in the interest of

justice. The petitioner is the sole accused in C.C No.2040 of

2013 on the file of the Judicial First Class Magistrate Court,

Paravur, Kollam district alleging offence punishable under

Section 354 of Indian Penal Code.       1st respondent is the

de facto complainant.    The case arose out of the impugned

Annexure A FIR in Crime No.51 of 2012 of Railway Police

Crl.M.C No.5868 of 2014          2



Station, Kollam.       After investigation, the police submitted the

impugned Annexure B final report/charge sheet in the above said

Annexure A crime, which has led to the pendency of C.C No.2040

of 2013 on the file of Judicial First Class Magistrate Court,

Paravur, Kollam district for the above said offences.

      2.   The gist of the prosecution case is that the petitioner

while    travelling     in  train  No.T    16603   Mangalapuram    -

Thiruvananthapuram Maveli Express in coach No.S4 at berth

No.25 had caught hold of the right hand of the de facto

complainant/1st respondent, who was also travelling in the same

coach in berth No.24. The petitioner's case is that the petitioner

was due to get down at Kollam junction and had got up to take

the luggage and in the process, his hand accidentally and

inadvertently       touched   the  right   hand  of   the de   facto

complainant/1st respondent. It was due to this misunderstanding

that the 1st respondent lodged the complaint alleging that when

the 1st respondent and her relatives were travelling in the train,

the petitioner had outraged her modesty by catching hold on her

Crl.M.C No.5868 of 2014        3



right hand etc., it is averred. It is stated that now all the disputes

between the petitioner and the 1st respondent have been amicably

settled.      The 2nd respondent has sworn to affidavit dated

10.10.2014 produced as Annexure C in this Crl.M.C stating that

she does not wish to continue with the impugned criminal

proceedings and that she would not like to proceed with the case

due to the passage of time and that the matter has been amicably

settled and that she has pardoned the accused and she has no

objection against quashing the impugned criminal proceedings

including the final report in the above said crime and all further

proceedings arising therefrom. It is in the background of these

facts and circumstances that the aforementioned Crl.M.C has

been filed.

      3.    The Crl.M.C. has been admitted and Sri.Ajith Krishnan

has taken notice for the 1st respondent and the learned Public

Prosecutor has taken notice for the 2nd respondent-State of

Kerala.

Crl.M.C No.5868 of 2014        4



      4.    Heard Sri.S.Mohammed Al Rafi, the learned counsel

appearing for the petitioner, Sri.Ajith Krishnan, learned counsel

appearing for the 1st respondent and the learned Public

Prosecutor appearing for the 2nd respondent-State of Kearla.

      5.    The learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted

that during the pendency of the aforementioned criminal

proceedings, the matter has been settled amicably between the

parties, which is resulted in the subject matter of the

aforementioned crime/case and that the continuation of the

proceedings in the above case/crime will cause miscarriage of

justice to both parties as the real disputants to the case have

arrived at an amicable settlement and any further continuation of

the criminal proceedings will amount to sheer wastage of time

and money and would unnecessarily strain the financial,

administrative and financial resources of the State.

      6.    Sri.Ajith Krishnan, the learned counsel appearing for

the 1st respondent has submitted on the basis of the specific

instructions furnished by the 1st respondent that they have

Crl.M.C No.5868 of 2014         5



amicably settled the disputes with the petitioners and that they

have no objection in the quashment of the impugned criminal

proceedings and that the complainant/victim/injured does not

intend to proceed any further against the petitioner as she has no

grievance against him and that she will not raise any

dispute/compliant in future if the prayer for quashing the

impugned final report is allowed.

      7.    The learned Public Prosecutor also was heard, who also

has not raised any serious objections and submitted that this

court may consider the prayer in this case in the light of the law

well settled by the Apex Court in that regard.

      8.    After having carefully considered the submissions of the

parties and after having perused the pleadings as well as the

documents and materials placed in this matter, it can be seen

that the offence alleged is more or less personal in nature and not

much element of public interest is involved. The crucial aspect of

the matter is that though such offence is involved, the real

disputants to the controversy which has led to the impugned

Crl.M.C No.5868 of 2014              6



criminal proceedings, have actually arrived at an amicable

settlement of the matter. From the submissions made by the

learned counsel for the 1st respondent, it is clear to the court that

the injured/victim/defacto complainant has no further grievance

against the petitioner/accused in the light of the settlement

arrived at by them. In this connection, it is relevant to note the

decision of the Apex Court in the case between Gian Singh v.

State of Punjab reported in 2013 (1) SCC (Cri) 160, para 61 =

(2012) 10 SCC 303 = 2012(4) KLT 108(SC), wherein the

Supreme Court has held as follows in para 61 thereof [ See SCC

(Cri)]:

                "61.   The position that emerges from the above
         discussion can be summarised thus: the power of the
         High Court in quashing a criminal proceeding or FIR or
         complaint in exercise of its inherent jurisdiction is distinct
         and different from the power given to a criminal court for
         compounding the offences under S.320 of the Code.
         Inherent power is of wide plenitude with no statutory
         limitation but it has to be exercised in accord with the
         guideline engrafted in such power viz;(i) to secure the
         ends of justice or (ii) to prevent abuse of the process of
         any Court. In what cases power to quash the criminal
         proceeding or complaint or F.I.R. may be exercised
         where the offender and victim have settled their dispute
         would depend on the facts and circumstances of each
         case and no category can be prescribed..

Crl.M.C No.5868 of 2014             7




It is further held as follows:-

         "......... But the criminal cases having overwhelmingly
         and pre-dominatingly civil flavour stand on different
         footing for the purposes of quashing, particularly the
         offences arising from commercial, financial,mercantile,
         civil, partnership or such like transactions or the
         offences arising out of matrimony relating to dowry etc.
         or the family disputes where the wrong is basically
         private or personal in nature and the parties have
         resolved their entire dispute. In this category of cases,
         High Court may quash criminal proceedings if in its view,
         because of the compromise between the offender and
         victim, the possibility of conviction is remote and bleak
         and continuation of criminal case would put accused to
         great oppression and prejudice and extreme injustice
         would be caused to him by not quashing the criminal
         case despite       full and complete settlement and
         compromise with the victim........"

      In the decision reported in the case Yogendra Yadav &

others v. The State of Jharkhand & another reported in 2014

(8) Scale 634 = III (2014) Current Criminal Reports CCR 426

(SC), the Apex Court has held as follows:

            "When the High Court is convinced that the offences are
      entirely personal in nature and, therefore, do not affect public
      peace or tranquility and where it feels that quashing of such
      proceedings on account of compromise would bring about peace
      and would secure ends of justice, it should not hesitate to quash
      them".

      The Apex Court in the above case was dealing with a case

involving offences under Sections 341, 323, 324, 504 & 307 r/w

Crl.M.C No.5868 of 2014        8



Section 34 Indian Penal Code.

         9. Considering the facts and circumstances of this case, it

is seen further that the impugned criminal proceedings have

arisen consequent to the personal disputes between the

disputants and the disputes have been settled amicably between

the parties. Accordingly, this Court is inclined to hold that in the

light of the facts and circumstances involved in the present case

and particularly in view of the settlement arrived at between the

parties, the principles laid down in the aforementioned decisions

of the Apex Court will be squarely applicable in the present case.

Moreover, since the real disputants to the controversy have

amicably settled the disputes, which led to these impugned

criminal proceedings, it is also the duty of the court to promote

such settlement, instead of compelling the parties to go on with

the dispute. It is also pertinent to note that since the matter is

settled out of court, in the event of proceeding with the trial,

there may not be any fruitful prosecution and the chances of

conviction of the accused is rather negligible and therefore, the

Crl.M.C No.5868 of 2014          9



net result of continuance of criminal proceedings would be sheer

waste of judicial time rather meaningless and therefore would

amount to abuse of the process of court proceedings in the larger

sense. Hence following the decisions of the Apex Court cited

supra, this Court is inclined to hold that the Crl.M.C. can be

allowed by granting the prayers sought for.

         In the result, the Crl.M.C. is allowed and the impugned

Annexure B final report/charge sheet in the impugned Annexure A

FIR in Crime No.51 of 2012 of Railway Police Station, Kollam,

which has led to the pendency of C.C No.2040 of 2013 on the file

of Judicial First Class Magistrate Court, Paravur, Kollam and all

further proceedings arising therefrom stand quashed.          The

petitioner shall produce certified copies of this order before the

court below concerned as well as before the Station House

Officer, Railway Police Station, Kollam.




                                          Sd/-
                              ALEXANDER THOMAS, JUDGE.

vdv         //True Copy//  P.A to Judge



