
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                             PRESENT:

                     THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE V.K.MOHANAN

        THURSDAY, THE 23RD DAY OF JANUARY 2014/3RD MAGHA, 1935

                                  CRL.A.No. 2116 of 2010 ( )
                                  -------------------------------------


 AGAINST THE JUDGMENT IN SC 493/2007 of ADDL. SESSIONS COURT(FAST
           TRACK COURT NO.II-ADHOC), THRISSUR DATED 12-10-2010


APPELLANTS/ACCUSED:
---------------------------------

        1. BINEESH, S/O. SREENIVASAN,
          MUTHAMPARAMBIL HOUSE, KALANIPALAM, THALIKULAM VILLAGE.

        2. VALSALA, W/O.SREENIVASAN,
          MUTHAMPARAMBIL HOUSE, KALANIPALAM, THALIKULAM VILLAGE.

        3. SEENA, D/O.SREENIVASAN,
          MUTHAMPARAMBIL HOUSE, KALANIPALAM, THALIKULAM VILLAGE.

          BY ADVS.SRI.M.RAMESH CHANDER
                       SRI.ANEESH JOSEPH

RESPONDENT/COMPLAINANT:
-----------------------------------------

        1.       STATE OF KERALA,
                 REP. BY THE PUBLIC PROCUTOR, HIGH COURT OF KERALA,
                 KOCHI-31.

 * ADDL. R2 IMPLEADED:

        ADDL.R2:

                 PURUSHOTHAMAN , S/O. KORISSERY KUNHAPPAN,
                 VALAPPAD VILLAGE, VALAPPAD ANJANGADY DESOM,
                 CHAVAKKAD TALUK, THRISSUR DISTRICT.

 * ADDITIONAL 2ND RESPONDENT IS IMPLEADED IN CRL.A.2116 OF 2013 AS
   PER ORDER DATED 13.03.2013 IN CRL.M.A..318 OF 2013.

          R1 BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SMT. LALIZA
          R2 BY ADV. SRI.K.PAUL KURIAKOSE

  THIS CRIMINAL APPEAL HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD ON 23-01-2014,
THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY DELIVERED THE FOLLOWING:

DSV/27/01


                         V.K.MOHANAN, J.
                 ----------------------------------------
                    Crl.A.No. 2116 of 2010
                 ----------------------------------------
           Dated this the 23rd day of January, 2014

                          J U D G M E N T



           Appellants are accused Nos.1 to 3 in S.C.No.493 of

2007 of the Court of Additional Sessions Judge (Fast Track No.II-

Adhoc), Thrissur. Their grievance is against the conviction and

sentence imposed on them for the offence under Section 498 A of

the Indian Penal Code in the above Sessions Case.

     2. The prosecution case is that the deceased Sindhu, who is

the daughter of PW2 Purushothaman of Korissery House,

committed suicide on 23.08.2006 at about 11.30 a.m. by hanging

herself to a hook in the ceiling of her bedroom at her parental

house situated at Anchangadi consequent to the abetment of A1,

her husband and A2 and A3, her mother in law and sister in law

respectively in connection with the non fulfillment of the demand

of dowry and also on account of the cruelty and harassment

meted out to her by them within 7 years of her marriage with A1.

On the strength of the First Information statement given by PW1

Crl.A.2116/2010                   2

Vijayan, the brother of PW2, the Valappad Police registered Crime

No.358/2006. Thus according to prosecution, the accused three in

numbers have committed the offences punishable under Sections

498 A, 306 and 304 B read with Section 34 of the Indian Penal

Code (for short `the IPC').

      3. On completing the investigation, a report was filed in the

Judicial First Class Magistrate's Court, Kodungallur by the Deputy

Superintendent of Police, Irinjalakuda and the learned Magistrate

by his order in C.P.No.82 of 2006, committed the case to the

Sessions Court wherein S.C.No.493 of 2007 is instituted and

subsequently made over to the present trial Court for disposal.

Thus when the accused appeared, after hearing the prosecution

as well as the defence, a formal charge was framed against them

for the offences punishable under Sections 498 A, 306 and 304 B

read with Section 34 of the IPC. When the said charge read over

and explained to the accused, they denied the same and pleaded

not guilty. Hence the trial was proceeded further, during which

the prosecution adduced its evidence by examining PWs 1 to 16

and Exhibits P1 to P14 were marked.         After considering the

evidence and materials on record, the learned Judge of the trial

Crl.A.2116/2010                  3

court found that offence under Sections 304 B and 306 of the IPC

are not made out against the accused and accordingly they are

acquitted under Section 235(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure

(for short `the Cr.P.C.) with respect to those offences. Whereas

the learned Judge has found that the prosecution has succeeded

in substantiating the charge against the accused for the offences

punishable under Section 498 A read with Section 34 of the IPC

and accordingly they are convicted thereunder.        On such a

conviction, the accused are sentenced to undergo rigorous

imprisonment for a period of three years each and to pay fine of

`25,000/- each and in default of payment of fine, they are

directed to suffer simple imprisonment for a further period of two

months each. It is also ordered that on realisation of the fine

amount, the same shall be paid to PW2 as compensation under

Section 357 (1) (b) of the Cr.P.C. The above findings which are to

the extent against the appellants and the conviction and sentence

are challenged in this appeal.

      4. It is relevant to note that during the pendency of the

above appeal, PW2 in the above Sessions Case, who is

respectively the husband and the father of deceased Prasanna

Crl.A.2116/2010                 4

and Sindhu, is impleaded as additional 2nd respondent in the

above appeal stating that the matter is subsequently settled

between the accused and PW2 and a compounding petition in

Crl.M.A.No.8796 of 2012 is also filed and which signed by the

appellants as well as the additional 2nd respondent and counter

signed by the respective counsel.

      5. I have heard Adv. Sri. M.Ramesh Chander, the learned

counsel appearing for the appellants, Adv. Sri. K.Paul Kuriakose,

the learned counsel appearing for the additional 2nd respondent

and Smt. Laliza, the learned Public Prosecutor for the State.

      6. To substantiate the above prosecution allegation

altogether 22 witnesses were cited but examined only 16

witnesses. The case in Crime No.358 of 2006 of Valappad Police

Station is registered on the basis of Exhibit P1, First Information

Statement lodged by PW1, the elder brother of PW2, who is the

father of deceased Sindhu and husband of deceased Prasanna.

      7. PW2, as I mentioned earlier, is the father of deceased

Sindhu, who was married by A1. Deceased Prasanna is the wife of

PW2. PW3 is another daughter of PW2 and the sister of deceased

Sindhu. PW6 is one of the neighbours and PW7 is the brother in

Crl.A.2116/2010                 5

law of PW2 and the brother of deceased Presanna and uncle of

deceased Sindhu. When PW1 was examined, he had deposed

about the marital relationship between the deceased Sindhu and

A1 and he had also deposed about the dowry arrangement

connected with the said marriage. According to PW1, A2 was not

happy about the nature of bangles given to Sindhu and Sindhu

told PW1 that all the gold ornaments were appropriated by A3

and they have also complained against Sindhu for bringing an

almira which was not manufactured by the Godrej company.

According to PW1, Sindhu was sent back to her house by the

accused asking her to bring `50,000/- and Sindhu was not willing

to return the matrimonial home without raising the said amount.

PW1 has identified Exhibit P1 as the First Information Statement

given by him to the Police. When PW2 is examined, he had also

deposed about the marriage and the dowry given to A1 and the

way in which he raised the fund to meet the expenses for the

purchase of ornaments etc. connected with the marriage. He had

also deposed about the purchase of almira and the complaint of

the accused about the same etc. and the dissatisfaction

expressed by them. PW2 deposed that about 35 days before the

Crl.A.2116/2010                 6

incident, as A2 informed him over phone that Sindhu was

suffering from stomach pain and A1 and A2 are not prepared to

treat her and thus she was brought home by deceased Prasanna.

According to PW2, Sindhu told him that she was compelled to cut

short her hairs by A3 and also deposed that the accused

compelled her to bring `50,000/-.

      8. PW3, as I mentioned earlier, is the sister of deceased

Sindhu, who was doing her final year B.Com at the relevant time.

During her examination, PW3 has also stated about the

arrangement including the dowry connected with the marriage

between A1 and the deceased Sindhu.        She had also spoken

about the almira given to the accused and the complaint made by

them. She also deposed that Sindhu was compelled to cut short

her hairs by A3 by saying that she need not have more hairs than

that of A3. She had also deposed that Sindhu told her that she

was sent out of the house of the accused with a demand to bring

an additional sum of `50,000/-. According to PW3, Sindhu and her

mother committed suicide due to the mental ill-treatment from

the side of the accused.

      9.  PW4 is an attestor to Exhibit P3 inquest report with

Crl.A.2116/2010                 7

respect to the body of the deceased Sindhu whereas PW5 is an

attestor to Exhibit P4 inquest report pertained to the body of

deceased Presanna.     PW6 is the neighbour of PW2 and he

deposed that on hearing the sound of breaking of grass, he came

to the house of PW2 and on looking through the broken pane of

window, he found Prasanna and Sindhu dead in a hanging posture

inside the room. PW6 has also deposed that deceased Sindhu

came to the house of PW2 about one month prior to the incident

and he had also deposed about the ornaments given as dowry to

A1.

      10. PW7 is the brother of deceased Prasanna and the uncle

of deceased Sindhu. PW7 has also stated about the marriage

between A1 and Sindhu and the details of the dowry given etc.

According to PW7, himself and deceased Prasanna went to the

house of the accused for presenting them a gift for Vishu, but A2

refused to receive the same. According to PW7, A3 complained

about the genuineness of the ornaments that had been given to

Sindhu at the time of marriage and the deceased Sindhu was

found wearing only a `thali' and `ear rings'. According to PW7,

rest of the ornaments were with A3. He had also deposed about

Crl.A.2116/2010                     8

the purchase of almira and the complaint expressed by the

accused.    According to PW7, Sindhu told him that the accused

demanded her to bring `50,000/-, failing which, she need not

return to their house and according to PW7, Sindhu committed

suicide as a result of the ill-treatment meted out by the accused.

      11. PW8 is the attestor to Exhibit P5 scene mahazar and

PW9 is the Constable attached to the office of the Deputy

Superintendent of Police, Irinjalakkuda, who is an attestor to

Exhibit P6 mahazar by which Exhibit P2 invitation card seized.

PW10 is the then Tahsildar of Chavakkad Taluk, who conducted

the inquest on the body of Sindhu and issued Exhibit P3 inquest

report.

      12. PW11 is the Doctor, who conducted the postmortem on

the body of the deceased Sindhu and issued Exhibit P8

postmortem certificate.       PW12 is the Doctor, who conducted

autopsy on the body of deceased Presanna and issued Exhibit P9

postmortem certificate. PW13 is the then Village Assistant of the

Village Officer, Valappad through whom Exhibit P10 sketch of the

place of occurrence got prepared and produced. PW14 is the

then Sub Inspector of Police, Valappad who examined the body of

Crl.A.2116/2010                   9

deceased Prasanna and prepared Exhibit P4 inquest report. It

was PW14 who filed Exhibit P11 report for incorporating Sections

498 A and 306 of the IPC. Exhibit P1 First Information Statement

of PW1 was recorded by PW15, the then Additional Sub Inspector

of Police, Valappad and registered the case under Exhibit P2 First

Information Report. PW16 is the Deputy Superintendent of Police,

Irinjalakkuda who investigated the case and laid the charge. He

had filed Exhibits P12 and P13 reports before the court. These

are the evidence and materials on record which referred by the

learned Judge in the impugned judgment.

      13.   The learned counsel for the appellants vehemently

submitted that the trial court is wrong in convicting the appellants

for the offence under Sections 498 A of the IPC, after having held

that no offences under Sections 306 or 304 B would lie against

the appellants. It is also pointed out by the learned counsel that

the evidence and materials on record are not sufficient to attract

the ingredients of Section 498 A of the Indian Penal Code. It is

also the contention of the learned counsel that the evidence of

PW1 and PW2 are sufficient to create a doubt about the

prosecution allegation against the accused and thus according to

Crl.A.2116/2010                  10

the learned counsel, the trial court ought to have acquitted the

accused at least leaving the benefit of doubt. It is also the

submission of the learned counsel that the parties to the dispute

had already settled the matter out of court and the said fact also

may be considered while disposing the above appeal.

       14. On the other hand, the learned Public Prosecutor

submitted that the evidence of PWs 1 to 3 and 7 shows that the

ill-treatment suffered by deceased Sindhu was occurred while she

was in her matrimonial home. The finding that Sindhu and her

mother were forced to commit suicide because of the ill-treatment

so meted out against them by the accused supported by their

evidence and materials on record. So according to the learned

Public Prosecutor, the trial court is justified in convicting only for

the offence under Section 498 A of the IPC. The learned counsel

appearing for the additional 2nd respondent submitted that PW2,

the father of the deceased Sindhu and husband of deceased

Prasanna has settled the matter out of court and he has no

objection in acquitting the appellants.

       15. I have carefully considered the arguments advanced by

the learned counsel for the appellants and additional 2nd

Crl.A.2116/2010                   11

respondent and the learned Public Prosecutor.          I have also

perused the evidence and materials on record.

      16. In the light of the rival contentions and the evidence

and materials on record, the question to be considered is whether

the trial court is justified in convicting the appellants for the

offence under Section 498 A read with Section 34 of the IPC? At

the outset, it is to be noted that though the specific charge of the

Police against the appellants is for the offences punishable under

Sections 304 B, 306 and 498 A read with Section 34 of the IPC,

the learned Judge of the trial court has already found that no

offences under Sections 304 B and 306 of the IPC attracted

against the appellants and accordingly they are acquitted for the

said offences. State has not filed any appeal against the above

acquittal. Thus the acquittal secured by the appellants became

final. Another fact to be considered is that after the trial, while

the appeal is pending before this Court, the matter has been

settled out of court between the parties, though 498 A is not a

compoundable offence as per the provisions of the Cr.P.C.

According to me, the merits of the prosecution case has to be

examined in the above said backdrops of the case.

Crl.A.2116/2010                  12

      17. It is beyond dispute that the marriage between the

deceased Sindhu and A1 was on 11.12.2005 and the deceased

Sindhu and her mother committed suicide on 23.08.2006 in their

house.   In a case like the present one, it is difficult to get direct

evidence in support of the prosecution allegation since the

alleged cruelties and the ill-treatment taken place in the

matrimonial home and the person who subjected to such

treatment is not available to give evidence. So the Court is bound

to scrutinize the available evidence with more caution and care.

The learned Judge himself observed in paragraph 33 of the

judgment that there is some improvements, embellishments and

omissions in the evidence of the witnesses but according to the

learned Judge the same are only inevitable in the case of truthful

witnesses. According to me, the above approach of the court

below is not fully correct. Going by the evidence of PWs 1 to 3

and 7, who are highly interested and relative of the deceased,

they have no specific case and the details about the ill-treatment

allegedly meted out by the accused towards the deceased

Sindhu. It is true during their examination, they have deposed

about the dissatisfaction expressed by the accused with respect

Crl.A.2116/2010                   13

to the gold ornaments worn by the deceased Sindhu and also

about the almira given by the relatives of the deceased. But

about all these incidents, they have no specific averments and

particulars. It is beyond dispute that one month prior to the date

of incident, Sindhu came to her parental home. None of these

prosecution witnesses have deposed on which date the accused

demanded `50,000/- towards dowry. It is brought on record to

the effect that the father of A1 admitted in the hospital and all the

inmates of the house of accused were attending that patient and

nobody to look after Sindhu and therefore they contacted PW2

and requested him to take away Sindhu to their house.           PW3

herself has admitted the said facts. The other witnesses have

also, more or less, admitted the said fact. It is also brought on

record that in fact Sindhu came to her parental home connected

with her stomach pain and also for the reason that her father in

law was hospitalised for treatment. Besides this aspect, in this

juncture it is relevant to note that about the exact date of demand

for `50,000/- or the exact date     about teasing or ill-treatment of

the deceased Sindhu connected with the gold ornaments or the

low quality of the almira given etc. are not mentioned. It is also

Crl.A.2116/2010                   14

relevant to note that deceased Sindhu was brought to her

parental home by the deceased Presanna, her mother, when PW2

got telephonic message from the matrimonial home of deceased

Sindhu about her stomach pain and particularly, when her father-

in-law was admitted in the hospital for cancer treatment, so

Sindhu came to her house, not as alleged by the prosecution that

she had driven out to bring `50,000/- as demanded by the

accused. Moreover, the exact date of demand of `50,000/- and

connected particulars are not mentioned by the prosecution

through any of the witnesses. Similarly, the particulars including

the date of ill-treatment meted out by the accused against the

deceased Sindhu and also about the details about cut short of the

hairs of deceased Sindhu are also not brought on record. Lastly,

it is relevant to note that deceased Sindhu was staying in her

parental house for more than one month and she committed

suicide, while she has staying along with her parents.           No

particular incident or facts pointed out by the prosecution to show

the immediate cause for committing suicide by the deceased

Sindhu. So it can be safely concluded that the prosecution has

miserably failed to establish the nexus between the so called

Crl.A.2116/2010                  15

illegal demand or ill-treatment and the suicide of deceased

Sindhu and her mother.

      18. It is also relevant to note that PW1 when gave Exhibit

P1 statement before the Police, his case is that deceased Sindhu

and Prasanna committed suicide because of the bad conduct of

PW2 who is a drunkard. According to me, when PW1, who is the

brother of PW2 and who gave Exhibit P1 statement, is not

expected to make false complaint against PW2, his own brother.

It is clear that PW1 resiled from his Exhibit P1 statement, to

salvage PW2 and to convict the accused. So what PW1 stated in

Exhibit P1 First Information Statement are sufficient to create

doubt in the mind of the court against the prosecution case and

as suggested by the defence the deceased committed suicide due

to the bad habit of PW2, cannot be ruled out.    This Court fails

to    understand    the reason for committing suicide by the

deceased Presanna, when the allegation is that accused ill-treated

deceased Sindhu. So the fact that deceased Prasanna, who is the

wife of PW2 committed suicide accelerated the doubt of        this

Court about the exact reason for committing suicide by both

deceased Prasanna and Sindhu and the version of PW1 in his

Crl.A.2116/2010                   16

Exhibit P1 statement about the habit of PW2, goes against the

very root of the prosecution allegation. So according to me, the

prosecution has miserably failed to prove beyond reasonable

doubt that the deceased Sindhu and Prasanna committed suicide

because of the demand connected with the dowry or due to the

ill-treatment from the side of the accused so as to attract Section

498 A of the IPC particularly when there is no nexus between the

above demand and cruelty with the suicide.

       19. In the light of the above discussions and in view of the

materials on record, I am of the view that the trial court is not

justified in convicting the appellants for the offence, under

Section 498 A of the IPC, after having acquitted them for the

offences under Sections 304 B and 306 of the IPC which are also

alleged on the same set of facts. Thus according to me, the

prosecution has miserably failed to establish its case against the

appellants beyond reasonable doubts. Thus extending the benefit

of doubts, the conviction recorded against the appellants is set

aside.

       In the result, this appeal is allowed setting aside the

judgment dated 12.10.2010 in S.C.No.493 of 2007 of the Court of

Crl.A.2116/2010                 17

Additional Sessions Court (Fast Track No.II-Adhoc), Thrissur and

the appellants/accused are acquitted of all the charges levelled

against them. The bail bond, if any, executed by them shall stand

cancelled and they are set at liberty.    If the appellants have

already deposited any amount in the trial court in terms of the

order dated 22.10.2010 in Crl.M.A.No.10020 of 2010, the same

shall be released to them forthwith in case an application is

moved in this behalf.




                                    V.K.MOHANAN, JUDGE.




DSV/24/01

Crl.A.2116/2010    18



