
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                    PRESENT:

                    THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE K.RAMAKRISHNAN

             TUESDAY, THE 28TH DAY OF JANUARY 2014/8TH MAGHA, 1935

                                          RPFC.No. 70 of 2009 ( )
                                               ------------------------
                        MC. NO.2/2007 OF FAMILY COURT, KOZHIKODE.
                                                        .......

REVISION PETITIONER/PETITIONER::
------------------------------------------------------

        1. MAIMOONA, W/O.YASIN SUNU,
           VELLIPARAMBA ALIAS THENIPARAMBA MEETHAL,
           P.O. MEDICAL COLLEGE.

        2. MUHAMMAD SALAM (MINOR), S/O.YASIN SUNU,
           VELLIPARAMBA ALIAS THENIPARAMBA MEETHAL,
           P.O. MEDICAL COLLEGE PSL.

           BY ADV. SRI.K.A.SALIL NARAYANAN.

RESPONDENT/RESPONDENT::
---------------------------------------------

           YASIN SUNU, S/O.MOIDEENKOYA MASTER,
           MUBARACK HOUSE, P.O.PURAKKATTIRY,
           KOZHIKODE, ELATHUR PSL.


           BY ADV. SRI.NOUSHAD THOTTATHIL.


           THIS REV.PETITION(FAMILY COURT) HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD
           ON 09-01-2014, THE COURT ON 28/01/2014 PASSED THE FOLLOWING:


rs.


                         K. RAMAKRISHNAN, J.
                ........................................................
                        R.P.(FC)NO.70 OF 2009
               ...........................................................
           Dated this the 28th day of January, 2014.

                                   O R D E R


      The petitioners in M.C.No.2/2007 on the files of the Family

Court, Kozhikode are the revision petitioners herein. The

revision petitioners filed the application claiming maintenance

against the respondent herein under Section 125 of the Code of

Criminal Procedure.

      2. The case of the revision petitioners was that the

respondent married the first revision petitioner on 18.3.2001 as

per the custom and in that wedlock, the second revision

petitioner was     born. After six months of the                          marriage, the

respondent started illtreating her demanding money and she was

driven out of the house. Even after the delivery, family members

of the respondent did not come to take her back. In spite of the

mediation, the conduct of the respondent did not improve. It

appears that he is residing with another woman now. The first

revision petitioner has no independent                         income to maintain

herself.  At the time of the marriage, 25 sovereigns of gold

ornaments were given to the first petitioner, which were also

R.P.(FC)NO.70 OF 2009            2

obtained     from    her  by   the   respondent   and   he   had

misappropriated the same. He used to come drunk and ill treat

her. He is working as a checker in a bus and getting Rs.250/-

per day.      Apart from that, he is also getting not less than

Rs.10,000/- from his properties. The first revision petitioner

requires Rs.2,500/- and the second revision petitioner requires

Rs.2,000/- for their monthly maintenance, which the respondent

is liable to pay. So, they prayed for allowing the application.

      3. The respondent appeared and filed counter admitting

the marriage with the first revision petitioner and paternity of

the second revision petitioner. According to him, he was

discharging his duties     as a loving    husband, but the   first

revision petitioner was not discharging her duties as a dutiful

wife. She was admitted in Rajendra Nursing Home, Kozhikode

for delivery and she delivered the second revision petitioner on

30.10.2002 and the entire delivery expenses were met by the

respondent.     Thereafter she was taken to her house as per

custom and he was frequently visiting her and the child and

providing maintenance to them. After the 40th day of delivery,

the respondent's mother and the sister went to the house of the

first petitioner to take her back and the child to their house.

R.P.(FC)NO.70 OF 2009            3

But, the first petitioner told that she is not willing to come back

to the house of the respondent as he is only working as a

checker in a bus and she is not interested to live with him. In

fact mediation was held and as per the mediation, he decided

to reside in her house for three days and thereafter as per the

terms of the mediation, they will have to come back to his

house. Though he stayed there as agreed, she did not come to

reside with him in her house.        Further, again as per the

mediation, she came to the house of the respondent and resided

there for nine days and on 11.3.2004 she had taken the second

revision petitioner to the clinic of Dr. Hashim for conducting

circumcission (sunnath) and thereafter she went to her house

and did not return to the matrimonial home. The allegation of

cruelty etc. are false. He never demanded any           amount and

he is not a drunkard and he never ill treated her. He is getting

only work as a checker for       three days a week and he is not

having any other income as stated by the first revision petitioner

in her petition. The allegation that the 1st revision petitioner is

depending on her father for her livelihood is not correct.     The

respondent is       prepared to take    back    the first revision

petitioner and the child and provide maintenance to them, if

R.P.(FC)NO.70 OF 2009             4

they are willing to come and reside with him. The first revision

petitioner is residing separately without any sufficient cause

and as such she is not entitled to get maintenance and he prayed

for dismissal of the application.

      4. The first revision petitioner was examined as PW1 and

counter petitioner was examined as RW1 and one witness was

examined as RW2 on the side of the respondent. After

considering the evidence on record, the Family Court found that

the first revision petitioner is residing separately without any

cause and as such, she is not entitled to get maintenance and

denied maintenance to her. But, the Family Court awarded

maintenance to the second revision petitioner at the rate of

Rs.500/- per month payable by the respondent from 2.1.2007

onwards and allowed the petition accordingly. Dissatisfied with

the dismissal of the claim for maintenance and       quantum of

maintenance awarded to the second petitioner, the petitioners in

the lower court have filed this revision petition.

      5. Heard the learned counsel for the revision petitioners

and the respondent.

      6. The counsel for the revision petitioners submitted that

the Family Court was not justified in coming to the conclusion

R.P.(FC)NO.70 OF 2009              5

that the first     revision petitioner was residing   separately

without any reasonable cause. Having disbelieved the evidence

of RW2, an alleged independent witness, there is no other

evidence except the evidence of PW1 and RW1 regarding that

aspect. Further, it could be seen from the evidence of PW1 that

after she left the house, there was no other mediation and no

amounts were paid to the revision petitioners. It was admitted

by RW1 as well. So, under the circumstances, the Family

Court was not justified in coming to the conclusion that there

was a bonafide offer made by the respondent.         The Family

Court was not       justified in denying maintenance to the first

revision petitioner. The amount awarded as maintenance to the

second revision petitioner is also on the lower side.

      7. On the other hand, the learned counsel for the

respondent submitted that the evidence of PW1 will go to show

that she was not telling the truth and there were mediations

taken place on earlier occasions when she left the house and

she went to her house from the clinic after the circumcission

(sunnath) of the second revision petitioner. Thereafter she did

not come back. So the court below was perfectly justified in

denying maintenance to the first revision petitioner as she is

R.P.(FC)NO.70 OF 2009            6

living separately without any reasonable cause and the offer

made by the respondent is bonafide. Considering the income

of the respondent, the amount awarded to the second revision

petitioner cannot be said to be low as well.

      8. The marriage between the first revision petitioner and

the respondent and the paternity of the second revision

petitioner are not in dispute. It was also brought out in evidence

that there was misunderstanding between PW1 and RW1 and

they have resided separately on earlier occasions as well and

due to mediation, there was some reunion and that failed later.

RW2 was examined on the side of the respondent to prove the

mediation and also the conduct of the first revision petitioner

in not joining RW1. But the Family Court came to the conclusion

that his evidence is not reliable and his evidence was discarded

by the court below. So there is only oath against oath given by

the first revision petitioner and the respondent in this case.

      9. PW1 had categorically stated that from the six months

of marriage, ill treatment started and she had to leave the

house on several occasions on account of the ill treatment met

by her in the house of the respondent at his hand. She had

denied the suggestion that after the delivery, the relatives of

R.P.(FC)NO.70 OF 2009             7

the husband came to her house with presents and she did

not go with them since she did not want to live with the

respondent as he was only working as a checker in a bus. It is

true that in the petition, she has stated that the respondent was

not in the habit of going to work. But while she was examined,

she had admitted that he was working as a checker in a bus.

But in the reexamination she had stated that he used to go

for work only occasionally. She had reiterated that she was ill

treated by him. She had also stated that he used to come drunk

and ill treated her. It is true that she had stated that she did not

want to reside with the respondent. In the re-examination she

had stated that she had filed a complaint for dowry harassment

and that is pending. It is true that she was not able to give the

name of the lady with whom he was alleged to be living as

stated in the petition. But that alone is not sufficient to come to

the conclusion that she was residing separately without any

reason. She had categorically stated that due to ill treatment,

she was compelled to leave the house on several times and in

spite of the mediation, she went and resided with him and his

attitude did not change. So, under the circumstances, it cannot

be said that there was no justifiable reason for PW1 to reside

R.P.(FC)NO.70 OF 2009           8

separately as found by the Family Court.

      10. Regarding the evidence of RW1, though he had a case

that he is prepared to maintain his wife and        child, if they

come and reside with him, he had categorically stated that after

she left the house with the child lastly, he did not go and ask

them to come. He did not take any steps to get back his wife

and child and he did not provide any maintenance to them as

well. So, under the circumstances, it cannot be said that the

offer made by him is bonafide so as to exonerate him from the

payment of maintenance to the first revision petitioner.       So,

the finding of the Family Court that the first revision petitioner

is residing separately without any sufficient cause and she is

not entitled to get maintenance is unsustainable in law       and

the same is liable to be set aside. I hold that the first revision

petitioner is residing separately because of the ill treatment

and a criminal case is pending in respect of the same and she

was neglected to be maintained by the respondent and she

has no income to maintain herself as well. So the respondent

is liable to pay maintenance to the first revision petitioner as

well.

      10. It is an admitted fact that the respondent is working

R.P.(FC)NO.70 OF 2009          9

in a bus as a checker and getting Rs.250/- per day. It is also

an admitted fact that the second revision petitioner is studying

in school and he is more than four and a half years at the

time when the application was filed. So under the circumstances,

the amount of Rs.500/- awarded        by the    Family Court as

maintenance to the second revision petitioner is very low.

Further , the first revision petitioner is also having no income

of her own to maintain herself. The respondent has no case

that she is incapacitated from doing any work as well. So,

under the     circumstances, the respondent is liable to pay

reasonable amount as maintenance to the           first  revision

petitioner and the second revision petitioner and the same is

fixed   as    Rs.1,200/- to the   first  revision petitioner and

Rs.1,000/- to the second revision petitioner. The respondent is

directed to pay this amount from the date of petition i.e.,

2.1.2007.

      With the above modification of the impugned order of the

Family Court, the revision petition is allowed in part.



                                           Sd/-
                               K. RAMAKRISHNAN, JUDGE.
cl

R.P.(FC)NO.70 OF 2009    10



