
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                              PRESENT:

            THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE ALEXANDER THOMAS

     WEDNESDAY, THE 5TH DAY OF NOVEMBER 2014/14TH KARTHIKA, 1936

                     Crl.MC.No. 6219 of 2014 ()
                     ---------------------------


      AGAINST THE JUDGMENT IN SC 416/2011 of PRINCIPAL SESSIONS
                        COURT,PATHANAMTHITTA
     CRIME NO. 581/2009 OF RANNI POLICE STATION , PATHANAMTITTA

PETITIONER(S)/ACCUSED:
-----------------------
       ANU SOMAN AGED 24 YEARS
       S/O.SOMAN, THAZHATHETHI VEETIL, MENAMTHOTTAM
       ANGADI MURI AND VILLAGE, RANNI TALUK
       PATHANAMTHITTA DISTRICT.

       BY ADV. SRI.V.R.MANORANJAN (MUVATTUPUZHA)

RESPONDENT(S)/CW2/VICTIM/STATE:
-------------------------------
     1. AISWARYA
       D/O.OMANA HARIKUMAR, PULLOOPRAM MURI, ANGADI VILLAGE
       RANNI TALUK, PATHANAMTHITTA DISTRICT (CW2)
       PIN-686661.

     2. THE SUB INSPECTOR
       RANNI POLICE STATION, PATHANAMTHITTA, PIN-686845.

     3. STATE OF KERALA
       REPRESENTED BY THE PUBLIC PROSECUTOR
       HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM, PIN-682031.

       R1  BY ADV. SRI.V.SETHUNATH
       R2 & R3 BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SRI.R.GITHESH

        THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE   HAVING COME UP FOR ADMISSION  ON
05-11-2014, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE FOLLOWING:

Crl.MC.No. 6219 of 2014 ()
---------------------------

                              APPENDIX

PETITIONER(S)' EXHIBITS
------------------------

ANNEXURE 1: TRUE COPY OF THE FINAL REPORT IN CRIME NO.581/2009 OF
           RANNI POLICE STATION, NOW PENDING AS S.C. NO.416/2011 ON
           THE FILE OF THE PRINCIPAL SESSIONS COURT, PATHANAMTHITTA.

ANNEXURE 2: TRUE COPY OF THE AFFIDAVIT FILED BY THE 1ST RESPONDENT.

RESPONDENT(S)' EXHIBITS      NIL
------------------------



                                         //TRUE COPY//


                                         P.A TO JUDGE
vdv


                  ALEXANDER THOMAS, J.
           =========================
                  Crl.M.C No.6219 of 2014
        ============================
        Dated this the 05th day of November, 2014

                            ORDER



     The petitioner herein is the accused in Crime No.581 of 2009

of Ranni Police Station, Pathanamthitta district for offences

alleged under Section 354 of the Indian Penal Code. The police

after investigation, submitted the impugned Annexure 1 final

report/charge sheet in the impugned Crime No. 581 of 2009 of

Ranni Police Station, which has led to the institution of the

Sessions Case, S.C No.416 of 2011 on the file of the Principal

Sessions Court, Pathanamthitta.    The petitioner is the accused

therein and the 1st respondent is the CW2/victim respectively in

the said impugned criminal proceedings. It is further stated that

all the disputes between the petitioner and the 1st respondent

have been fully and amicably settled out of court. The de facto

complainant in this case is the mother of the 1st respondent and at

the time of launching the prosecution the 1st petitioner was aged

17 years and now she has attained the age of majority, it is

averred.

Crl.M.C No.6219 of 2014         2



      2. The crux of the prosecution case is that the petitioner/

accused who was a senior student in the school of the victim and

now an autorickshaw driver had been disturbing the victim over

phone and directly showing his intention to marry her and on

15.10.2009 at 4:35 p.m, while the victim was waiting in the bus

stand, the accused approached her showing the intention to

marry her and caught hold of her hand and body and thereby

outraged her modesty. It is now stated that all the disputes

between the petitioner and the 1st respondent have been

amicably settled and that the 1st respondent has decided not to

continue any further with the impugned criminal proceedings at

Annexure 1. The 1st respondent has sworn to affidavit dated

01.11.2014 produced as Annexure 2 in this Crl.M.C stating the

above said facts that she is now aged 22 years and that the

accused (petitioner) had studied as senior to her in the school

and that the prosecution was launched on the reason that the

accused had disturbed her with the purpose of marrying her and

now another marriage has been proposed for her and that the

pendency of this case will adversely affect her future and that

the disputes between her and 1st respondent has been amicably

settled and that she no objection in termination/quashment of the

Crl.M.C No.6219 of 2014           3



impugned criminal proceedings arising out of Annexure 1. It is

in the light of these facts and circumstances that the above said

Crl.M.C has been filed with the prayer to quash the impugned

Annexure 1 final report/charge sheet filed in the impugned

Crime No.581 of 2011 of Ranni Police Station, Pathanamthitta

district, which has led to the pendency of S.C No.416 of 2011 on

the file of the Principal Sessions Court, Pathanamthitta and all

further proceedings arising therefrom.

      3.    The Crl.M.C. has been admitted and Sri.V.Sethunath

has taken notice for the 1st respondent and the learned Public

Prosecutor has taken notice for the 2nd and 3rd respondents.

      4.    Heard      Sri.Manoranjan.V.R, the   learned counsel

appearing for the petitioner, Sri.V.Sethunath, learned counsel

appearing for 1st respondent and the learned Public Prosecutor

appearing for the 2nd and 3rd respondents.

      5.    The learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted

that during the pendency of the aforementioned impugned

criminal proceedings, the matter has been settled amicably

between the parties, which is resulted in the subject matter of

the aforementioned crime/case and that the continuation of the

proceedings in the above case/crime will cause miscarriage of

Crl.M.C No.6219 of 2014          4



justice to both parties as the real disputants to the case have

arrived at an amicable settlement and any further continuation

of the criminal proceedings will amount to sheer wastage of time

and money and would unnecessarily strain the financial,

administrative and financial resources of the State.

      6.    Sri.V.Sethunath, the learned counsel appearing for

the 1st respondent, has submitted on the basis of the specific

instructions furnished by the 1st respondent that she has

amicably settled the disputes with the petitioner and that she has

no objection in the quashment of the impugned criminal

proceedings and that the complainant/victim/injured does not

intend to proceed any further against the petitioner as she has

no grievance against him and that they will not raise any

dispute/compliant in future if the prayer for quashing the

impugned final report is allowed.

      7.    The learned Public Prosecutor also was heard, who

also has not raised any serious objections and submitted that this

court may consider the prayer in this case in the light of the law

well settled by the Apex Court in that regard.

      8.    After having carefully considered the submissions of

the parties and after having perused the pleadings as well as the

Crl.M.C No.6219 of 2014              5



documents and materials placed in this matter, it can be seen

that the offence alleged is more or less personal in nature and

not much element of public interest is involved. The crucial

aspect of the matter is that though such offence is involved, the

real disputants to the controversy which has led to the impugned

criminal proceedings, have actually arrived at an amicable

settlement of the matter. From the submissions made by the

learned counsel for the 1st respondent, it is clear to the court that

the injured/victim/defacto complainant has no further grievance

against the petitioner/accused in the light of the settlement

arrived at by them. In this connection, it is relevant to note the

decision of the Apex Court in the case between Gian Singh v.

State of Punjab reported in 2013 (1) SCC (Cri) 160, para 61 =

(2012) 10 SCC 303 = 2012(4) KLT 108(SC), wherein the

Supreme Court has held as follows in para 61 thereof [See SCC

(Cri)]:

                "61. The position that emerges from the above
         discussion can be summarised thus: the power of the
         High Court in quashing a criminal proceeding or FIR
         or complaint in exercise of its inherent jurisdiction is
         distinct and different from the power given to a
         criminal court for compounding the offences under
         S.320 of the Code. Inherent power is of wide plenitude
         with no statutory limitation but it has to be exercised
         in accord with the guideline engrafted in such power
         viz;(i) to secure the ends of justice or (ii) to prevent
         abuse of the process of any Court.      In what cases
         power to quash the criminal proceeding or complaint

Crl.M.C No.6219 of 2014                 6



          or F.I.R. may be exercised where the offender and
          victim have settled their dispute would depend on the
          facts and circumstances of each case and no category
          can be prescribed..

It is further held as follows:-

          "......... But the criminal cases having overwhelmingly
          and pre-dominatingly civil flavour stand on different
          footing for the purposes of quashing, particularly the
          offences          arising       from        commercial,
          financial,mercantile, civil, partnership or such like
          transactions or the offences arising out of matrimony
          relating to dowry etc. or the family disputes where the
          wrong is basically private or personal in nature and
          the parties have resolved their entire dispute. In this
          category of cases, High Court may quash criminal
          proceedings if in its view, because of the compromise
          between the offender and victim, the possibility of
          conviction is remote and bleak and continuation of
          criminal case would put accused to great oppression
          and prejudice and extreme injustice would be caused
          to him by not quashing the criminal case despite full
          and complete settlement and compromise with the
          victim........"

       In the decision reported in the case Yogendra Yadav &

others v. The State of Jharkhand & another reported in 2014

(8) Scale 634 = III (2014) Current Criminal Reports CCR 426

(SC), the Apex Court has held as follows:

             "When the High Court is convinced that the offences are
       entirely personal in nature and, therefore, do not affect public
       peace or tranquility and where it feels that quashing of such
       proceedings on account of compromise would bring about peace
       and would secure ends of justice, it should not hesitate to quash
       them".

       The Apex Court in the above case was dealing with a case

involving offences under Sections 341, 323, 324, 504 & 307 r/w

Section 34 Indian Penal Code.

Crl.M.C No.6219 of 2014          7



         9. Considering the facts and circumstances of this case,

it is seen further that the impugned criminal proceedings have

arisen consequent to the personal disputes between the

disputants and the disputes have been settled amicably between

the parties. Accordingly, this Court is inclined to hold that in the

light of the facts and circumstances involved in the present case

and particularly in view of the settlement arrived at between the

parties, the principles laid down in the aforementioned decisions

of the Apex Court will be squarely applicable in the present case.

Moreover, since the real disputants to the controversy have

amicably settled the disputes, which led to these impugned

criminal proceedings, it is also the duty of the court to promote

such settlement, instead of compelling the parties to go on with

the dispute. It is also pertinent to note that since the matter is

settled out of court, in the event of proceeding with the trial,

there may not be any fruitful prosecution and the chances of

conviction of the accused is rather negligible and therefore, the

net result of continuance of criminal proceedings would be sheer

waste of judicial time rather meaningless and therefore would

amount to abuse of the process of court proceedings in the

larger sense. Hence following decisions of the Apex Court cited

Crl.M.C No.6219 of 2014            8



supra, this Court is inclined to hold that the Crl.M.C. can be

allowed by granting the prayers sought for.

         In the result, the Crl.M.C. is allowed. In the interest of

justice, it is ordered that the impugned Annexure 1 final

report/charge sheet filed in the impugned Crime No.581 of 2009

of Ranni Police Station, Pathanamthitta, which has led to the

pendency of S.C No.416 of 2011 on the file of the Principal

Sessions Court, Pathanamthitta and all further proceedings

arising therefrom stand quashed. The petitioner shall produce

certified copies of this order before the Principal Sessions Court,

Pathanamthitta as well as before the Station House Officer,

Ranni Police Station, Pathanamthitta.




                                            Sd/-
                                 ALEXANDER THOMAS, JUDGE


vdv //True Copy//       P.A to Judge



