
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                      PRESENT:

                           THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE V.K.MOHANAN

              MONDAY,THE 29TH DAY OF SEPTEMBER 2014/7TH ASWINA, 1936

                                           Crl.MC.No. 5356 of 2014 ()
                                                ---------------------------
CC.NO.1410/2014 OF JUDICIAL FIRST CLASS MAGISTRATE COURT -II, ERNAKULAM
CRIME NO. 147/2014 OF CHERANALLOOR POLICE STATION ,ERNAKULAM DISTRICT
                                                    ------------------------

PETITIONER/ACCUSED:
--------------------------------------

            THOMAS P.J, AGED 53 YEARS,
            S/O.P.M.JOSEPH, PERAYIL HOUSE, SOUTH CHITTOOR.P.O.,
            CHERANELLUR VILLAGE, KANAYANUR TALUK, KOCHIN-27.

            BY ADVS.SRI.T.B.SHAJIMON
                          SMT.GOVINDU P.RENUKADEVI

RESPONDENT(S)/RESPONDENTS/COMPLAINANT/STATE:
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

        1. LALI THOMAS, AGED 42 YEARS,
            W/O.THOMAS P.J.,PERAYIL HOUSE, SOUTH CHITTOOR.P.O.,
            CHERANELLUR VILLAGE, KANAYANUR TALUK, KOCHIN-27.

        2. STATE OF KERALA,
            REP. BY THE PUBLIC PROSECUTOR,
            HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM.

             R1 BY ADV. SRI.SIJU MATHEW
             R2 BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SMT. R.REMA

            THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE HAVING COME UP FOR ADMISSION
            ON 29-09-2014, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE FOLLOWING:




sts

Crl.MC.No. 5356 of 2014 ()
---------------------------------------

                                              APPENDIX

PETITIONER(S)' ANNEXURES:
--------------------------------------------


ANNEX A1-            THE COPY OF THE FINAL REPORT.




RESPONDENT(S)' ANNEXURES:                          NIL




                                                       /TRUE COPY/


                                                       P.S.TO.JUDGE




sts


                            V.K.MOHANAN, J.
                     ----------------------------------------
                        Crl.M.C.No. 5356 of 2014
                     ----------------------------------------
               Dated this the 29th day of September, 2014

                                  O R D E R

                     The above petition is filed under Section 482 of the

Criminal Procedure Code (for short 'Cr.P.C.') at the instance of the

petitioner, who is the accused in C.C.No.1410 of 2014 of the Judicial First

Class Magistrate Court-II, Ernakulam, which is a case instituted upon the

police report in Crime No. 147/2014 of Cheranelloor Police Station for the

offences punishable under Sections 498A,323 and 324 of I.P.C. with a

prayer to call for the records in C.C.No.1410/2014 on the file of the

Judicial First Class Magistrate Court-II, Ernakulam and to quash

Annexure A1 final report as the matter is settled out of court.

          2. The allegation in the above case is that the petitioner

physically and mentally harassed the de facto complainant by asking more

dowry and he misused the de facto complainant's property and thereby,

the petitioner/accused committed the above offences. Now, the case of the

petitioner is that the matter is settled out of court.

Crl.M.C.No.5356 of 2014

                                     :-2-:

         3. Heard the learned counsel for the petitioner as well as the first

respondent. I have also heard the learned Public Prosecutor.

         4. The learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that during the

pendency of the above case, the matter is settled amicably between the parties

to the dispute which is the subject matter of the above case. Therefore, the

continuation of the proceedings in the above case is abuse of process of law and

proceedings.

         5. The learned counsel for the first respondent, who on the basis of

specific instruction received from the respondent, submitted that the above

respondent, who is the de facto complainant/victim/injured does not intend to

proceed any further against the petitioner and she has no grievance against him.

         6. I have carefully considered the above submissions of the

respective counsel. I have verified the documents and materials produced along

with the above petition. In the given facts and circumstances of the case and

especially in the light of the settlement arrived between the parties to the

dispute, the learned Public Prosecutor has also no objection in allowing the

above petition.

Crl.M.C.No.5356 of 2014

                                    :-3-:

          7. Both counsel for the petitioner as well as counsel for the first

respondent submitted that in pursuance of the settlement arrived between

the petitioner, who is the husband of the first respondent and the first

respondent, they are residing together and living a peaceful marital life and

the continuation of the above proceedings against the petitioner will affect

their family life and therefore, all the proceedings pending against the

petitioner may be quashed.

          8. In the light of the fact that the dispute is settled and husband

and wife are residing together, certainly, the continuation of the criminal

proceedings will adversely affect their smooth family life and no purpose

will be served, even if the trial is proceeded against the petitioner,

particularly in view of the present stand of the first respondent. So, it is a

fit case, where this Court has to set aside the proceedings pending against

the petitioner to render justice and thereby to allow the petitioner as well

as the first respondent to lead a peaceful marital life.

          9. Having regard to the facts and circumstances involved in the case,

it can be seen that the offences involved in the above case are only Sections

Crl.M.C.No.5356 of 2014

                                            :-4-:

498A,323 and 324 of I.P.C., which are more or less personal in nature and no

public interest is involved. It is pertinent to note that though such offences are

involved, the real parties to the dispute approached this Court after having

amicably settled the matter. From the submission made by the counsel for the

first respondent, it appears to me that the injured/the victim/the de facto

complainant has no further grievance against the petitioner/accused in the light

of the settlement arrived by them. In this juncture, it is relevant to note the

decisions of the Honourable Apex Court reported in Gian Singh v. State of

Punjab [2012(4) KLT 108(SC)] and Jitendra Raghuvanshi and Others v.

Babita Raghuvanshi and another [2013 (1) KLD 817 (SC)]. In Gian Singh's

case, the Supreme Court has held as follows:-

                    "57. The position that emerges from the above discussion
            can be summarised thus: the power of the High Court in quashing a
            criminal proceeding or FIR or complaint in exercise of its inherent
            jurisdiction is distinct and different from the power given to a
            criminal court for compounding the offences under S.320 of the
            Code.     Inherent power is of wide plenitude with no statutory
            limitation but it has to be exercised in accord with the guideline
            engrafted in such power viz;(i) to secure the ends of justice or (ii) to
            prevent abuse of the process of any Court. In what cases power to
            quash the criminal proceeding or complaint or F.I.R. may be
            exercised where the offender and victim have settled their dispute
            would depend on the facts and circumstances of each case and no
            category can be prescribed..

It is further held as follows:-

Crl.M.C.No.5356 of 2014

                                             :-5-:

         "......... But the criminal cases having overwhelmingly and pre-
         dominatingly civil flavour stand on different footing for the
         purposes of quashing, particularly the offences arising from
         commercial, financial,mercantile, civil, partnership or such like
         transactions or the offences arising out of matrimony relating to dowry
         etc. or the family disputes where the wrong is basically private or
         personal in nature and the parties have resolved their entire dispute. In
         this category of cases, High Court may quash criminal proceedings if in
         its view, because of the compromise between the offender and victim, the
         possibility of conviction is remote and bleak and continuation of criminal
         case would put accused to great oppression and prejudice and extreme
         injustice would be caused to him by not quashing the criminal case
         despite      full and complete settlement and compromise with the
         victim........"


Further, in Jitendra Raghuvanshi's case, the Apex Court has held as

follows:-

                   "7. It is not in dispute that matrimonial disputes have been on
         considerable increase in recent times resulting in filing of complaints
         under Sections 498A and 406 of I.P.C. not only against the husband but
         also against the relatives of the husband. The question is when such
         matters are resolved either by the wife agreeing to rejoin the matrimonial
         home or by mutual settlement of other pending disputes for which both
         the sides approached the High Court and jointly prayed for quashing of
         the criminal proceedings or the FIR or complaint by the wife under
         Sections 498A and 406 of I.P.C., whether the prayer can be declined on
         the sole ground that since the offences are non-compoundable under
         Section 320 of the Code, it would be impermissible for the court to quash
         the criminal proceedings or FIR or complaint.
                   8. It is not in dispute that in the case on hand subsequent to the
         filing of the criminal complaint under Sections 498A and 406 of IPC and
         Sections 3 and 4 of the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961, with the help and
         intervention of family members, friends and well-wishers, the parties
         concerned have amicably settled their differences and executed a
         compromise/settlement. Pursuant thereto, the appellants filed the said
         compromise before the Trial Court with a request to place the same on
         record and to drop the criminal proceedings against the appellants
         herein. It is also not in dispute that in additional to the mutual settlement
         arrived at by the parties, respondent/-wife has also filed an affidavit
         stating that she did not wish to pursue the criminal proceedings against
         the appellants and fully supported the contents of the settlement deed. It

Crl.M.C.No.5356 of 2014

                                            :-6-:

         is the grievance of the appellants that no only the Trial Court rejected
         such prayer of the parties but also the High Court failed toe exercise its
         jurisdiction under Section 482 of the Code only on the ground that the
         criminal proceedings relate to the offences punishable under Sections
         498A and 406 of IPC which are non-compoundable in nature."
                 "12. In our view, it is the duty of the Courts to encourage
         genuine settlements of matrimonial disputes, particularly, when the same
         are on considerable increase.           Even if the offences are non-
         compoundable, if they relate to matrimonial disputes and the Court is
         satisfied that the parties have settled the same amicably and without any
         pressure, we hold that for the purpose of securing ends of justice, Section
         320 of the Code would not be a bar to the exercise of power of quashing
         of FIR, complaint or the subsequent criminal proceedings.
                 13. There has been an outburst of matrimonial disputes in recent
         times. The institution of marriage occupies an important place and it has
         an important role to play in the society. Therefore, every effort should be
         made in the interest of the individuals in order to enable them to settle
         down in life and live peacefully. If the parties ponder over their defaults
         and terminate their disputes amicably by mutual agreement instead of
         fighting it out in a Court of law, in order to do complete justice in the
         matrimonial matters, the Courts should be less hesitant in exercising its
         extraordinary jurisdiction.    It is trite to state that the power under
         Section 482 should be exercised sparingly and with circumspection only
         when the Court is convinced, on the basis of material on record, that
         allowing the proceedings to continue would be an abuse of the process of
         the Court or that the ends of justice require that the proceedings ought to
         be quashed."


Considering the particular facts and circumstances in this case, it can be

seen further that the criminal proceedings are initiated consequent to the

matrimonial dispute arose among the parties and both the disputes are now

amicably settled between the parties. According to me, in the light of the

facts and circumstances involved in the present case and particularly in

view of the settlement arrived in the present case, the dictum laid in the

Crl.M.C.No.5356 of 2014

                                     :-7-:

above decisions will be squarely applicable in the present case. I am of the

view that as the parties to the dispute settled the issues amicably, it is the

duty of this Court to promote such settlement, instead of compelling the

parties to go on with the dispute. It is pertinent to note that since the

matter is settled out of court, in the event of proceeding with the trial, there

would not have any fruitful prosecution, resulting the conviction of the

accused, rather the net result would be sheer waste of judicial time and

abuse of process of the court and proceedings. Thus, according to me,

following the decisions cited supra, this Crl.M.C.can be allowed granting

the relief as sought for.

                     In the result, following the dictum laid in the above

decisions, this Crl.M.C. is allowed, quashing all further proceedings

pending against the petitioner in C.C.No.1410/2014 on the file of the

Judicial First Class Magistrate Court-II, Ernakulam and to quash Annexure

Crl.M.C.No.5356 of 2014

                                :-8-:

A1 final report in Crime No.147/2014 of Cheranalloor Police Station

and all further proceedings thereto.




                                               V.K.MOHANAN,
                                                     Judge

MBS/

Crl.M.C.No.5356 of 2014

                           :-9-:



