
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                           PRESENT:

                  THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE ALEXANDER THOMAS

        FRIDAY, THE 12TH DAY OF DECEMBER 2014/21ST AGRAHAYANA, 1936

                                  Crl.MC.No.6333 of 2014
                                  ----------------------------------

       CC NO.1134/2010 of ADDITIONAL CHIEF JUDICIAL MAGISTRATE COURT,
                                        ERNAKULAM.
          CRIME NO.23/1995 OF HILL PALACE POLICE STATION,ERNAKULAM

PETITIONER:
-------------------

          REGI C. MONCY,AGED 44 YEARS,
          S/O.C.C.MONCY,CHANDANATHIL HOUSE, P
          AMBAKUDA.P.O.,MUVATTUPUZHA,
          ERNAKULAM DISTRICT.

           BY ADVS.SRI.P.G.MANU (MAMMALASSERY)
                        SRI.C.C.PRAKASH

RESPONDENTS:
-----------------------

1.        STATE OF KERALA,
          REPRESENTED BY THE PUBLIC PROSECUTOR,
          HIGH COURT OF KERALA,ERNAKULAM-31.

2.        THE SUB INSPECTOR OF POLICE,
          HILL PALACE,TRIPUNITHURA,ERNAKULAM-682036.

3.        MATHAI PHILIP,GENERAL MANAGER,
          NATIONAL TYRE & RUBBER CO. OF INDIA LTD.
          CONTAINER FREIGHT STATION,PETTA,
          THRIPUNITHURA-682036.


           R1 & R2 BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SMT.SAREENA GEORGE.
           R3 BY ADV.SRI.JOBIN PAUL


          THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE HAVING COME UP FOR ADMISSION
          ON 12-12-2014, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE
          FOLLOWING:

pk

Crl.MC.No.6333 of 2014
---------------------------------

                                          APPENDIX

PETITIONER'S EXHIBITS:
------------------------------------

ANNEXURE I- CERTIFIED COPY OF F.I.R DATED 21.02.1995.

ANNEXURE II- CERTIFIED COPY OF FINAL REPORT DATED 21.10.1995.

RESPONDENT'S EXHIBITS:                             NIL
---------------------------------------


                                                   //TRUE COPY//




                                                   P.S.TO JUDGE


pk


                    ALEXANDER THOMAS, J.
                    -----------------------------
                    Crl.M.C.No.6333 Of 2014
                 ---------------------------------
          Dated this the 12th day of December, 2014.

                             O R D E R


      The petitioner herein is the accused in Annexure-I FIR in

Crime No.23/1995 of Hill Palace Police Station, Thripunithura,

Ernakulam District for offences alleged under Sec.420 IPC.

The 3rd respondent is the defacto complainant in this case. The

police after investigation submitted the impugned Annexure-II

Final Report/Charge Sheet in the impugned Annexure-I Crime

which has led to the filing of C.C.No.1134/2010 on the file fo

the Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate Court, Ernakulam. The

prosecution   allegation    is  that   the    petitioner borrowed

Rs.2,000/- from the 3rd respondent-defacto complainant, who

is a distant relative of the petitioner in the year 1995 and

alleging commission of offence of cheating as envisaged under

Sec.420    IPC,   the    aforementioned        impugned   criminal

proceedings have been set in motion. The petitioner was aged

22 years when he borrowed the money from the 3rd

respondent, is conducting a stage carriage service plying from

Piravom to Ernakulam. It is the case of the petitioner that it is

                             ::2::

Crl.M.C.No.6333 Of 2014

true that the petitioner had borrowed Rs.2,000/- from his

distant relative and that he was always ready and willing to

make the payment of the outstanding dues to the 3rd

respondent. But, that there was no chance to see him as he

was not seen in the place where he lived earlier.       The 3rd

respondent-defacto complainant has entered appearance

through counsel and has sworn to affidavit dated 8.12.2014

which has been filed in this Crl.M.C stating that the petitioner

had borrowed Rs.2,000/- from him and that the 3rd respondent

had given the complaint to the Hill Palace Police Station which

led to the registration of impugned Annexure-I Crime

No.23/1995 of Hill Palace Police Station, Thripunithura,

Ernakulam, for offence under Sec.420 IPC and that submission

of the impugned Annexure-II Final Report/Charge Sheet in the

said Crime has led to the pendency of C.C.No.1134/2010 on

the file of the Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate Court,

Ernakulam.     It is further stated in the said affidavit by

the 3rd respondent that the matter has been fully and

finally settled between the parties and that the petitioner had

already given money in 1995 itself and he does not have any

intention to proceed any further against the petitioner in

                                ::3::

Crl.M.C.No.6333 Of 2014

the impugned criminal proceedings and that he has no

objection for the grant of prayer for quashment of the

impugned     Final   Report/Charge    Sheet   and   all  further

proceedings arising therefrom. The prayer of the petitioner is

to quash the impugned Annexure-A2 Final Report/Charge

Sheet filed in the impugned Crime No.23/1995 of Hill Palace

Police Station, Thripunithura Police Station, Ernakulam District

which has led to the institution of C.C.No.1134/2010 on the file

of the file of the Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate Court,

Ernakulam and all further proceedings arising therefrom.

      2.   The Crl.M.C has been admitted and Sri.Jobin Paul,

Advocate, has taken notice for the 3rd respondent and the

learned Public Prosecutor has taken notice for respondents 1 &

2.

      3.   Heard Sri.P.G.Manu, learned counsel appearing for

the petitioner, Sri.Jobin Paul, learned counsel appearing for the

3rd respondent and the learned Public Prosecutor appearing for

respondents 1 & 2.

      4.   The learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted

that during the pendency of the aforementioned criminal

                               ::4::

Crl.M.C.No.6333 Of 2014

proceedings, the matter has been settled amicably between

the parties, and that the continuation of the proceedings in the

above case/crime will cause miscarriage of justice to both

parties as the real disputants to the controversy have arrived

at an amicable settlement and any further continuation of the

criminal proceedings will amount to sheer wastage of time and

money     and   would    unnecessarily    strain  the   judicial,

administrative and financial resources of the State.

      5.   Sri.Jobin Paul, learned counsel appearing for the 3rd

respondent has submitted on the basis of the specific

instructions furnished by the 3rd respondent that the 3rd

respondent has amicably settled the disputes with the

petitioner and that he has no objection in the quashment of

the    impugned     criminal    proceedings    and   that    the

complainant/victim/injured does not intend to proceed any

further against the petitioner as he has no grievance against

him and that he will not raise any dispute/complaint in future if

the prayer for quashing the impugned final report is allowed.

      6.   The learned Public Prosecutor also was heard and

submitted that this Court may consider the prayer in this case

                               ::5::

Crl.M.C.No.6333 Of 2014

in the light of the law well settled by the Apex Court in that

regard.

      7.   After having carefully considered the submissions of

the parties and after having perused the pleadings as well as

the documents and materials placed in this matter, it can be

seen that the offences alleged are more or less personal in

nature. The crucial aspect of the matter is that though such

offences are involved, the real disputants to the controversy,

which has led to the impugned criminal proceedings, have

actually arrived at an amicable settlement of the matter. From

the submissions made by the learned counsel for the 3rd

respondent,    it   is  clear     to    the   Court    that   the

injured/victim/defacto complainant has no further grievance

against the petitioner/accused in the light of the settlement

arrived at by them.

      8.   In this connection, it is relevant to note the decision

of the Apex Court in the case between Gian Singh v. State of

Punjab reported in 2013 (1) SCC (Cri) 160, para 61 = (2012)

10 SCC 303 = 2012(4) KLT 108(SC), wherein the Supreme

Court has held as follows in para 61 thereof [ See SCC (Cri)]:

                                     ::6::

Crl.M.C.No.6333 Of 2014


               "61.   The position that emerges from the above
      discussion can be summarised thus: the power of the High
      Court in quashing a criminal proceeding or FIR or complaint in
      exercise of its inherent jurisdiction is distinct and different
      from the power given to a criminal court for compounding the
      offences under S.320 of the Code. Inherent power is of wide
      plenitude with no statutory limitation but it has to be
      exercised in accord with the guideline engrafted in such
      power viz;(i) to secure the ends of justice or (ii) to prevent
      abuse of the process of any Court. In what cases power to
      quash the criminal proceeding or complaint or F.I.R. may be
      exercised where the offender and victim have settled their
      dispute would depend on the facts and circumstances of each
      case and no category can be prescribed..

It is further held as follows:-

       "......... But the criminal cases having overwhelmingly and
       pre-dominatingly civil flavour stand on different footing for
       the purposes of quashing, particularly the offences arising
       from commercial, financial, mercantile, civil, partnership or
       such like transactions or the offences arising out of
       matrimony relating to dowry etc. or the family disputes
       where the wrong is basically private or personal in nature
       and the parties have resolved their entire dispute. In this
       category    of   cases,  High   Court  may   quash   criminal
       proceedings if in its view, because of the compromise
       between the offender and victim, the possibility of conviction
       is remote and bleak and continuation of criminal case would
       put accused to great oppression and prejudice and extreme
       injustice would be caused to him by not quashing the
       criminal case despite full and complete settlement and
       compromise with the victim........"

       9.      Considering the facts and circumstances of this

case, it is seen further that the impugned criminal proceedings

have arisen consequent to the personal disputes between the

disputants and the disputes have been settled amicably

between the parties. Accordingly, this Court is inclined to hold

that in the light of the facts and circumstances involved in the

                               ::7::

Crl.M.C.No.6333 Of 2014

present case and particularly in view of the settlement arrived

at between the parties, the principles laid down in the

aforementioned decisions of the Apex Court will be squarely

applicable in the present case. Moreover, since the real

disputants to the controversy have amicably settled the

disputes, which led to these impugned criminal proceedings, it

is also the duty of the court to promote such settlement,

instead of compelling the parties to go on with the dispute. It

is also pertinent to note that since the matter is settled out of

court, in the event of proceeding with the trial, there may not

be any fruitful prosecution and the chances of conviction of the

accused is rather negligible and therefore, the net result of

continuance of criminal proceedings would be sheer waste of

judicial time rather meaningless and therefore would amount

to abuse of the process of court proceedings in the larger

sense. Hence following decisions of the Apex Court cited supra,

this Court is inclined to hold that the Crl.M.C. can be allowed

by granting the prayers sought for.

                                ::8::

Crl.M.C.No.6333 Of 2014

      In the result, Crl.M.C is allowed and in the interest of

justice, it is ordered that the impugned Annexure-II Final

Report/Charge Sheet filed in in the impugned Annexure-I FIR

in   Crime    No.23/1995      of   Hill Palace  Police Station,

Thripunithura,    which    has    led   to  the   pendency   of

C.C.No.1134/2010 on the file of the Additional Chief Judicial

Magistrate Court, Ernakulam and all proceedings arising

therefrom stand quashed. The petitioner shall forward certified

copies of this order to the Station House Officer concerned as

well as to the jurisdictional Magistrate concerned.




                                          ALEXANDER THOMAS,
                                                   Judge.

bkn/-



