
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                      PRESENT:

                     THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE ALEXANDER THOMAS

            WEDNESDAY, THE 15TH DAY OF OCTOBER 2014/23RD ASWINA, 1936

                                           Crl.MC.No. 5822 of 2014 ()
                                                ---------------------------
           CC.NO.193/2012 OF JUDICIAL FIRST CLASS MAGISTRATE COURT,
                                          CHANGANACHERRY
CRIME NO. 89/2012 OF THRIKKODITHANAM POLICE STATION ,KOTTAYAM DISTRICT
                                                    ----------------------

PETITIONER(S)/ACCUSED :
-----------------------------------------

        1. CEDHEESH CHERIYAN,S/O.YOHANNAN CHERIYAN,AGED 35 YEARS,
            RESIDING AT THEKKETHAYIL HOUSE, THUMPOLI P.O.,
            ALAPPUZHA.

        2. SEEMA CHERIYAN,W/O.JOSE MELVIN, AGED 39 YEARS,
            RESIDING AT CHAMMNI HOUSE,
            AMBALAPARAKARAYIL, KAKKANADU VILLAGE,
            ERNAKULAM DISTRICT.

        3. SALIN CHERIYAN,W/O.YOHANNAN CHERIYAN,AGED 60 YEARS,
            RESIDING AT THEKKETHAYIL HOUSE, THUMPOLI P.O.,
            ALAPPUZHA.

            BY ADV. SRI.A.SHAFEEK (KAYAMKULAM)

RESPONDENT(S)/DEFACTO COMPLAINANT STATE :
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

        1. JAISY JAMES,D/O.ANNAMMA, AGED 32 YEARS,
            RESIDING AT KALLARACKAL, MADAPPALLY,
            CHANGANASSERY -686 546.

        2. STATE OF KERALA,
            REPRESENTED BY THE SUB INSPECTOR OF POLICE,
            THRICKODITHANAM POLICE STATION,
            KOTTAYAM DISTRICT THROUGH PUBLIC PROSECUTOR,
            HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM.

             R1 BY ADV. SRI.P.G.PRAMOD
             R2 BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SRI.GITHESH.R.

            THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE HAVING COME UP FOR ADMISSION
            ON 15-10-2014, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE
            FOLLOWING:

sts

Crl.MC.No. 5822 of 2014 ()
--------------------------------------

                                               APPENDIX

PETITIONER(S)' ANNEXURES:
---------------------------------------------

ANNEX.1.             CERTIFIED COPY OF THE FINAL REPORT IN CRIME NO. 89/2012 OF
                     THRIKKODITHANAM POLICE STATION.

ANNEX.2.             TRUE COPY OF THE PETITION FILED BY THE 1ST PETITIONER AND
                     THE 1ST RESPONDENT BEFORE THE HON'BLE FAMILY COURT,
                     MAVELIKARA.

ANNEX.3.             AFFIDAVIT SWORN BY THE 1ST RESPONDENT.


RESPONDENT(S)' ANNEXURES:                           NIL




                                                        /TRUE COPY/


                                                        P.S.TO.JUDGE


sts


                     ALEXANDER THOMAS, J.
                     -----------------------------
                     Crl.M.C.No.5822 of 2014
                  ---------------------------------
            Dated this the 15th day of October, 2014.

                              O R D E R

      The above captioned Criminal Miscellaneous Case (Crl.M.C)

has been filed with the prayers to quash the proceedings in

C.C.No.193/2012 on the file of the Judicial First Class Magistrate

Court-I, Changanassery.       Petitioners are the accused and 1st

respondent is the defacto complainant in the above said Calender

Case. The 1st respondent/defacto complainant is the wife of the

1st petitioner. Petitioners 2 & 3 are the sister and mother of the

1st petitioner.  A private criminal complaint filed by the 1st

respondent wife before the Magistrate Court concerned was

forwarded to the police for investigation under Section 156(3)

Cr.P.C pursuant to which Crime No.89/2012 of Thrikkodithanam

Police Station was registered. After completion of investigation,

Annexure-A1 Final Report was submitted and the learned

Magistrate took cognizance of the crime and the case was

numbered as C.C.No.193/2012. The gist of the allegation is that

after the marriage, the petitioners harassed the 1st respondent

mentally and physically demanding more money and gold

ornaments and that on several occasions, the 1st petitioner

manhandled her by twisting her hand, slapped on her face and

                                ::2::

Crl.M.C.No.5822 of 2014

caught hold of her neck and that the 1st petitioner locked her in

the room without giving food, poured kerosene around the room

and threatened to ignite her her and that the petitioners had

misappropriated the money and gold ornaments given by her

parents and thus the petitioners committed offences as alleged

etc. After the submission of Annexure-A1 Final Report, due to

the intervention of the mediators, petitioners and 1st respondent

agreed to settle all the disputes and the 1st petitioner and 1st

respondent had jointly filed Annexure-A2 petition for divorce

under Section 10A of the Indian Divorce Act before the Family

Court. The 1st respondent has sworn to Annexure-A3 affidavit

dated 30.9.2014 stating that she had initiated the impugned

criminal   proceedings    under    a  misunderstanding      due   to

temperamental differences and implied imputations and that

since all the disputes with the petitioners have been settled

amicably and that she has received the gold ornaments due from

the 1st petitioner and that they have jointly filed a petition under

Section 10A of the Indian Divorce Act before the Family Court

etc. Since the disputes have been settled she is not interested to

continue the impugned criminal proceedings and that no purpose

will be served in continuing such proceedings and that she has no

                                ::3::

Crl.M.C.No.5822 of 2014

objection    in   quashing    the     criminal   proceedings     in

C.C.No.193/2012 on the file of the Judicial First Class Magistrate

Court-I, Changanassery. It is in the background of these facts

and circumstances, the Crl.M.C has been filed with the payer to

quash the impugned criminal proceedings.

      2.   The Crl.M.C. has been admitted and Sri.P.G.Pramod

has taken notice for the 1st respondent and the learned Public

Prosecutor has taken notice for the 2nd respondent.

      3.   Heard Sri.A Shafeek Kayamkulam, learned counsel

appearing for the petitioners, Sri.P.G.Pramod, learned counsel

appearing for the 1st respondent and the learned Public

Prosecutor appearing for the 2nd respondent.

      4.   The learned counsel for the petitioners has submitted

that during the pendency of the aforementioned criminal

proceedings, the matter has been settled amicably between the

parties, and that the continuation of the proceedings in the above

case/crime will cause miscarriage of justice to both parties as the

real disputants to the case have arrived at an amicable

settlement and any further continuation of the criminal

proceedings will amount to sheer wastage of time and money

and would unnecessarily strain the judicial, administrative and

                                ::4::

Crl.M.C.No.5822 of 2014

financial resources of the State.

      5.    Sri.P.G.Pramod, the learned counsel appearing for the

1st respondent has submitted, on the basis of the specific

instructions furnished by the 1st respondent, that the 1st

respondent has amicably settled the disputes with the petitioners

as stated above and that she has no objection in the quashment

of   the   impugned     criminal    proceedings and     that   the

complainant/victim/injured does not intend to proceed any

further against the petitioners as she has no grievance against

them and that she will not raise any dispute/complaint in future if

the prayer for quashing the impugned criminal proceedings is

allowed.

      6.    The learned Public Prosecutor also was heard, who

also has not raised any serious objections and submitted that the

court may consider the prayer in this case in the light of the law

well settled by the Apex Court in that regard.




      7.    After having carefully considered the submissions of

the parties and after having perused the pleadings as well as the

documents and materials placed in this matter, it can be seen

that the offences alleged are more or less personal in nature and

                                  ::5::

Crl.M.C.No.5822 of 2014

not much element of public interest is involved.            The crucial

aspect of the matter is that though such offences are involved,

the real disputants to the controversy, which has led to the

impugned criminal proceedings, have actually arrived at an

amicable settlement of the matter. From the submissions made

by the learned counsel for the 1st respondent, it is clear to the

court that the injured/victim/defacto complainant has no further

grievance against the petitioner/accused in the light of the

settlement arrived at by them. In this connection, it is relevant

to note the decision of the Apex Court in the case between Gian

Singh v. State of Punjab reported in 2013 (1) SCC (Cri) 160,

para 61 = (2012) 10 SCC 303 = 2012(4) KLT 108(SC), wherein

the Supreme Court has held as follows in para 61 thereof [ See

SCC (Cri)]:

            "61.  The position that emerges from the above
      discussion can be summarised thus: the power of the
      High Court in quashing a criminal proceeding or FIR or
      complaint in exercise of its inherent jurisdiction is distinct
      and different from the power given to a criminal court for
      compounding the offences under S.320 of the Code.
      Inherent power is of wide plenitude with no statutory
      limitation but it has to be exercised in accord with the
      guideline engrafted in such power viz;(i) to secure the
      ends of justice or (ii) to prevent abuse of the process of
      any Court. In what cases power to quash the criminal
      proceeding or complaint or F.I.R. may be exercised
      where the offender and victim have settled their dispute
      would depend on the facts and circumstances of each
      case and no category can be prescribed..

                                   ::6::

Crl.M.C.No.5822 of 2014

It is further held as follows:-

      "......... But the criminal cases having overwhelmingly
      and pre-dominatingly civil flavour stand on different
      footing for the purposes of quashing, particularly the
      offences arising from commercial, financial, mercantile,
      civil, partnership or such like transactions or the
      offences arising out of matrimony relating to dowry etc.
      or the family disputes where the wrong is basically
      private or personal in nature and the parties have
      resolved their entire dispute. In this category of cases,
      High Court may quash criminal proceedings if in its view,
      because of the compromise between the offender and
      victim, the possibility of conviction is remote and bleak
      and continuation of criminal case would put accused to
      great oppression and prejudice and extreme injustice
      would be caused to him by not quashing the criminal
      case     despite   full  and   complete   settlement  and
      compromise with the victim........"

Further, in the case Jitendra Raghuvanshi and Others v.

Babita Raghuvanshi and another reported in (2013) 4 SCC

58 [see 2013 (1) KLD 817 (SC)], the Apex Court has held as

follows:-

              "8. It is not in dispute that matrimonial disputes
       have been on considerable increase in recent times
       resulting in filing of complaints under Sections 498A and
       406 of I.P.C. not only against the husband but also
       against the relatives of the husband.     The question is
       when such matters are resolved either by the wife
       agreeing to rejoin the matrimonial home or by mutual
       settlement of other pending disputes for which both the
       sides approached the High Court and jointly prayed for
       quashing of the criminal proceedings or the FIR or
       complaint by the wife under Sections 498A and 406 of
       I.P.C., whether the prayer can be declined on the sole
       ground that since the offences are non-compoundable
       under Section 320 of the Code, it would be impermissible
       for the court to quash the criminal proceedings or FIR or

                                  ::7::

Crl.M.C.No.5822 of 2014

      complaint.
             9. It is not in dispute that in the case on hand
      subsequent to the filing of the criminal complaint under
      Sections 498A and 406 of IPC and Sections 3 and 4 of
      the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961, with the help and
      intervention of family members, friends and well-
      wishers, the parties concerned have amicably settled
      their   differences   and     executed    a   compromise/
      settlement.    Pursuant thereto, the appellants filed the
      said compromise before the Trial Court with a request to
      place the same on record and to drop the criminal
      proceedings against the appellants herein. It is also not
      in dispute that in additional to the mutual settlement
      arrived at by the parties, respondent/-wife has also filed
      an affidavit stating that she did not wish to pursue the
      criminal proceedings against the appellants and fully
      supported the contents of the settlement deed. It is the
      grievance of the appellants that no only the Trial Court
      rejected such prayer of the parties but also the High
      Court failed toe exercise its jurisdiction under Section
      482 of the Code only on the ground that the criminal
      proceedings relate to the offences punishable under
      Sections 498A and 406 of IPC which are non-
      compoundable in nature.
             15. In our view, it is the duty of the Courts to
      encourage genuine settlements of matrimonial disputes,
      particularly, when the same         are on considerable
      increase. Even if the offences are non-compoundable, if
      they relate to matrimonial disputes and the Court is
      satisfied that the parties have settled the same amicably
      and without any pressure, we hold that for the purpose
      of securing ends of justice, Section 320 of the Code
      would not be a bar to the exercise of power of quashing
      of   FIR,   complaint    or    the   subsequent    criminal
      proceedings.
             16.  There has been an outburst of matrimonial
      disputes in recent times.      The institution of marriage
      occupies an important place and it has an important role
      to play in the society. Therefore, every effort should be
      made in the interest of the individuals in order to enable
      them to settle down in life and live peacefully. If the
      parties ponder over their defaults and terminate their
      disputes amicably by mutual agreement instead of
      fighting it out in a Court of law, in order to do complete

                                 ::8::

Crl.M.C.No.5822 of 2014

      justice in the matrimonial matters, the Courts should be
      less hesitant in exercising its extraordinary jurisdiction.
      It is trite to state that the power under Section 482
      should be exercised sparingly and with circumspection
      only when the Court is convinced, on the basis of
      material on record, that allowing the proceedings to
      continue would be an abuse of the process of the Court
      or that the ends of justice require that the proceedings
      ought to be quashed."

      8.    Considering the facts and circumstances of this case,

it is seen further that the impugned criminal proceedings have

arisen consequent to the matrimonial disputes between the

disputants and the disputes have been settled amicably between

the parties. Accordingly, this Court is inclined to hold that in the

light of the facts and circumstances involved in the present case

and particularly in view of the settlement arrived at between the

parties, the principles laid down in the aforementioned decisions

of the Apex Court will be squarely applicable in the present case.

Moreover, since the real disputants to the controversy have

amicably settled the disputes, which led to these impugned

criminal proceedings, it is also the duty of the court to promote

such settlement, instead of compelling the parties to go on with

the dispute. It is also pertinent to note that since the matter is

settled out of court, in the event of proceeding with the trial,

there may not be any fruitful prosecution and the chances of

                                 ::9::

Crl.M.C.No.5822 of 2014

conviction of the accused is rather negligible and therefore, the

net result of continuance of criminal proceedings would be sheer

waste of judicial time rather meaningless and therefore would

amount to abuse of the process of court proceedings in the larger

sense. Hence following decisions of the Apex Court cited supra,

this Court is inclined to hold that the Crl.M.C. can be allowed by

granting the prayers sought for.

      In the result, Crl.M.C is allowed.          Accordingly, the

impugned criminal proceedings in C.C.No.193/2012 on the file of

the Judicial First Class Magistrate Court-I, Changanassery (arising

out of Crime No.89/2012 of Thrikodithanam Police Station) and

all further proceedings arising therefrom stands quashed. The

petitioners shall produce certified copies of this order before the

Judicial First Class Magistrate Court-I, Changanassery and to the

Station House Officer, Thrikkodithanam Police Station.




                                            ALEXANDER THOMAS,
                                                     Judge.

bkn/-



