
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                      PRESENT:

                       THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE K.RAMAKRISHNAN

              THURSDAY, THE 6TH DAY OF FEBRUARY 2014/17TH MAGHA, 1935`

                                           Crl.MC.No. 1068 of 2014 ()
                                                ---------------------------
       CP. NO.59/2013 OF JUDICIAL FIRST CLASS MAGISTRATE COURT-I, KANNUR.
                   CRIME NO. 1928/2012 OF KANNUR TOWN POLICE STATION.
                                                           ......

PETITIONER/ACCUSED NO.9:
------------------------------------------

            MOBIN, S/O.MANOHARAN,
            AGED 19 YEARS, MADATHANKANDY HOUSE,
            P.O. KIZHUNNA, KANNUR DISTRICT.

            BY ADVS.SRI.K.C.SANTHOSHKUMAR,
                          SMT.K.K.CHANDRALEKHA.

RESPONDENTS/COMPLAINANT & INJURED:
----------------------------------------------------------------

        1. STATE OF KERALA,
            REPRESENTED BY THE PUBLIC PROSECUTOR,
            HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM.

        2. SADIQ, S/O.MUHAMMED KUTTY,
           AGED 21 YEARS, SOUDHA MANSIL,
            KACHERIPARAMBU, P.O. MUNDERI,
            KANNUR DISTRICT-670 141.

        3. SREEYESH, S/O.SAJEEVAN,
            AGED 20 YEARS, M.K. HOUSE, P.O. AZHEEKKAL,
            KANNUR DISTRICT - 670 012.

        4. SREERAG, S/O.SREEDHARAN,
            AGED 20 YEARS, VADAKEPARAMBATH HOUSE,
            P.O. MUNDAYAD, KANNUR DISTRICT.

        5. JAPTHAN, S/O.MANOHARAN,
            AGED 20 YEARS, SREE NIVAS, ADIKADALAYI P.O.,
            KANNUR DISTRICT - 670 007.

        6. ASHWIN, S/O.SUDAKARAN,
            AGED 20 YEARS, RESIDING AT S.K. NIVAS,
            MADUKOTH, VARAM P.O., KANNUR DISTRICT -670 012.

        7. RAJATH, S/O.BALASUBRAMANIAN,
           AGED 19 YEARS, 'SREENIVAS',
            EDAKKAD P.O., KANNUR DISTRICT-670 007.


            R1 BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SMT.S. HYMA.
            R2 TO R7 BY ADV. SMT.M.M.DEEPA.


            THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE HAVING COME UP FOR ADMISSION
            ON 06-02-2014, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE
            FOLLOWING:
rs.

Crl.MC.No. 1068 of 2014


                                APPENDIX

PETITIONER'S ANNEXURES:-


ANNEXURE-A:         TRUE COPY OF THE FIRST INFORMATION STATEMENT.

ANNEXURE-B:         TRUE COPY OF THE CHARGE SHEET SUBMITTED BY KANNUR
                    TOWN POLICE IN CRIME NO.1928/2012.

ANNEXURE-C:         TRUE COPY OF THE INTIMATION DATED 25.01.2014 ISSUED BY
                    ARMY RECRUITING OFFICE, CALICUT.

ANNEXURE-D:         THE SWORN AFFIDAVIT EXECUTED BY THE RESPONDENT
                    NO. 2 TO 7.

RESPONDENT'S ANNEXURES:-              NIL.




                                            //TRUE COPY//


                                            P.A. TO JUDGE

rs.


                             K. RAMAKRISHNAN, J.
             ------------------------------------------------------------------
                           Crl.M.C. No.1068 of 2014
            ---------------------------------------------------------------------
               Dated this the 6th day of February, 2014


                                      O R D E R




           This criminal miscellaneous case is filed by the 9th

accused in Crime No.1928/2012 of Kannur Town Police

Station, who is the sole accused in C.P. No.59/2013 on the

file of the Judicial First Class Magistrate Court-I, Kannur, to

quash the proceedings, on the basis of the composition

entered into between the petitioner and the injured,

including the defacto-complainant under Section 482 of the

Code of Criminal Procedure (hereinafter called the 'Code').

           2.      It is alleged in the petition that, the

petitioner is aged now 19 years and he is in the selected list

as an Army men by the Army Recruitment Board, Calicut,

and he was the 9th accused in Crime No.1928/12 of Kannur

Town Police Station. The crime was registered on the basis

of the statement given by CW2, who is the 2nd respondent

herein, alleging offences under Section 143, 147, 148, 324

Crl.M.C. No.1068 of 2014
                                2

323, 308 and 341 read with Section 149 of the Indian Penal

Code. After investigation, final report has been filed by the

investigating officer against all the accused persons

including the petitioner before the Judicial First Class

Magistrate Court-I, Kannur. Except the present petitioner,

the case against other accused persons were committed to

the court of Sessions and that case is pending against them

before the Sessions Court. Since the present petitioner did

not appear at the time, the case against him was split up

and re-filed as C.P.59/2013 and now it is pending before

that court.

            3.    The incident occurred in the premises of S.N.

College, Kannur, caused on account of some altercation

between the members of two student organisations. Now

the matter has been settled, considering the fact that he has

been provisionally selected as an Army men by the Army

Recruitment Office, Calicut, and he was directed to produce

Crl.M.C. No.1068 of 2014
                                3

a police verification certificate, from the Superintendent of

Police by 10.02.2014. Though, a request was made showing

the settlement reached between the parties and that there

is no possibility of conviction being entered against the

petitioner, the police officials are not giving a certificate to

that effect. Since the matter has been settled between the

petitioner and the injured persons and there is no possibility

of any conviction being entered as against the petitioner

and the allegations made and the overt act alleged against

the petitioner are not that grave, he has no other option but

to approach this court, to quash the proceedings as against

him. Otherwise he will be loosing his opportunity of getting

employment in the Army.         So he filed the application for

the above relief under Section 482 of the 'Code'.

            4.    Respondents 2 to 7 who are the defacto-

complainant and the injured in the above case appeared

through counsel and also filed Annexure-D affidavit,

Crl.M.C. No.1068 of 2014
                                4

regarding the composition entered into between them

stating the reason for the composition also and expressed

their willingness to quash the proceedings, as against the

petitioner alone.

            5.    The application was opposed by the learned

Public Prosecutor on the ground that, the case against the

other accused persons are still pending, this is likely to

affect the prosecution in that case.

            6.    The counsel for the petitioner submitted that,

the overt act attributed against the petitioner is not that

grave and after the incident, he had to leave the college and

now he has realised the mistakes and he is in the verge of

getting employment and he had no criminal background as

well.    So he seeks the intervention of this court, as an

exceptional case to quash the proceedings.

            7.    I have considered the rival contentions of

both parties in the matter.

Crl.M.C. No.1068 of 2014
                               5

            8.      It  is an admitted fact that, while the

petitioner was a Plus Two student in Sree Narayana

College, Kannur, he had some political affiliation and was a

member of a student political organisation. There was some

incident happened on 15.10.2012, in which a clash occurred

between the two rival students political organisations and

CWs 1 to 6, who are respondents 2 to 7 herein sustained

injuries in that incident.   On the basis of the statement

given    by    CW1,     a case  was    registered as   Crime

No.1928/2013 of Kannur Town Police Station and alleging

offences under Section 143, 147, 148, 324 323, 308 and 341

read with Section 149 of the Indian Penal Code and after

investigation final report has been filed, which was taken on

the file by the learned magistrate.        Since the present

petitioner did not appear at the earlier occasion, the

learned magistrate has committed the case against other

accused persons in this case to the Sessions Court and now

Crl.M.C. No.1068 of 2014
                                 6

that matter is pending before the Sessions Court, as against

other accused persons. The case against the present

petitioner was split up and re-filed as C.P.59/2013. Now the

matter has been settled between the petitioner and the

defacto-complaint and other injured persons, who were

arrayed as respondent 2 to 7 in the petition.

            9.    It was specifically mentioned in the affidavit

filed by respondents 2 to 7 that due to the intervention of

mediators and well-wishers and also considering the future

of the present petitioner, they have decided to settle the

case against the present petitioner alone. Further it was

also mentioned in the affidavit that, they have not made

any specific allegation against the present petitioner either

in the first information statement or in the further

statement given by them to the police. So they have no

objection in recording composition and quashing the

proceedings as against the petitioner, considering his

Crl.M.C. No.1068 of 2014
                               7

present repentance made by him for the incident and they

have decided to forgive him and provide him an opportunity

to lead a happy life.

            10. It may be mentioned here that, normally this

court is not inclined to exercise the extra ordinary power

under Section 482 of the 'Code', in a case where grave

offences are alleged. Except the offence under Section 308

and 324 of Indian Penal Code, the other offences cannot be

said to be of that grave nature.

            11. Further it is seen from the case diary file

that, the incident happened between two student political

organisations and the petitioner and respondents 2 to 7

belonged to the rival student organisations.        There is a

tendency among the students that doing something in the

colour of political activity during their student life will give

them prosperity in future to become a political leader.

Unfortunately this is being supported by the political parties

Crl.M.C. No.1068 of 2014
                               8

as well. Innocent students are being trapped to un-

necessary      political incidents, without    knowing      the

consequence of their act at their tender age. This is an

example of one such incident. The students are also not

understanding the pain and interest taken by their parents,

to provide them good education as well. Ignoring all these

aspects, under some false notion of politics, they are

involving in such activities and later they are repenting for

their involvement in such activities, by the time it will

become too late to repair as well. But in this case, it is seen

that, the present petitioner has been recruited provisionally

as Army men by the Army Recruiting Office, Calicut, and he

was asked to produce a police verification report to asking

about his antecedents. Since a crime has been registered

and it is pending and it has not been disposed of, police may

not be able to exonerate him and give a certificate that he

had no criminal antecedents. I have requested the learned

Crl.M.C. No.1068 of 2014
                                       9

Public Prosecutor to enquire about the antecedent of the

present petitioner and the Public Prosecutor has submitted

that, except this case, there is no other case registered

against the petitioner and he had no other criminal

background as well.

            12. Further, respondents 2 to 7 who are the

injured persons have come with an open mind with

magnanimity to forgive him for his act so as to give him an

opportunity to lead a good life in future. In the decision

reported in Gian Singh v. State of Punjab [2012(4) KLT

108 (SC)], the Hon'ble Supreme Court has observed

regarding the power of this court under Section 482 of the

'Code' and in what circumstances it can be used, which

reads as follows:

      "The position that emerges from the above discussion can be
      summarised thus: the power of the High Court in quashing a
      criminal proceedings or FIR or complaint in exercise of its
      inherent jurisdiction is distinct and different from the power
      given to a criminal court for compounding the offences under
      S.320 of the Code. Inherent power is of wide plenitude with
      no statutory limitation but has to be exercised in accord with
      the guideline engrafted in such power viz; (i) to secure the

Crl.M.C. No.1068 of 2014
                                       10

      ends of justice or (ii) to prevent abuse of the process of any
      Court. In what cases power to quash the criminal proceeding
      or complaint or FIR may be exercised where the offender and
      victim have settled their dispute would depend on the facts
      and circumstances of each case an no category can be
      prescribed. However, before exercise of such power, the High
      Court must have due regard to the nature and gravity of the
      crime. Heinous and serious offences of mental depravity or
      offences like murder, rape, dacoity, etc., cannot be fittingly
      quashed even though the victim or victim's family and the
      offender have settled the dispute.       Such offences are not
      private in nature and have serious impact on society.
      Similarly, any compromise between the victim and offender in
      relation to the offences under special statutes like Prevention
      of Corruption Act or the offences committed by public servants
      while working in that capacity etc; cannot provide for any
      basis for quashing criminal proceedings involving such
      offences. But the criminal cases having overwhelmingly and
      pre-dominatingly civil flavour stand on different footing for the
      purposes of quashing, particularly the offences arising from
      commercial, financial mercantile, civil, partnership or such
      like transactions or the offences arising out of matrimony
      relating to dowry, etc., or the family disputes where the wrong
      is basically private or personal in nature and the parties have
      resolved their entire dispute. In this category of cases, High
      Court may quash criminal proceedings if in its view, because
      of the compromise between the offender and victim, the
      possibility of conviction is remote and bleak and continuation
      of criminal case would put accused to great oppression and
      prejudice and extreme injustice would be caused to him by not
      quashing the criminal case despite full and complete
      settlement and compromise with the victim. In other words,
      the High Court must consider whether it would be unfair or
      contrary to the interest of justice to continue with the criminal
      proceedings or continuation of the criminal proceedings would
      tantamount to abuse of process of law despite settlement and
      compromise between the victim and wrongdoer and whether
      to secure the ends of justice, it is appropriate that criminal
      case is put to an end and if the answer to the above question
      (s) is in affirmative, the High Court shall be well within its
      jurisdiction to quash the criminal proceeding."


             13. Though it can be termed as a political fight

Crl.M.C. No.1068 of 2014
                              11

between the student union which resulted in the incident,

considering the age of the petitioner at the time when the

incident happened, I feel that he could not have anticipated

the consequences of the act, when involved in the incident

due to the over-enthusiasm inspired on him by the political

heroes, which he wanted to follow in his life. Later he had

realised his mistake. Further the persons who sustained

injury in the incident also belong to a political group now

realised that, they intended to forgive the act of the

petitioner to provide him better prosperity in life.    The

pendency of this case may spoil the life of the petitioner.

Court should never stand in the way of protecting the

interest of a citizen, who has repented for his past activity

and decided to improve his character and lead a happy life

in future.     So considering the exceptional circumstances

mentioned above, and also considering the fact that the

overt act alleged against the petitioner is also not that

Crl.M.C. No.1068 of 2014
                                  12

grave compared to other accused persons involved in the

crime, I feel that it is a fit case where in the interest of

justice and also to provide a life to a person, who is now

repenting for his past activity, without any further criminal

background, to invoke the power under Section 482 of the

'Code' to quash the proceedings as against him alone. So

the    petition     is  allowed     and     the  proceedings      in

C.P.No.59/2013 (Crime No.1928/2012              of Kannur Town

Police Station) pending before the Judicial First Class

Magistrate Court-I, Kannur, is hereby quashed as against

the petitioner alone. Office is directed to communicate this

order to the concerned court,             immediately for further

necessary action.




                                                Sd/-
                                         K. Ramakrishnan, Judge

                            // True Copy //

                                                     P.A. to Judge

ss



