
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                      PRESENT:

                     THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE ALEXANDER THOMAS

                TUESDAY,THE 7TH DAY OF OCTOBER 2014/15TH ASWINA, 1936

                                           Crl.MC.No. 5615 of 2014 ()
                                                ---------------------------
  LPC.NO. 94/2013 OF JUDICIAL FIRST CLASS MAGISTRATE COURT-II, KANNUR
 CRIME NO. 720/2008 OF VALAPATTANAM POLICE STATION , KANNUR DISTRICT
                                                    ----------------------

PETITIONER/1ST ACCUSED :
---------------------------------------------

            T. LIJU,AGED 37 YEARS, S/O.SREEDHARAN,
            THARAMMAL HOUSE, P.O NARATH,
            KANNUR DISTRICT.

             BY ADV. SRI.P.U.SHAILAJAN

RESPONDENT(S)/DE-FACTO COMPLAINANT & STATE :
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------

        1. K.AJINA,AGED 28 YEARS,D/O.NARAYANAN,
            MADAKKALI HOUSE, P.O AZHEEKODE,
            KANNUR DISTRICT. PIN-670 009

        2. STATE OF KERALA,
            REPRESENTED BY STATION HOUSE OFFICER,
            VALAPATTANAM POLICE STATION, KANNUR DISTRICT.
            THROUGH THE PUBLIC PROSECUTOR,
            HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM- 682 031.

            R1 BY ADV. SMT.D.N.NISHANI
            R2 BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SMT. R.REMA

            THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD
            ON 07-10-2014, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE
            FOLLOWING:




sts

Crl.MC.No. 5615 of 2014 ()
---------------------------------------

                                               APPENDIX

PETITIONER(S)' ANNEXURES:
---------------------------------------------


ANNEXURE 1.                    CERTIFIED COPY OF THE CHARGE SHEET IN L.P.C. 94/2013 ON
                               THE FILE OF THE JUDICIAL FIRST CLASS MAGISTRATE
                               COURT -II, KANNUR.

ANNEXURE 2.                    COPY OF THE FIR IN CRIME NO.720/2008 OF VALAPATTANAM
                               POLICE STATION, KANNUR DISTRICT.

ANNEXURE 3.                    COPY OF AFFIDAVIT SWEARED BY THE IST RESPONDENT.




RESPONDENT(S)' ANNEXURES:                                NIL




                                                               /TRUE COPY/


                                                               P.S.TO.JUDGE




sts


                        ALEXANDER THOMAS, J.
                    ==================
                      Crl.M.C.No.5615 of 2014
                    ==================
             Dated this the 7th day of October, 2014
                               O R D E R

      The petitioner is the 1st accused in C.C.No.300/2009 pending

before the Judicial First Class Magistrate Court-II, Kannur, for

offences under Sections 498A, 406 read with Section 34 of the IPC.

The other accused were the sister and mother of the petitioner. The

1st respondent herein is the defacto complainant. The petitioner's

sister and mother had already been acquitted by the court and the

petitioner was in Gulf and he could not appear before the court, it is

averred. The case is split and transferred as L.P.C. 94/2013 on the

register of the Judicial First Class Magistrate Court-II, Kannur. Now

the case has been settled between the parties and marriage between

the petitioner and the 1st respondent has been dissolved by a decree

of divorce and the parties have amicably settled their disputes and

the 1st respondent-wife as the defacto complainant has sworn to

Annexure III affidavit dated 27.6.2014 before this Court stating that

the disputes between the petitioner and the 1st respondent have

                                - : 2 :-

been resolved amicably and that she has no complaint against the

petitioner and that she is not interested to continue the criminal

proceedings, which led to C.C.No. 300/2009 on the file of the

Judicial First Class Magistrate Court-II, Kannur. It is in the

background     of   these   facts    and  circumstances   that   the

aforementioned Crl.M.C. has been filed praying to quash Annexure-

I final report, which led to C.C.No.300/2009 on the file of the

Judicial First Class Magistrate Court-II, Kannur and to quash

proceedings in L.P.C.No.94/2013 pending before the said court.

      2.   The Crl.M.C. has been admitted and Smt.D.N.Nishani

has taken notice for the 1st respondent and the learned Public

Prosecutor has taken notice for the 2nd respondent-State of Kerala.

      3.   Heard Sri. P.U.Shailajan, the learned counsel appearing

for the petitioner, Smt.D.N.Nishani, the learned counsel appearing

for R1 and    the learned Public Prosecutor appearing for the 2nd

respondent-State.

      4.   The learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted that

during the pendency of the aforementioned criminal proceedings,

the matter has been settled amicably between the parties, which is

resulted in the subject matter of the aforementioned crime/case and

                                 - : 3 :-

that the continuation of the proceedings in the above case/crime

will cause miscarriage of justice to both parties as the real

disputants to the case have arrived at an amicable settlement and

any further continuation of the criminal proceedings will amount to

sheer wastage of time and money and would unnecessarily strain

the judicial, administrative and financial resources of the State.

      5.    Smt.D.N.Nishani, the learned counsel appearing for the

1st respondent has submitted on the basis of the specific

instructions furnished by the 1st respondent that the 1st respondent

has amicably settled the disputes with the petitioner and that she

has no objection in the quashment of          the impugned criminal

proceedings and that the complainant/victim/injured does not

intend to proceed any further against the petitioner as she has no

grievance    against  him    and    that  she   will  not   raise any

dispute/compliant in future if the prayer for quashing the impugned

criminal proceedings is allowed.

      6.    The learned Public Prosecutor also was heard, who also

has not raised any serious objections and submitted that that court

may consider the prayer in this case in the light of the law well

settled by the Apex Court in that regard.

                                    - : 4 :-

      7.    After having carefully considered the submissions of the

parties and after having perused the pleadings as well as the

documents and materials placed in this matter, it can be seen that

the offences alleged are more or less personal in nature and not

much element of public interest is involved. The crucial aspect of

the matter is that though such offences are involved, the real

disputants to the controversy which has led to the impugned

criminal proceedings, have actually arrived at an amicable

settlement of the matter. From the submissions made by the

learned counsel for the 1st respondent, it is clear to the court that

the injured/victim/defacto complainant has no further grievance

against the petitioner/accused in the light of the settlement arrived

at by them. In this connection, it is relevant to note the decision of

the Apex Court in the case between Gian Singh v. State of Punjab

reported in 2013 (1) SCC (Cri) 160, para 61 = (2012) 10 SCC 303 =

2012(4) KLT 108(SC), wherein the Supreme Court has held as

follows in para 61 thereof [ See SCC (Cri)]:

                "61. The position that emerges from the above
         discussion can be summarised thus: the power of the
         High Court in quashing a criminal proceeding or FIR or
         complaint in exercise of its inherent jurisdiction is
         distinct and different from the power given to a criminal
         court forInherent
                   compounding the offences under S.320 of the
         Code.              power is of wide plenitude with no

                                          - : 5 :-

           statutory limitation but it has to be exercised in accord
           with the guideline engrafted in such power viz;(i) to
           secure the ends of justice or (ii) to prevent abuse of the
           process of any Court. In what cases power to quash the
           criminal proceeding or complaint or F.I.R. may be
           exercised where the offender andonvictim have settled
           their
           circumstances ofwould case and no category canand
                     dispute            depend         the  facts
                                 each                               be
           prescribed..

It is further held as follows:-

           "......... But the criminal cases having overwhelmingly and
           pre-dominatingly civil flavour stand on different footing
           for the purposes of quashing, particularly the offences
           arising from commercial, financial,mercantile, civil,
           partnership or such like transactions or the offences
           arising out of matrimony relating to dowry etc. or the
           family disputes where the wrong is basically private or
           personal in nature and the parties have resolved their
           entire dispute. In this category of cases, High Court may
           quash criminal proceedings if in its view, because of the
           compromise between the offender and victim, the
           possibility of conviction is remote and bleak and
           continuation of criminal case would put accused to great
           oppression and prejudice and extreme injustice would
           be caused to him by not quashing the criminal case
           despite full and complete settlement and compromise
           with the victim........"

Further, in the case Jitendra Raghuvanshi and Others v. Babita

Raghuvanshi and another reported in (2013) 4 SCC 58 [see 2013

(1) KLD 817 (SC)], the Apex Court has held as follows:-

                    "8. It is not in dispute that matrimonial disputes
           have been on considerable increase in recent times
           resulting in filing of complaints under Sections 498A
           and 406 of I.P.C. not only against the husband but also
           against the relatives of the husband. The question is
           when such matters are resolved either by the wife
           agreeing to rejoin the matrimonial home or by mutual
           settlement of other pending disputes for which both the
           sides approached the High Court and jointly prayed for
           quashing of the criminal proceedings or the FIR or

                            - : 6 :-

complaint by the wife under Sections 498A and 406 of
I.P.C., whether thethe
                     prayer can be declined on the sole
ground that since320 offences arequashitthe
                                        non-compoundable
under
impermissible for the court toCode,
        Section          of   the                would   be
                                                   criminal
proceedings or FIR or complaint.

       9. It is not in dispute that in the case on hand
subsequent to the filing of the criminal complaint under
Sections 498A and 406 of IPC and Sections 3 and 4 of
the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961, with the help and
intervention of family members, friends and well-
wishers,differences
their     the partiesand
                       concerned have amicably settled
                             executed     a   compromise/
settlement.   Pursuant thereto, the appellants filed the
said compromise before the Trial Court with a request to
place the same on record and to drop the criminal
proceedings against the appellants herein. It is also not
in dispute that in additional to the mutual settlement
arrived at by the parties, respondent/-wife has also filed
an affidavit stating that she did not wish to pursue the
criminal proceedings against the appellants and fully
supported the contents of the settlement deed. It is the
grievance of the appellants that no only the Trial Court
rejected such prayer of the parties but also the High
Court failed toe exercise its jurisdiction under Section
482 of the Code only on the ground that the criminal
proceedings relate to the offences punishable under
Sections 498A and 406 of IPC which are non-
compoundable in nature.

       15. In our view, it is the duty of the Courts to
encourage genuine settlements of matrimonial disputes,
particularly, when the same are on considerable
increase. Even if the offences are non-compoundable, if
they relate to matrimonial disputes and the Court is
satisfied that the parties have settled the same amicably
and without any pressure, we hold that for the purpose
of securing ends of justice, Section 320 of the Code
would not be a bar to the exercisesubsequent quashing
                                      of power of
of   FIR,   complaint    or   the                  criminal
proceedings.

       16. There has been an outburst of matrimonial
disputes in recent times.
occupies an important placeThe it has an important role
                                    institution of marriage
                              and
to play in the society. Therefore, every effort should be

                                     - : 7 :-

         made in the interest of the individuals in order to enable
         them to settle down in life and live peacefully. If the
         parties ponder over their defaults and terminate their
         disputes amicably by mutual agreement instead of
         fighting it out in a Court of law, in order to do complete
         justice in the matrimonial matters, the Courts should be
         less hesitant in exercising its extraordinary jurisdiction.
         It is trite to state that the power under Section 482
         should be exercised sparingly and with circumspection
         only when the Court is convinced, on the basis of
         material on record, that allowing the proceedings to
         continue would be an abuse of the process of the Court
         or that the ends of justice require that the proceedings
         ought to be quashed."

      8.    Considering the facts and circumstances of this case, it

is seen further that the impugned criminal proceedings have arisen

consequent to the matrimonial disputes between the disputants and

the disputes have been settled amicably between the parties.

Accordingly, this Court is inclined to hold that in the light of the

facts and circumstances involved in the present case and

particularly in view of the settlement arrived at between the parties,

the principles laid down in the aforementioned decisions of the

Apex Court will be squarely applicable in the present case.

Moreover, since the real disputants to the controversy have

amicably settled the disputes, which led to these impugned criminal

proceedings, it is also the duty of the court to promote such

settlement, instead of compelling the parties to go on with the

dispute. It is also pertinent to note that since the matter is settled

                                   - : 8 :-

out of court, in the event of proceeding with the trial, there may not

be any fruitful prosecution and the chances of conviction of the

accused is rather negligible and therefore, the net result of

continuance of criminal proceedings would be sheer waste of

judicial time rather meaningless and therefore would amount to

abuse of the process of court proceedings in the larger sense.

Hence following the decisions of the Apex Court cited supra, this

Court is inclined to hold that the Crl.M.C. can be allowed by

granting the prayers sought for.

      9.    In the result, the Crl.M.C. is allowed and the impugned

Annexure I final report/charge sheet which led to C.C.No.300/2009

on the file of the Judicial First Class Magistrate Court-II, Kannur and

the   proceedings    in   L.P.C.No.94/2014,     which   culminated   in

C.C.No.300/2009 pending before the said court, stand quashed.

The petitioner shall produce certified copies of this order before the

court below concerned as well as before the Station House Officer,

Valapattanam Police Station.


                                                       Sd/-
sdk+                                       ALEXANDER THOMAS, JUDGE
         ///True copy///

                               P.S. to Judge

- : 9 :-



