
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                      PRESENT:

                             THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE K.HARILAL

              WEDNESDAY, THE 22ND DAY OF JANUARY 2014/2ND MAGHA, 1935

                                             RPFC.No. 30 of 2010 ( )
                                              -------------------------------


         AGAINST THE ORDER IN M.C.No. 328/2006 of FAMILY COURT,PALAKKAD
                                                DATED 13-10-2008

REVISION PETITIONER/RESPONDENT:
-------------------------------------------------------

            HAMEED, S/O.ALAVI, ETTAYIKKAL,
            THACHAMPARA, MANNARKKAD, PALAKKAD.

            BY ADV. SRI.VINOD KUMAR.C

RESPONDENTS/PETITIONERS:
--------------------------------------------

        1. P.A.BALKIES, W/O.HAMEED,
            PALLIKUNDIL VEEDU, PULAPETTA, KONIKKIZHI,
            OTTAPPALAM, PALAKKAD.

        2. FASEELA, D/O.HAMEED, AGED 11 YEARS

        3. FAISAL, S/O.HAMEED, AGED 9 YEARS,
            RESPONDENT 2 AND 3 ARE MINORS AND REPRESENTED BY
            GUARDIAN/MOTHER, IST RESPONDENT.

            R1-R3 BY ADV. SRI.JACOB SEBASTIAN

            THIS REV.PETITION(FAMILY COURT) HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD ON
            22-01-2014, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE FOLLOWING:




MJL


                     K. HARILAL, J.
                  ----------------------
               R.P.(F.C.) No.30 of 2010
              -------------------------------
      Dated this the 22nd day of January, 2014

                         ORDER




      The revision petitioner is the respondent in

M.C.No.328/2006 on the files of the Family Court,

Palakkad. He is the husband of the 1st respondent and

the father of the respondents 2 and 3. The above M.C.

was filed under Section 125 of the Cr.P.C., seeking

maintenance allowance from the revision petitioner.

According to the 1st respondent, she is the legally

wedded wife of the revision petitioner and the

respondents 2 and 3 are the children born in the said

wed-lock. While the 3rd respondent was in the womb,

in 1994, the revision petitioner sent the respondents 1

and 2 to the house of the 1st respondent and left for

Mumbai. Thereafter, the respondents were not cared

till he came back in 2002. The 1st respondent has no

job or any source of income. She is unable to maintain

R.P.(F.C.) No.30 of 2010       2

herself and the children. But the revision petitioner is a

businessman earning 15,000/- per month. But, he has

been neglecting to pay maintenance allowance to the

respondents from 1994 onwards.        He came back from

Mumbai in the year 2002.

      2. The revision petitioner resisted the claim, but he

admitted the marriage with the 1st respondent and the

paternity of the 2nd respondent. He strongly denied the

paternity of the 3rd respondent as the 1st respondent gave

birth to the 3rd respondent after he left for Mumbai. He

denied the allegations of demanding dowry and contended

that he never ill-treated or harassed the 1st respondent

while they were living together at Tirupur.         The 1st

respondent is a Grama Panchayat Member and she is

getting 3,000/- per month. He left for Mumbai in the

year 1993 and he has no access to the 1st respondent

when the 3rd respondent was begotten.             After his

departure, the 1st respondent led an immoral life and

became pregnant.        He has no business or property as

R.P.(F.C.) No.30 of 2010        3

alleged by the 1st respondent.

      3. After considering the rival contentions, the court

below directed the revision petitioner to pay monthly

maintenance allowance at the rate of 1,000/- to the 1st

respondent and 625/- each to the respondents 2 and 3

from the date of filing the petition. The legality, propriety

and correctness of the said order are under challenge in

this Revision Petition.

      4. The short question that arises for consideration

is, whether the court below can be justified in directing

the revision petitioner to pay maintenance allowance to

the respondents 1 to 3 at the rate quantified above? As

far as the respondents 1 and 2 are concerned, the marital

status as well as the paternity is admitted. But, in the

case of the 3rd respondent, his paternity is challenged by

the revision petitioner. It is the case of the 1st respondent

that the revision petitioner had gone to Mumbai in

November 1994 and, at that time, she was pregnant by 5

months. The marriage still subsists. Similarly, the 3rd

R.P.(F.C.) No.30 of 2010        4

respondent was born during the continuance of the said

valid marriage. Under Section 112 of the Indian Evidence

Act, the fact that any person was born during the

continuance of a valid marriage between his mother and

any man or within 280 days after the dissolution of the

marriage, the mother       remain in marriage, shall be a

conclusive proof that he is the legitimate son of that man

unless it can be shown that the parties to the marriage

had no access to each other at any time, when the child

could have been begotten. As rightly held by the court

below, as the marriage is admitted and the 3rd respondent

was born during the continuance of the said marriage, the

presumption under Section 114 of the Indian Evidence Act

will come into play.     If that be so, the burden shall be

heavy on the revision petitioner to rebut the presumption.

The revision petitioner should have proved by cogent

evidence that the 1st respondent and himself had no

access to each other when the 3rd respondent would have

been begotten. Has the revision petitioner succeeded in

R.P.(F.C.) No.30 of 2010     5

discharging the burden?

      5. Coming to the evidence on record, it is seen that

no evidence has been adduced to discharge the burden

except the oral testimony of the revision petitioner.

According to the 1st respondent, he had gone to Mumbai

only in November 1994. If it was before that date, he

could have adduced evidence to prove the same.

Considering the date of birth of the 3rd respondent the

court below found that there is no dispute that the

spouses had access to each other at the time when the 3rd

respondent could have begotten, if the revision petitioner

had left for Mumbai only in November 1994. It is for him

to prove that his departure was before 1994, as alleged

by the revision petitioner.    P.W.1 testified in cross-

examination that the revision petitioner had left for

Mumbai in 1994 only. But, such evidence was not further

challenged in cross-examination. No question was asked

disputing the said contention of the 1st respondent. More

particularly, no question was asked in cross-examination

R.P.(F.C.) No.30 of 2010       6

disputing the paternity of the 3rd respondent. That apart,

the revision petitioner could have taken steps to undergo

DNA test, if he was sure that the 3rd respondent is not his

child.     His reluctancy can be presumed to be deliberate

as he was not sure that the 3rd respondent is the child

born to him.

      6. Consequently, I find that the revision petitioner

had miserably failed to discharge the burden of proving

non access under Section 114 of the Indian Evidence Act

and I reject the contention that the 3rd respondent is not

his child. The next point survives for consideration is, is

the quantum of maintenance allowance determined by the

court below justifiable? According to the 1st respondent,

she had no job or income. The revision petitioner

contended that the 1st respondent is getting 3000/- per

month as sitting fee; but it has come out in evidence that

she held the position of Grama Panchayat Member

during the period 2002 to 2005 only and thereafter she

stopped her political involvement and now she has no

R.P.(F.C.) No.30 of 2010       7

income at all. Admittedly, the minor children are living

in an orphanage. As rightly held by the court below, their

staying in the orphanage is the best proof of the

absence of any income of the 1st respondent. Though it

was contended that the 1st respondent runs a bakery,

such contention was not found a place in the counter

statement. No attempt was made by him to substantiate

the ownership of bakery when he was subjected to cross

examination. It has also come out in evidence that the

revision petitioner has married again and in the second

wedlock he has two children.      But the second marriage

and the liability to look after them cannot be considered

as the reason to wriggle out from the statutory liability to

pay maintenance allowance to the first wife and children.

The revision petitioner has no case that he is unhealthy,

disabled or incapacitated to do work so as to earn

livelihood for his family.   In the absence of any such

evidence, an able bodied man is presumed to be having

sufficient earning capacity to look after his family.

R.P.(F.C.) No.30 of 2010       8

      7. Having regard to the standard of life of the

respondents and also       the financial capacity of the

revision petitioner,     I am of the opinion that the

determination of the quantum of maintenance allowance

@ 1000/- to the 1st respondent and 625/- each to

respondents 2 and 3 are proper and justifiable.          The

determination of the quantum of maintenance does not

call for any interference under revisional jurisdiction.

      8. The learned counsel for the revision petitioner

submits that the revision petitioner is married again and

he has 2 children in that wedlock.         Now, he has to

maintain two families. He is suffering due to financial

difficulties. He is unable to raise fund so as to remit the

entire arrear in lump sum.     He wants some time to pay

the arrear in instalments.

      9. Having regard to the above submission         at the

Bar, the revision petitioner is given six months time to

pay the entire arrear provided that 1/3rd of the total

arrear shall be remitted within two months and the next

R.P.(F.C.) No.30 of 2010         9

1/3rd shall be remitted within the next two months and

the entire balance shall be remitted within the last two

months.      In the event of failure to remit      any of the

instalments within the specified time, this instalment

facility will stand vacated and the Family Court will be free

to enforce the realisation of the arrear in lump sum.

          This Revision Petition is disposed of accordingly.




                                       Sd/-K.HARILAL
                                             JUDGE




OKB/MJL



