
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                        PRESENT:

               THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE ALEXANDER THOMAS

     WEDNESDAY, THE 5TH DAY OF NOVEMBER 2014/14TH KARTHIKA, 1936

                              Crl.MC.No.6197 of 2014 ()
                                ---------------------------
                      CC 1878/2014 of J.M.F.C., KAYAMKULAM
      CRIME NO.345/2014 OF VALLIKUNNAM POLICE STATION, ALAPPUZHA

PETITIONERS/ACCUSED:
---------------------------

       1. NIDHIN, AGED 27 YEARS,
         S/O RAMACHANDRAN PILLAI, MARUTHAVANA ATHIRA VEEDU
         PALLICKALKATTANAM, KAYAMKULAM, ALAPPUZHA DISTRICT.

       2. RAMACHANDRAN PILLAI, AGED 60 YEARS
         S/O. SANKARA KURUP, MARUTHAVANA ATHIRA VEEDU
         PALLICKAL, KATTANAM, KAYAMKULAM, ALAPPUZHA DISTRICT.

       3. VASANTHAKUMARI. Y, AGED 53 YEARS
         W/O RAMACHANDRAN PILLAI, MARUTHAVANA ATHIRA VEEDU
         PALLICKAL, KATTANAM, KAYAMKULAM, ALAPPUZHA DISTRICT.

         BY ADVS.SRI.V.MADHUSUDHANAN
                      SRI.S.SANKARAN THAMPI
                      SRI.S.MAHESWARAN THAMPY
                      SRI.T.ISSAC

RESPONDENTS/COMPLAINANT & STATE:
---------------------------------------------

       1. PARVATHY R.S, AGED 26 YEARS
         D/O C.RADHAKRISHNA PILLAI, VYSHAKH, KOONAYIL
         PARAVUR VILLAGE, KOLLAM DISTRICT, PIN:691 301.

       2. STATE OF KERALA
         REPRESENTED BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR
         HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM-682031.

         R1 BY ADV. SRI.P.VIJAYARAGHAVAN ((PALAYIL)
         R2 BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SRI.R.GITHESH

         THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD ON 5-11-
       2014, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE FOLLOWING:

Crl.MC.No. 6197 of 2014 ()
---------------------------

                                  APPENDIX

PETITIONER(S)' EXHIBITS:
-----------------------------

ANNEXURE A1: TRUE COPY OF RELEVANT PAGES OF THE F.I.R IN CRIME NO.345
OF 2014 OF VALLIKUNNAM POLICE STATION, ALAPPUZHA DISTRICT.

ANNEXURE A2: TRUE COPY OF THE FINAL REPORT IN CRIME NO.345 OF 2014 OF
VALLIKUNNAM POLICE STATION, ALAPPUZHA DISTRICT.

ANNEXURE A3: A TRUE COPY OF THE AFFIDAVIT SWORN TO BY THE IST
RESPONDENT ENDORSING THE FACTUM OF SETTLEMENT.

RESPONDENT(S)' EXHIBITS:              NIL
--------------------------------




                                               // TRUE COPY //




                                               P.A TO JUDGE.


                   ALEXANDER THOMAS, J.
                   -----------------------------
                   Crl.M.C.No.6197 Of 2014
                 ---------------------------------
          Dated this the 5th day of November, 2014.

                            O R D E R



      The prayer in the above captioned Criminal Miscellaneous

Case (Crl.M.C) is to quash the impugned Annexure-A2 Final

Report/Charge    Sheet    filed   in   Crime     No.345/2014 of

Vallikkunnam Police Station which has led to the pendency of

C.C.No.1878/2014 on the file of the Judicial First Class

Magistrate Court, Kayamkulam and all further proceedings

arising therefrom.      Petitioners are the accused in the

aforementioned Crime No.345/2014 of Vallikkunnam Police

Station registered for offences alleged under Sec.498A r/w 34

IPC. The 1st petitioner is the husband of the 1st respondent

and petitioners 2 & 3 are the father and mother of the 1st

petitioner.  After the marriage of the 1st petitioner and 1st

respondent, the aforementioned Crime was registered on the

basis of the complaint filed by the 1st respondent before the

City Police Commissioner, Kollam and crime was registered as

Crime No.581/2014 of Paravur Police Station. Later, the said

crime was transferred to the Vallikkunnam Police Station and

                               ::2::

Crl.M.C.No.6197 Of 2014

after   investigation   the  police  submitted the    impugned

Annexure-A2 Final Report/Charge Sheet in Crime No.345/2014

which has led to the institution of C.C.No.1878/2014 on the file

of the Judicial First Class Magistrate Court, Kayamkulam. It is

submitted that the petitioners are innocent and that the crime

was registered due to certain misunderstanding between the

petitioners and the 1st respondent-defacto complainant and

that the disputes between the parties have been now amicably

settled and that the 1st respondent-defacto complainant has no

grievance and has no objection in the termination of the

impugned criminal proceedings and she has no subsisting

grievance against the petitioners and all further proceedings in

the impugned criminal proceedings may be quashed. That the

1st petitioner and 1st respondent are living separately and filed

a joint petition before the Family Court, Mavelikkara seeking

divorce.    The 1st respondent-defacto complainant filed an

affidavit dated 29.10.2014 produced as Annexure-A3 stating

the above aspects wherein it is stated that due to the

intervention of the mediators the matter has been settled

amicably between the parties and filed a petition for divorce

before the Family Court, Mavelikkara and that the entire

                                ::3::

Crl.M.C.No.6197 Of 2014

disputes between the parties have been amicably settled and

in view of the settlement, she does not want to prosecute the

petitioners and she has no objection in the termination of the

impugned      criminal     proceedings      now    pending      as

C.C.No.1878/2014 on the file of the Judicial First Class

Magistrate Court, Kayamkulam in respect of the impugned

Crime No.345/2013 of Vallikkunnam Police Station. It is in the

background of these facts and circumstances, this Crl.M.C has

been instituted to quash the impugned proceedings.

      2.   The      Crl.M.C.    has     been     admitted     and

Sri.Vijayakumaran Pillai has taken notice for the 1st respondent

and the learned Public Prosecutor has taken notice for the 2nd

respondent-State of Kerala.

      3.   Heard Sri.V.Madhusudhanan, learned counsel for the

petitioners, Sri.Vijayakumaran Pillai, learned counsel for the 1st

respondent and the learned Public Prosecutor appearing for the

2nd respondent-State of Kerala.

      4.   The learned counsel for the petitioners has submitted

that during the pendency of the aforementioned criminal

proceedings, the matter has been settled amicably between the

parties, and that the continuation of the proceedings in the above

                                ::4::

Crl.M.C.No.6197 Of 2014

case/crime will cause miscarriage of justice to both parties as the

real disputants to the controversy have arrived at an amicable

settlement and any further continuation of the criminal

proceedings will amount to sheer wastage of time and money

and would unnecessarily strain the judicial, administrative and

financial resources of the State.

      5.    Sri.Vijayakumaran Pillai, learned counsel appearing

for the 1st respondent has submitted, on the basis of the specific

instructions furnished by the 1st respondent, that the 1st

respondent has amicably settled the disputes with the petitioners

as stated above and that she has no objection in the quashment

of   the    impugned    criminal    proceedings  and    that   the

complainant/victim/injured does not intend to proceed any

further against the petitioners as she has no grievance against

them and that she will not raise any dispute/complaint in future if

the prayer for quashing the impugned criminal proceedings is

allowed.

      6.    The learned Public Prosecutor also was heard, who

also has not raised any serious objections and submitted that the

court may consider the prayer in this case in the light of the law

well settled by the Apex Court in that regard.

                                     ::5::

Crl.M.C.No.6197 Of 2014

      7.    After having carefully considered the submissions of

the parties and after having perused the pleadings as well as the

documents and materials placed in this matter, it can be seen

that the offences alleged are more or less personal in nature and

not much element of public interest is involved.                  The crucial

aspect of the matter is that though such offences are involved,

the real disputants to the controversy, which has led to the

impugned criminal proceedings, have actually arrived at an

amicable settlement of the matter. From the submissions made

by the learned counsel for the 1st respondent, it is clear to the

Court that the injured/victim/defacto complainant has no further

grievance against the petitioners/accused in the light of the

settlement arrived at by them. In this connection, it is relevant

to note the decision of the Apex Court in the case between Gian

Singh v. State of Punjab reported in 2013 (1) SCC (Cri) 160,

para 61 = (2012) 10 SCC 303 = 2012(4) KLT 108(SC), wherein

the Supreme Court has held as follows in para 61 thereof [ See

SCC (Cri)]:

            "61.    The position that emerges from the above
      discussion can be summarised thus: the power of the High
      Court in quashing a criminal proceeding or FIR or complaint
      in exercise of its inherent jurisdiction is distinct and different
      from the power given to a criminal court for compounding
      the offences under S.320 of the Code. Inherent power is of
      wide plenitude with no statutory limitation but it has to be

                                    ::6::

Crl.M.C.No.6197 Of 2014

       exercised in accord with the guideline engrafted in such
       power viz;(i) to secure the ends of justice or (ii) to prevent
       abuse of the process of any Court. In what cases power to
       quash the criminal proceeding or complaint or F.I.R. may be
       exercised where the offender and victim have settled their
       dispute would depend on the facts and circumstances of
       each case and no category can be prescribed..

It is further held as follows:-

       "......... But the criminal cases having overwhelmingly
       and pre-dominatingly civil flavour stand on different
       footing for the purposes of quashing, particularly the
       offences arising from commercial, financial, mercantile,
       civil, partnership or such like transactions or the
       offences arising out of matrimony relating to dowry
       etc. or the family disputes where the wrong is basically
       private or personal in nature and the parties have
       resolved their entire dispute. In this category of cases,
       High Court may quash criminal proceedings if in its
       view, because of the compromise between the offender
       and victim, the possibility of conviction is remote and
       bleak and continuation of criminal case would put
       accused to great oppression and prejudice and
       extreme injustice would be caused to him by not
       quashing the criminal case despite full and complete
       settlement and compromise with the victim........"

Further, in the case Jitendra Raghuvanshi and Others v.

Babita Raghuvanshi and another reported in (2013) 4 SCC

58 [see 2013 (1) KLD 817 (SC)], the Apex Court has held as

follows:-

              "8.  It is not in dispute that matrimonial disputes
       have been on considerable increase in recent times
       resulting in filing of complaints under Sections 498A and
       406 of I.P.C. not only against the husband but also against
       the relatives of the husband. The question is when such
       matters are resolved either by the wife agreeing to rejoin
       the matrimonial home or by mutual settlement of other
       pending disputes for which both the sides approached the

                                     ::7::

Crl.M.C.No.6197 Of 2014

      High Court and jointly prayed for quashing of the criminal
      proceedings or the FIR or complaint by the wife under
      Sections 498A and 406 of I.P.C., whether the prayer can be
      declined on the sole ground that since the offences are non-
      compoundable under Section 320 of the Code, it would be
      impermissible     for  the   court   to  quash   the   criminal
      proceedings or FIR or complaint.
             9.   It is not in dispute that in the case on hand
      subsequent to the filing of the criminal complaint under
      Sections 498A and 406 of IPC and Sections 3 and 4 of the
      Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961, with the help and intervention
      of family members, friends and well-wishers, the parties
      concerned have amicably settled their differences and
      executed a compromise/ settlement. Pursuant thereto, the
      appellants filed the said compromise before the Trial Court
      with a request to place the same on record and to drop the
      criminal proceedings against the appellants herein.       It is
      also not in dispute that in additional to the mutual
      settlement arrived at by the parties, respondent/-wife has
      also filed an affidavit stating that she did not wish to pursue
      the criminal proceedings against the appellants and fully
      supported the contents of the settlement deed. It is the
      grievance of the appellants that no only the Trial Court
      rejected such prayer of the parties but also the High Court
      failed toe exercise its jurisdiction under Section 482 of the
      Code only on the ground that the criminal proceedings
      relate to the offences punishable under Sections 498A and
      406 of IPC which are non-compoundable in nature.
             15.   In our view, it is the duty of the Courts to
      encourage genuine settlements of matrimonial disputes,
      particularly, when the same are on considerable increase.
      Even if the offences are non-compoundable, if they relate to
      matrimonial disputes and the Court is satisfied that the
      parties have settled the same amicably and without any
      pressure, we hold that for the purpose of securing ends of
      justice, Section 320 of the Code would not be a bar to the
      exercise of power of quashing of FIR, complaint or the
      subsequent criminal proceedings.
             16.    There has been an outburst of matrimonial
      disputes in recent times.        The institution of marriage
      occupies an important place and it has an important role to
      play in the society. Therefore, every effort should be made
      in the interest of the individuals in order to enable them to
      settle down in life and live peacefully. If the parties ponder
      over their defaults and terminate their disputes amicably by
      mutual agreement instead of fighting it out in a Court of
      law, in order to do complete justice in the matrimonial

                                    ::8::

Crl.M.C.No.6197 Of 2014

      matters, the Courts should be less hesitant in exercising its
      extraordinary jurisdiction. It is trite to state that the power
      under Section 482 should be exercised sparingly and with
      circumspection only when the Court is convinced, on the
      basis of material on record, that allowing the proceedings to
      continue would be an abuse of the process of the Court or
      that the ends of justice require that the proceedings ought
      to be quashed."

      8.    Considering the facts and circumstances of this case,

it is seen further that the impugned criminal proceedings have

arisen consequent to the matrimonial disputes between the

disputants and the disputes have been settled amicably between

the parties. Accordingly, this Court is inclined to hold that in the

light of the facts and circumstances involved in the present case

and particularly in view of the settlement arrived at between the

parties, the principles laid down in the aforementioned decisions

of the Apex Court will be squarely applicable in the present case.

Moreover, since the real disputants to the controversy have

amicably settled the disputes, which led to these impugned

criminal proceedings, it is also the duty of the court to promote

such settlement, instead of compelling the parties to go on with

the dispute. It is also pertinent to note that since the matter is

settled out of court, in the event of proceeding with the trial,

there may not be any fruitful prosecution and the chances of

conviction of the accused is rather negligible and therefore, the

                                ::9::

Crl.M.C.No.6197 Of 2014

net result of continuance of criminal proceedings would be sheer

waste of judicial time rather meaningless and therefore would

amount to abuse of the process of court proceedings in the larger

sense. Hence following decisions of the Apex Court cited supra,

this Court is inclined to hold that the Crl.M.C. can be allowed by

granting the prayers sought for.

      In the result, the Crl.M.C is allowed and it is ordered in

the interest of justice that the impugned Annexure-A2 Final

Report/Charge Sheet filed in impugned Annexure-A1 FIR in

Crime No.345/2014 of Vallikkunnam Police Station which has

led to the pendency of C.C.No.1878/2014 on the file of the

Judicial First Class Magistrate Court, Kayamkulam and all

further proceedings arising therefrom as against all the

accused stand quashed.        Petitioners shall forward certified

copies of this order to the Station House Officer concerned as

well as to the jurisdictional Magistrate concerned.




                                            ALEXANDER THOMAS,
                                                    Judge.

bkn/-



