
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                      PRESENT:

                       THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE K.RAMAKRISHNAN

                  TUESDAY,THE 6TH DAY OF MAY 2014/16TH VAISAKHA, 1936

                                            Crl.MC.No. 4031 of 2012
                                            ----------------------------------

      AGAINST THE ORDER IN MC 9/2007 of JUDICIAL FIRST CLASS MAGISTRATE
                                             COURT-V, KOZHIKODE
    AGAINST THE ORDER/JUDGMENT IN CRL.RP 18/2011 of ADDITIONAL SESSIONS
                                              COURT, KOZHIKODE
                                                     ----------------


PETITIONER(S)/1ST RESPONDENT IN REVISION PETITION/RESPONDENT IN M.C.:
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

            K. MOHAMED SHAFI, S/O.LATE C.AHAMMED KOYA, AGED 36 YEARS,
            KALATHINKAL HOUSE, ASMATH BUILDING, KALLITHODI ROAD,
            FEROKE, CHUNGAM,
            KOZHIKODE NOW RESIDING AT KALATHINKAL HOUSE, KOTTA,
            KUTTIPALAKKAL, POST MUKKAM, KOZHIKODE DISTRICT.

            BY ADVS.SRI.K.M.FIROZ
                          SMT.M.SHAJNA

RESPONDENT(S)/REVISION PETITIONER/2ND RESPONDENT/IN REVISION
PETITION/PETITIONER IN M.C. AND STATE:
-------------------------------------------------------------

        1. SHAMSIYA, D/O.SAITHALI, AGED 30 YEARS, KALATHINKAL HOUSE
            MANIYATTUPARAMBU, NORTH BEPUR P.O., KOZHIKODE 673008.

        2. THE STATE OF KERALA, REPRESENTED BY THE PUBLIC PROSECUTOR,
            HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM 682 031.

            R1 BY ADVS. SRI.V.V.SURENDRAN1
                                SRI.P.A.HARISH
            R2 BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SRI.N.SURESH


            THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD ON 01-04-2014
            THE COURT ON 06-05-2014, PASSED THE FOLLOWING:




PJ

Crl.MC.No. 4031 of 2012
----------------------------------




                                                  APPENDIX




PETITIONER(S) ANNEXURES
-----------------------------------------


ANNEXURE-A1:                   CERTIFIED COPY OF THE ORDER IN M.C.NO.9 OF 2007
                               PASSED BY THE HON'BLE JUDICIAL FIRST CLASS
                               MAGISTRATE COURT-V,KOZHIKODE.


ANNEXURE-A2:                   CERTIFIED COPY OF THE ORDER DATED 9.5.2012 IN
                               CRL.R.P. NO. 18 OF 2011 PASSED BY THE FIRST ADDITIONAL
                               SESSIONS COURT, KOZHIKODE DIVISION.


RESPONDENTS' ANNEXURES
------------------------------------------

                               NIL.


                                                                       / TRUE COPY /


                                                                       P.S. TO JUDGE

PJ


                      K. RAMAKRISHNAN, J.
                   .................................................
                      Crl.M.C.No.4031 of 2012
                   ..................................................
               Dated this the 6th day of May, 2014.

                                O R D E R


      This is a petition filed by the                     counter petitioner in

M.C.No.9/2007 on the file of the Judicial First Class Magistrate

Court-V, Kozhikode and the respondent in Crl.R.P.No.18/2011

on the file of the First Additional Sessions Court, Kozhikode

to quash     the proceedings to the extent objected by the

petitioner in Cr.R.P.No.18/2011 under Section 482 of the Code

of Criminal Procedure (herein after referred to as 'the Code').

      2. The original proceedings in M.C.No.9/2007 was taken

on file on the basis of a petition filed by the respondent herein

under Section 3 of the Muslim Women (Protection of Rights on

Divorce) Act. The case of the original petitioner in the petition

was that she is the former wife of the petitioner herein. The

marriage between the petitioner and the respondent was

solemnised on 1.4.1993. At the time of marriage, the parents

of the respondent        herein had given 25 sovereigns of gold

ornaments and paid cash of Rs.25,000/- to the petitioner herein.

After the   marriage, mother of the petitioner obtained gold

Crl.M.C.No.4031 of 2012          2

ornaments of the respondent herein for keeping the same in

her safe custody. Subsequently, with the help of the father of

the respondent,       who was  working   abroad,   the petitioner

herein went abroad and after 14 months, he returned from

Gulf. After some time,        he obtained Rs.50,000/- from the

father of the respondent and went to Gulf again. That time

also, he returned within a few months. The gold ornaments

given to her were appropriated by the petitioner herein. In the

marital relationship, two children were born to them. He was

working as a Peon in Agricultural Department at the time of

marriage. She was ill treated by the petitioner herein and also

his relatives demanding dowry. She was taken to his quarters

in the working place. There also the ill treatment continued.

He had married another woman by name Rahmath and he was

residing with her. In connivance with the second wife, she was

driven out of the house. Since she was unable to tolerate the

ill treatment at      the hands of the petitioner herein and his

relatives,   she filed a complaint before the Magistrate court

which was forwarded to the police and a crime was registered.

While so, he pronounced triple talaq and intimated the same

to the respondent herein by letter dated 7.1.2006. Thereafter

Crl.M.C.No.4031 of 2012        3

she observed iddath. He has not paid any maintenance during

the period of iddath and he had not returned her gold

ornaments or the cash received at the time of marriage and

also at the time when he went abroad. He is getting Rs.8,000/-

as salary. She claimed Rs.6,000/- towards maintenance during

iddath period and return of 25 sovereigns of gold ornaments or

its   value Rs.1,77,000/- and Rs.3,00,000/- towards fair and

reasonable provision and also return of Rs.75,000/- obtained by

the petitioner herein from her parents at the time of marriage

and also at the time when he went abroad on the          second

occasion.

      3. The petitioner herein, who is the respondent in the

main proceedings, appeared and filed counter contending as

follows:

      He admitted the marriage and birth of two children in the

marriage. He had also admitted that on 7.1.2006, he divorced

her and informed the same to her by sending a registered letter.

He denied the allegation that at the time of marriage, 25

sovereigns of gold ornaments were given and Rs.25,000/- cash

was given which were misappropriated by him. He had also

denied the allegation that the father of the respondent herein

Crl.M.C.No.4031 of 2012           4

paid Rs.50,000/- to him at the time when he went abroad on

the second occasion. According to him, on the first occasion, he

went to Gulf on visiting visa and after the period of visa, he

came back. He did not get any          employment there.   On the

second occasion, he went there,but did not get any proper job.

So he immediately came back. According to him, the attitude of

the respondent changed after he returned from Gulf without

getting any proper employment there. The allegation that she

was    residing in     her house   for  a long period   after  the

marriage is not correct. She resided there only after a few

days and thereafter she was taken         to his tharavadu  house

and thereafter she was taken to the quarters allotted to him in

his work place. According to him, she was not satisfied with the

amenities available there and she        wanted to go and live in

her house. In fact,     after the filing of the false complaint to

the police, she left the house. At that time, she had taken all

the ornaments       with her. She was given only ornaments less

than 20 sovereigns which were kept by her            and taken by

her at the time when she left the house. He was getting only

Rs.3,000/- and odd after deduction which is hardly sufficient to

meet the requirements of his family.         While the respondent

Crl.M.C.No.4031 of 2012            5

herein left the house, the children were with him and without

his consent, she had taken them from the school and though a

complaint was filed, that was not properly prosecuted by the

police. She filed M.C.No.205/2007 claiming maintenance for

herself and children and        later she had withdrawn the same

when she came to understand that it is not maintainable. The

respondent herein, who is the petitioner in the main case, is not

entitled to get any of the reliefs claimed in the petition. However

the amounts claimed are also exorbitant. So he prayed for

dismissal of the application.

      4. PWs 1 to 3 were examined and Exts.P1 to P6 series

were marked on the side of the respondent herein in the lower

court.     The petitioner herein was examined as RW1 and

Ext.D1 was marked on his side. After considering the evidence

on    record, the learned Magistrate awarded Rs.6,000/- as

maintenance during the period of iddath and also awarded

Rs.1,68,000/- as       reasonable and fair provision, but rejected

the claim for return of gold ornaments or its value and the

amount alleged to have been paid at the time of marriage and

also at the time when the petitioner went abroad on the second

occasion. Dissatisfied with the dismissal of the claims, the

Crl.M.C.No.4031 of 2012         6

respondent herein filed Crl.R.P.No.18/2011 before the Sessions

Court, Kozhikode and      it was    disposed of    by the     First

Additional Sessions      Judge by the impugned judgment and

allowed the claim for return of 5 sovereigns of gold ornaments

or its value of Rs. 1 lakh and also directed the petitioner to pay

Rs.25,000/- being the amount paid at the time of marriage.

The learned Additional Sessions Judge had fixed the monthly

maintenance amount payable at Rs.2,200/- and awarded

Rs.6,600/- being the maintenance at the time of iddath and

also taken 16 as multiplier and assessed Rs.4,22,400/- being

the reasonable and fair provision payable but awarded only

Rs.3,00,000/- being the amount claimed in the petition as fair

and reasonable provision payable to the respondent herein.

Aggrieved by the enhancement of fair and reasonable provision

and also allowing the claim for return of 5 sovereigns of gold

ornaments and the cash of Rs.25,000/-, the petitioner filed this

petition under Section 482 of the Code to quash the order to

the extent mentioned above.

      5. Heard the counsel for the petitioner, the respondent

and the learned Public Prosecutor.

      6. The counsel for the petitioner submitted that the trial

Crl.M.C.No.4031 of 2012           7

court has disbelieved       the evidence of Pws 2 and 3      and

disallowed the claim for return of      gold ornaments and also

return of cash.        The revisional court went wrong    in  re

appreciating the evidence and granting the relief in part to the

respondent herein. Further, it will be seen from Ext.D1 that

the petitioner was getting only Rs.3,263/- after all his

deductions. So the amount awarded by the Additional Sessions

Court is exorbitant and beyond the capacity of the petitioner.

Further, the total amount awarded is also exorbitant. The

learned counsel relied on the decision reported in Majeed C.A

v. Afira and Another (2011 (1) KHC 776) for the proposition

that    when a fair and reasonable compensation is awarded,

then no separate amount can be awarded towards maintenance

during iddath period. According to PW1, there is none witnessed

the payment of the amount either at the time of the marriage

or at the time of the petitioner went abroad on the second

occasion. But, according to PW3, he had witnessed the same

which is not believable.      Even the    revisonal court did not

believe the evidence of PW3 regarding the amount claimed

as amount paid by the father of the respondent herein to the

petitioner for meeting the expenses to go abroad on the

Crl.M.C.No.4031 of 2012          8

second occasion. So, according to the counsel for the petitioner,

the court below was not justified in granting the relief to the

respondent herein over and above what has been granted by

the trial court.

      7. On the other hand, the counsel for the first respondent

argued that there was no case for the petitioner herein that no

gold ornaments were given to the respondent herein at the

time of marriage. Further, the evidence of PW2, the goldsmith

will go to show that the ornaments were made and given at the

the request of the father and mother of the respondent herein

in connection with the marriage of the respondent.       There is

nothing to disbelieve the evidence of PW2 on this aspect.

Further, there is no enmity for PW3 to give evidence against

the respondent as well. It was admitted by PW1 that the

respondent's father was working abroad at the time of their

marriage and their social position was better than the position

of the petitioner herein. So under the circumstances, there is

nothing to disbelieve the evidence of PW1 regarding the gold

ornaments and cash given at the time of marriage. Further,

Ext.P2 - the salary certificate of the petitioner produced by the

respondent herein will go to show that he was getting a take

Crl.M.C.No.4031 of 2012           9

home salary of around Rs.7,000/- at the time of issuance of that

certificate and he had availed a loan only after the proceedings

were initiated and       so  the Additional Sessions Judge was

perfectly justified in    quantifying the    fair and   reasonable

provision     on     a higher rate    considering the age of the

respondent and        remote possibility of getting remarriage etc.

So, according to the him, there is nothing to interfere in the

matter.

      8. Under Section 482 of the Code, powers of this Court is

very limited and only if the orders passed by the court below

were perverse, this Court should not normally interfere with

the finding of the court below. This Court cannot re- appreciate

the evidence as well.

      9. It is an admitted fact that the petitioner herein married

the respondent and they were living together till 7.1.2006 when

he pronounced the tipple talaq and dissolved the marriage. It

is also an admitted fact that he was working as a Peon in

Agricultural Department at the time when the marriage had

taken place. The case of the respondent in the petition was that

at the time of marriage 25 sovereigns of gold ornaments and

Rs.25,000/- cash was given which were appropriated by the

Crl.M.C.No.4031 of 2012         10

petitioner herein and his family members and they were not

returned to her. The petitioner had no case that       no gold

ornaments were given to the respondent herein. His case was

that only less than 20 sovereigns gold ornaments were given

and no cash was paid and at the time when PW1 left the house,

she had taken the gold ornaments. It is true that the father of

PW1 was not examined. But the respondent herein herself was

examined as PW1 and         goldsmith, who had made the gold

ornaments in connection with her marriage, was examined as

PW2 and Ext.P6 series bills given by PW2 were marked on

the side of the respondent herein to prove her claim. It is true

that Ext.P6 series were not in a prescribed form. But the

evidence of        PW2 goldsmith will go  to show that he is

conducting a shop by name C.K. Sons Jewellery and he was

not selling jewellery, but used to manufacture jewellery from

old jewellery and gold coin. According to him, the father and

mother of the respondent herein came and entrusted some

gold coins and old gold ornaments for making gold ornaments

and accordingly he had given Ext.P6 series bills. It will go to

show that about 21 sovereigns of gold ornaments were made

by him for and on behalf of the respondent herein in connection

Crl.M.C.No.4031 of 2012          11

with her marriage at the request of her parents. Further PW1

had given evidence that some of her relatives have given gold

ornaments as gift as well. The petitioner had no case that the

respondent's family had no financial background to give gold

ornaments. Further, it can take judicial notice in connection

with the     marriage that there is a     custom for giving gold

ornaments and cash to the female child by her parents. So,

under the circumstances, there is nothing to disbelieve        the

evidence of PW1 that 25 sovereigns of gold ornaments were

given to her and also cash of Rs.25,000/- was also given to the

petitioner herein in connection with the marriage. Further,

merely because printed bills were not produced by PW2 is not a

ground to disbelieve the evidence on this aspect as well.

Further, though RW1 had a case that he had raised loan from

bank to go abroad, he had not produced any documents to prove

this fact. So under the circumstances, possibilities spoken to

PW1 that her gold ornaments were appropriated by RW1 for

going abroad on two occasions cannot be ruled out and so the

trial court was not justified in disallowing the claim of return of

five sovereigns of gold ornaments taken at the time of RW1

going abroad and also cash of Rs.25,000/- paid at the time of

Crl.M.C.No.4031 of 2012        12

marriage, which the Additional Sessions Judge had rightly

allowed the same. If the trial court had mis appreciated the

evidence, then the revisionl court is entitled to set aright

that irregularity and grant the relief      to the respondent

herein. So, no illegality has been committed by the First

Additional      Sessions Judge in  allowing the claim of the

respondent herein regarding return of five sovereigns of gold

ornaments or its value at Rs. 1 lakh and cash of Rs. 25,000/-

and I do not find any reason to interfere with the direction

given    by the First Additional Sessions Judge to return 5

sovereigns of gold ornaments or its value Rs.1,00,000/- and also

return Rs.25,000/-, the amount paid at the time of marriage.

      10. As regards the maintenance amount is concerned, the

learned Magistrate has taken Rs.2,000/- as monthly maintenance

and awarded Rs.6,000/- as maintenance during the period of

iddath and taking 7 as multiplier, awarded Rs.1,68,000/- being

the fair and reasonable provision. The revisional court had

taken monthly income of the petitioner as Rs.2,200/- and

awarded Rs.6,600/- as maintenance during the period of iddath

and taking 16 as the multiplier considering the age of the

respondent herein namely 33 years, assessed Rs.4,22,400/- as

Crl.M.C.No.4031 of 2012          13

fair and reasonable provision but confined the amount to

Rs.3,00,000/- claimed in the petition as fair and reasonable

provision.

      11. The case of the petitioner herein was that he is getting

only a take home salary of Rs.3,263/- as per Ext.D1 salary

certificate produced by him. So, according to him, he is unable

to pay that amount. But it will be seen from Ext.P2 which the

respondent had obtained under the provisions of the Right to

Information Act which is dated 30.6.2008 that he was getting

a gross salary of Rs.9,561/- and after deduction, he is getting a

take home salary of Rs.6,891/-. Ext.D1 is the certificate issued

on 17.6.2010 much after the divorce. Further, it will be seen

from Ext.P7 housing loan account that it was taken by him

on 12.6.2009 that is during the pendency of the proceedings.

So both the courts below were perfectly justified in not taking

the income in Ext.D1 for fixing the monthly income of the

petitioner herein. The Additional Sessions Judge had taken the

monthly income of the petitioner as per Ext.D1 and assessed

the monthly maintenance payable to the petitioner. But the

amount payable has to be ascertained as on the date of divorce

and not subsequent to the same. So, as on the date of divorce,

Crl.M.C.No.4031 of 2012          14

the petitioner herein was getting        a   take home salary of

Rs.6,891/-. It is also brought out in evidence that he had married

again and he is having      children in that and his mother is also

living with him. So considering the circumstances, the amount

of Rs.2,000/- fixed by the Magistrate as monthly maintenance

appears to be        reasonable and the revisional court was not

justified in   enhancing the same to Rs.2,200/-.      Further the

trial court has taken 7      as multiplier,   but   the Additional

Sessions Judge had taken multiplier of 16 as though it is a

case of    awarding compensation under the provisions of the

Motor Vehicles Act. So, the method adopted by the First

Additional Sessions Judge for fixing the multiplier appears to

be on the higher side. At the same time, the multiplier taken

by the trial court is also appears to be on the lower side.     So

taking ten as the multiplier, the respondent herein is entitled

to get a fair and        reasonable provision of     Rs.2,24,000/-

(2000x12x10) in stead of Rs.3,00,000/- awarded by the First

Additional Sessions Court.        To that extent, the judgment

passed by the court below has to be modified.

      12. The contention raised by the counsel for the petitioner

relying on the decision reported in Majeed's case (cited supra)

Crl.M.C.No.4031 of 2012          15

that since fair and reasonable provision has been directed to

be paid for the remaining period, the further amount paid as

maintenance is unsustainable cannot be accepted in view of the

later decision of this Court reported in Chand Muhammed v.

Zeenath      and Another (2011 KHC 786) and Danial Latifi

v. Union of India (2001 KHC 776) by the Hon'ble Supreme

Court. Further if the monthly maintenance payable is taken as

Rs.2,000/-, then the amount of       maintenance payable during

the period of iddath will be Rs.6,000/- and not Rs.6,600/- as

enhanced by the Additional Sessions Court. So this amount

has to be modified as stated above.

      13. So the petition is allowed in part. The direction of the

First Additional Sessions Judge issued to the petitioner to return

5 sovereigns of gold ornaments or its value of Rs.1,00,000/-

and also return Rs.25,000/- as the amount paid at the time of

marriage to the respondent herein are hereby confirmed. But

the amount of Rs.6,600/- awarded as maintenance during the

period of iddath       and also Rs.3,00,000/-    awarded by the

Tribunal as fair and reasonable provision are set aside and

the same is modified as follows:

      The petitioner is directed to pay Rs.6,000/- as maintenance

Crl.M.C.No.4031 of 2012             16

during the period of iddath and Rs.2,24,000/- as fair and

reasonable provision to the respondent herein. Three months

time is granted to the petitioner to pay this amount, if not

already paid to the respondent herein.

      With the above modification of the impugned order passed

by the First Additional Sessions Court, the petition is allowed

in part.

                                                 Sd/-
                                    K. RAMAKRISHNAN, JUDGE.

cl
                        /true copy/
                                     P.S to Judge



