
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                      PRESENT:

                           THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE V.K.MOHANAN

                MONDAY,THE 18TH DAY OF AUGUST 2014/27TH SRAVANA, 1936

                                           Crl.MC.No. 4631 of 2014 ()
                                                ---------------------------
        CC 415/2011 of JUDICIAL FIRST CLASS MAGISTRATE COURT, PAYYANNUR
                                                      --------------
PETITIONERS/ACCUSED NO 1 TO 6 :
--------------------------------------------------
        1. P.K.MUHAMMED SHAFI, AGED 40 YEARS,
            S/O.ABDUL KHADER, AYISHA MANZIL, MUTTAM
            VENGARA P. O., KANNUR DIST

        2. P.K. RUDHYA, AGED 63 YEARS,
            W/O.ABDUL KHADER, AYISHA MANZIL, MUTTAM
            VENGARA P O, KANNUR DIST

        3. P.K. NASEEMA, AGED 47 YEARS,
            D/O.ABDUL KHADER, AYISHA MANZIL, MUTTAM
            VENGARA P O, KANNUR DIST

        4. MOIDEEN KUNHI, AGED 32 YEARS,
            S/O.RAMLA, SAREENA MAHAL, MUTTAM
            VENGARA P. O., KANNUR DIST

        5. ABDUL KHADER P.K., AGED 53 YEARS,
            NEAR RAILWAY GATE, KANNUR CITY, KANNUR DIST

        6. A. C. SHADULI, AGED 38 YEARS,
            H/O.BUSHRA, AYIDHA MANZIL, MUTTAM,
            VENGARA P. O., KANNUR DIST

            BY ADVS.SRI.ZUBAIR PULIKKOOL
                          SRI.P.S.BINU

RESPONDENTS/COMPLAINANT :
---------------------------------------------
        1. NAHEEMA P.K., AGED 33 YEARS,
            D/O. A C ABDUL KHADER, PADINHARE KONHANVALAPPIL,
            MATTOOL SOUTH, MATTOOL P O, KANNUR DIST- 670306

        2. STATE OF KERALA
            REP BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR,
            HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM

            R1 BY ADV. SMT.P.A.ANEESHA
            R2 BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SRI. DHANESH MATHEW MANJOORAN

            THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE HAVING COME UP FOR ADMISSION
            ON 18-08-2014, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE
             FOLLOWING:

BP

Crl.MC.No. 4631 of 2014 ()
---------------------------

                                            APPENDIX

PETITIONER(S)' EXHIBITS
-------------------------------------

ANNEXURE I:-                   COPY OF THE FIR AND POLICE CHARGE IN CRIME NO 35/11 OF
                               PAZHAYANGADI POLICE STATION.

ANNEXURE II:-                  THE TRUE COPY OF THE AFFIDAVIT OF IST RESPONDENT


RESPONDENT(S)' EXHIBITS                    :           NIL.


                                                              //TRUE COPY//




                                                              P.A. TO JUDGE

BP


                      V.K. MOHANAN,J.
             ---------------------------------------
               Crl. M.C. No. 4631 of 2014
            ----------------------------------------
             Dated this the 18th day of August, 2014

                             ORDER


        The above petition is filed under Section 482 of the

Criminal Procedure Code (for short 'Cr.P.C.') at the instance of

the petitioners, who are accused Nos. 1 to 6 in C.C.No.

415/2011 on the file of the Judicial First Class Magistrate

Court, Payyannur, which is a case instituted upon the police

report in Crime No. 35/11 of Pazhayangadi Police Station for

the offences punishable under Sections 406, 498(A) read with

34 I.P.C. with a prayer to quash Annexure I FIR in the

aforesaid  crime    and   all   further  proceedings   in  C.C.

No.415/2011 on the file of the J.F.C.M. Court, Payyannur, as

the matter is settled out of court.

        2. The allegation in the above case is that the

marriage between the 1st accused and the defacto complainant

was solemnized on 30.10.1999 as per the custom prevailing in

Muslim community and while the defacto complainant and the

1st accused were living as husband and wife in the matrimonial

home as well as in the house of the defacto complainant, she

was mentally and physically harassed by all accused

Crl. M.C. No. 4631 of 2014
                                 2

demanding more money and gold and 2nd accused didn't retrun

the gold ornaments which entrusted to her etc. and thereby

the accused committed the offences and now, the case of the

petitioners is that the matter is settled out of court.

          3. Heard the learned counsel for the petitioners    as

well as the learned counsel for the first respondent. I have

also heard the learned Public Prosecutor.

          4. The learned counsel for the petitioners submitted

that during the pendency of the above case, the matter is

settled amicably between the parties to the dispute which is

the subject matter of the above case.             Therefore, the

continuation of the proceedings in the above case is abuse of

process of law and proceedings.

          5. The learned counsel for the first respondent who on

the basis of specific instruction received from the respondent

submitted that the above respondent, who is the de facto

complainant does not intend to proceed any further against the

petitioners and she has no grievance against them.

          6. I have carefully considered the above submissions

of the respective counsel. I have verified the documents and

materials produced along with the above petition. In the given

Crl. M.C. No. 4631 of 2014
                               3

facts and circumstances of the case and especially in the light

of the settlement arrived between the parties to the dispute,

the learned Public Prosecutor has also no objection in allowing

the above petition.

          7. Having regard to the facts and circumstances

involved in the case, it can be seen that the offences involved

in the above case are only under Sections 406, 498(A) read

with 34 I.P.C., which are more or less personal in nature and

no public interest is involved.   It is pertinent to note that

though such offences are involved, the real parties to the

dispute approached this Court after having amicably settled

the matter. From the submission made by the counsel for the

first respondent, it appears to me that the de facto

complainant      has    no further   grievance    against   the

petitioners/accused in the light of the settlement arrived by

them. In this juncture, it is relevant to note the decisions of

the Honourable Apex Court reported in Gian Singh v. State

of   Punjab      [2012(4)  KLT   108(SC)]       and   Jitendra

Raghuvanshi and Others v. Babita Raghuvanshi and

another [2013 (1) KLD 817 (SC)]. In Gian Singh's case, the

Supreme Court has held as follows:-

Crl. M.C. No. 4631 of 2014
                                          4

                  "57.   The position that emerges from the above
          discussion can be summarised thus:        the power of the
          High Court in quashing a criminal proceeding or FIR or
          complaint in exercise of its inherent jurisdiction is distinct
          and different from the power given to a criminal court for
          compounding the offences under S.320 of the Code.
          Inherent power is of wide plenitude with no statutory
          limitation but it has to be exercised in accord with the
          guideline engrafted in such power viz;(i) to secure the
          ends of justice or (ii) to prevent abuse of the process of
          any Court. In what cases power to quash the criminal
          proceeding or complaint or F.I.R. may be exercised where
          the offender and victim have settled their dispute would
          depend on the facts and circumstances of each case and
          no category can be prescribed..



It is further held as follows:-

          "......... But the criminal cases having overwhelmingly
          and pre-dominatingly civil flavour stand on different
          footing for the purposes of quashing, particularly the
          offences arising from commercial, financial,mercantile,
          civil, partnership or such like transactions or the offences
          arising out of matrimony relating to dowry etc. or the
          family disputes where the wrong is basically private or
          personal in nature and the parties have resolved their
          entire dispute. In this category of cases, High Court may
          quash criminal proceedings if in its view, because of the
          compromise between the offender and victim, the
          possibility of conviction is remote and bleak and
          continuation of criminal case would put accused to great
          oppression and prejudice and extreme injustice would be
          caused to him by not quashing the criminal case despite
          full and complete settlement and compromise with the
          victim........"


Further, in Jitendra Raghuvanshi's case, the Apex Court

has held as follows:-


                   "7. It is not in dispute that matrimonial disputes
          have been on considerable increase in recent times
          resulting in filing of complaints under Sections 498A and
          406 of I.P.C. not only against the husband but also
          against the relatives of the husband.      The question is
          when such matters are resolved either by the wife
          agreeing to rejoin the matrimonial home or by mutual
          settlement of other pending disputes for which both the
          sides approached the High Court and jointly prayed for
          quashing of the criminal proceedings or the FIR or

Crl. M.C. No. 4631 of 2014
                                         5

          complaint by the wife under Sections 498A and 406 of
          I.P.C., whether the prayer can be declined on the sole
          ground that since the offences are non-compoundable
          under Section 320 of the Code, it would be impermissible
          for the court to quash the criminal proceedings or FIR or
          complaint.

                  8. It is not in dispute that in the case on hand
          subsequent to the filing of the criminal complaint under
          Sections 498A and 406 of IPC and Sections 3 and 4 of
          the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961, with the help and
          intervention of family members, friends and well-
          wishers, the parties concerned have amicably settled
          their differences and executed a compromise/settlement.
          Pursuant    thereto,   the   appellants   filed  the  said
          compromise before the Trial Court with a request to
          place the same on record and to drop the criminal
          proceedings against the appellants herein. It is also not
          in dispute that in additional to the mutual settlement
          arrived at by the parties, respondent/-wife has also filed
          an affidavit stating that she did not wish to pursue the
          criminal proceedings against the appellants and fully
          supported the contents of the settlement deed. It is the
          grievance of the appellants that no only the Trial Court
          rejected such prayer of the parties but also the High
          Court failed toe exercise its jurisdiction under Section
          482 of the Code only on the ground that the criminal
          proceedings relate to the offences punishable under
          Sections 498A and 406 of IPC which are non-
          compoundable in nature."

                  "12. In our view, it is the duty of the Courts to
          encourage genuine settlements of matrimonial disputes,
          particularly, when the same are on considerable
          increase. Even if the offences are non-compoundable, if
          they relate to matrimonial disputes and the Court is
          satisfied that the parties have settled the same amicably
          and without any pressure, we hold that for the purpose
          of securing ends of justice, Section 320 of the Code
          would not be a bar to the exercise of power of quashing
          of   FIR,   complaint    or    the  subsequent     criminal
          proceedings.

                  13. There has been an outburst of matrimonial
          disputes in recent times.     The institution of marriage
          occupies an important place and it has an important role
          to play in the society. Therefore, every effort should be
          made in the interest of the individuals in order to enable
          them to settle down in life and live peacefully. If the
          parties ponder over their defaults and terminate their
          disputes amicably by mutual agreement instead of
          fighting it out in a Court of law, in order to do complete
          justice in the matrimonial matters, the Courts should be
          less hesitant in exercising its extraordinary jurisdiction.

Crl. M.C. No. 4631 of 2014
                                       6

          It is trite to state that the power under Section 482
          should be exercised sparingly and with circumspection
          only when the Court is convinced, on the basis of
          material on record, that allowing the proceedings to
          continue would be an abuse of the process of the Court
          or that the ends of justice require that the proceedings
          ought to be quashed."


          8. Considering the particular facts and circumstances

in this case, it can be seen further that the criminal

proceedings are initiated consequent to the matrimonial

dispute arose among the parties and both the disputes are

now amicably settled between the parties. According to me, in

the light of the facts and circumstances involved in the present

case and particularly in view of the settlement arrived in the

present case, the dictum laid in the above decisions will be

squarely applicable in the present case. I am of the view that

as the parties to the dispute settled the issues amicably, it is

the duty of this Court to promote such settlement, instead of

compelling the parties to go on with the dispute.                   It is

pertinent to note that since the matter is settled out of court,

in the event of proceeding with the trial, there would not have

any fruitful prosecution, resulting the conviction of the

accused, rather the net result would be sheer waste of judicial

time and abuse of process of the court and proceedings. Thus,

according to me, following the decisions cited supra, this

Crl. M.C. No. 4631 of 2014
                                 7

Crl.M.C. can be allowed granting the relief as sought for.

          In the result, following the dictum laid in the above

decisions, this Crl.M.C. is allowed, quashing Annexure -I FIR

and all further proceedings pending against the petitioners in

C.C.No.415/2011 on the file of the Judicial First Class

Magistrate Court, Payyannur, in Crime No. 35/2011 of

Pazhayangadi Police Station.




                                    Sd/-V.K. MOHANAN
                                          JUDGE

LSN/-



