
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                PRESENT:

                 THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE K.RAMAKRISHNAN

          TUESDAY, THE 25TH DAY OF MARCH 2014/4TH CHAITHRA, 1936

                                      Crl.MC.No. 1660 of 2014
                                          ---------------------------
CP NO. 223/2013 OF JUDICIAL FIRST CLASS MAGISTRATE COURT I, KASARAGOD
   CRIME NO. 407/2013 OF KUMBALA POLICE STATION , KASARAGOD
                                                      ....

    PETITIONER(S)/ACCUSED:
    ------------------------------------------

   1. MUHAMMED RAFEEK, AGED 22 YEARS,
      S/O.ABBAS, RAUF MANZIL, OLAYAM JAMA-ATH QUARTERS,
      SHIRIYAKKUNNU, SHIRIYA VILLAGE, KASARAGOD.

   2. ABDUL SAMEER, AGED 24 YEARS,
      S/O.MUHAMMED, ONANTHA HOUSE, SHIRIYAKKUNNU,
      SHIRIYA VILLAGE, KASARAGOD.

   3. MUHAMMED KABEER P.M., AGED 22 YEARS,
      S/O.MOIDEEN, PUTHIYANGADY HOUSE, SHIRIYAKKUNNU,
      SHIRIYA VILLAGE, KASARAGOD.

      BY ADV. SRI.S.JIJI

    RESPONDENT(S)/DE-FACTO COMPLAINANT AND STATE:
    -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

   1. KESHAVA S., AGED 36 YEARS,
      S/O.RAGHAVA, SHIRIYAKKUNNU, SHIRIYA VILLAGE,
      KASARAGOD.

   2. STATE OF KERALA,
      REPRESENTED BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR,
      HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM.

      R1 BY ADV. SMT.NIMA JACOB
      R2 BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SMT. S.HYMA

      THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE HAVING COME UP FOR ADMISSION
      ON 25-03-2014, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE
      FOLLOWING:

Kss

Crl.M.C.No.1660/2014




                                APPENDIX


PETITIONER'S ANNEXURES:


ANNEX.A1:    COPY OF FINAL REPORT IN CR.407/2013 OF KUMBALA POLICE

             STATION.


ANNEX.A2:    AFFIDAVIT DTD. 25/02/2014 SWORN BY THE 1ST RESPONDENT.




RESPONDENT'S ANNEXURES:                N I L




                                                        /TRUE COPY/




                                                        P.A.TO JUDGE

Kss


                      K. Ramakrishnan, J.
    ==============================
                  Crl.M.C.No.1660 of 2014
    ==============================
        Dated this, the 25th day of March, 2014.


                            O R D E R

      This is an application filed by the accused Nos.1 to 3 in

C.P.No.223/13     pending    before    the  Judicial  First  Class

Magistrate Court No-I, Kasargod to quash the proceedings in

view of the settlement arrived at between them and the de

facto complainant under Section 482 of Code of Criminal

Procedure.

      2.    It is alleged in the petition that petitioners are the

accused in C.P.No.223/13 pending before the Judicial First

Class Magistrate Court No-I, Kasargod. A case was registered

on the basis of the statement given by the de facto

complainant first respondent herein against the petitioners as

Crime No.407/13 of Kumbala Police Station of Kasargod

District alleging offences under Sections 341, 324 read with

Section 34 of Indian Penal Code and Section 3(1)(x) of

Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of

Atrocities) Act. After investigation, Annexure A1 final report

has been filed which has been taken on file as C.P.No.223/13

Crl.M.C.No.1660 of 2014     : 2  :

and pending before Judicial First Class Magistrate Court, No-I,

Kasargod. Due to the intervention of mediators and the local

people, the matter has been now settled between the parties.

In fact, the incident occurred due to some labour dispute

between them and that has now been settled.              The first

respondent does not want to proceed with the prosecution

against the petitioners. Since some of the offences are non-

compoundable in nature, they could not compound the case

before the court below. So, they have no other option except

to approach this court seeking the following relief:

           "To quash Annexure A-1 Final Report and all further

     proceedings in C.P.No.223/2013 of J.F.M.C-I, Karargod

     (Crime No.407/2013 of Kumbala police Station) as against

     the petitioners/accused persons in this petition, in the

     interest of justice."

      3.     First respondent appeared through Counsel and

submitted that the matter has been settled between the

parties and he does not want to prosecute the case in view of

the settlement and harmony has been restored between them.

He had also filed an affidavit in support of the same.        The

learned Counsel for the petitioner submitted that, in view of

the settlement, there is no possibility of conviction and it will

Crl.M.C.No.1660 of 2014      : 3   :

be only a wastage of time, if the prosecution is allowed to

continue. So, he prayed for allowing the application.

      4.     The Learned Public Prosecutor, on instructions, as

directed by this court, submitted that, except this case there is

no other case against the petitioners and since offence under

Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of

Atrocities) Act is incorporated, it is not a case to be quashed at

this stage.

      5.     It is an admitted fact that on the basis of the

statement given by the first respondent herein as de facto

complainant, a case was registered as Crime No.407/13 of

Kumbala Police Station against the petitioners alleging offences

under Sections 341, 324 read with Section 34 of Indian Penal

Code and Section 3(1)(x) of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled

Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act.        After investigation,

Annexure A1 final report has been filed and it was taken on file

as C.P.No.223/13 on the file of the Judicial First Class

Magistrate Court, Kasargod. Now, the matter has been settled

between the parities.       First respondent filed Annexure 2

affidavit stating that, the incident occurred due to some labour

dispute that arose in a timber mill where both the petitioners

Crl.M.C.No.1660 of 2014     : 4  :

and the de facto complainant were working. Due to the of

intervention of mediators and well wishers, the entire dispute

has been settled and harmony between them has been

restored. Now they are working together happily.

      6.     It is true that offence under Section 3(1)(x) of

Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of

Atrocities) Act has been incorporated in the case and it is a

special enactment that has been enacted by the Parliament so

as to protect the interest of certain categories of persons

mentioned in the statute and avoid atrocities being caused to

them on account of their caste factor. It is true in serious

matters like this, this court should not normally invoke the

power under Section 482 of Code of Criminal Procedure as it

cannot be treated as a case of individuals, but, affecting a

particular society for whose benefit the enactment has been

enacted and it is a public issue. But, when a victim of such

incident comes before the court and says that the matter has

been settled and there was no atrocity as such caused to him

and it was due to some misunderstanding that the case itself

has been initiated and due to the intervention of parties, their

relationship has been restored, then, court must honour the

Crl.M.C.No.1660 of 2014        : 5  :

wish of the victim so as to provide him a solace and to lead a

happy life in the society along with others which has caused on

account of the settlement.

      7.     In the decision reported in Gian Singh V. State of

Punjab [2012 (4) KLT 108 (SC)], it is held as follows:

            "The position that emerges from the above
      discussion can be summarised thus: the power of the
      High Court in quashing in criminal proceeding or F.I.R.
      or complaint in exercise of its inherent jurisdiction is
      distinct and different from the power given to a criminal
      court for compounding the offences under S.320 of the
      Code.    Inherent power is of wide plenitude with no
      statutory limitation but it has to be exercised in accord
      with the guideline engrafted in such power viz;(i) to
      secure the ends of justice or (ii) to prevent abuse of the
      process of any Court. In what cases power to quash the
      criminal proceeding or complaint or F.I.R may be
      exercised where the offender and victim have settled
      their   dispute   would   depend     on  the   facts  and
      circumstances of each case and no category can be
      prescribed.    However, before exercise of such power,
      the High Court must have due regard to the nature and
      gravity of the crime. Heinous and serious offences of
      mental depravity or offences like murder, rape, dacoity,
      etc., cannot be fittingly quashed even though the victim
      or victim's family and the offender have settled the
      dispute.    Such offences are not private in nature and
      have serious impact on society.            Similarly, any
      compromise between the victim and offender in relation
      to the offences under special statutes like Prevention of
      Corruption Act or the offences committed by public
      servants while working in that capacity etc; cannot
      provide for any basis for quashing criminal proceedings
      involving such offences. But the criminal cases having
      overwhelmingly and pre-dominatingly civil flavour stand
      on different footing for the purposes of quashing,
      particularly the offences arising from commercial,
      financial, mercantile, civil,  partnership or such like
      transactions or the offences arising out of matrimony
      relating to dowry, etc; or the family disputes where the

Crl.M.C.No.1660 of 2014         : 6  :

      wrong is basically private or personal in nature and the
      parties have resolved their entire dispute.        In this
      category of case, High Court may quash criminal
      proceedings if in its view, because of the compromise
      between the offender and victim, the possibility of
      conviction is remote and bleak and continuation of
      criminal case would put accused to great oppression and
      prejudice and extreme injustice would be caused to him
      by not quashing the criminal case despite full and
      complete settlement and compromise with the victim.
      In other words, the High Court must consider whether it
      would be unfair or contrary to the interest of justice to
      continue with the criminal proceeding or continuation of
      the criminal proceeding would tantamount to abuse of
      process of law despite settlement and compromise
      between the victim and wrongdoer and whether to
      secure the ends of justice, it is appropriate that criminal
      case is put to end and if the answer to the above
      question(s) is in affirmative, the High Court shall be well
      within its jurisdiction to quash the criminal proceeding."



      8.     In view of the dictum laid down in the above

decision and also considering the fact that the matter has been

settled between the parities and harmony has been restored

between the petitioners and the first respondent who belongs

to different community on account of the settlement and also

in view of the settlement, there is no possibility of conviction if

the matter is allowed to continue, this court feels that it is a fit

case where the power under Section 482 of Code of Criminal

Procedure has to be invoked to quash the proceedings to

promote the settlement and harmony that has been restored

between two community people and this should not be a

Crl.M.C.No.1660 of 2014     : 7  :

hurdle for that.

      So, the application is allowed and further proceedings in

C.P.No.223/13 (Crime No.407/2013 of Kumbala Police Station)

now pending before Judicial First Class Magistrate Court, No-I,

Kasargod as against the petitioners is quashed.       Office is

directed to communicate this order to that court immediately

for necessary further action.




                                           Sd/-
                                 K.Ramakrishnan, Judge.


Bb




                                           [True copy]

                                                P.A to Judge



