
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                    PRESENT:

                  THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE ALEXANDER THOMAS

           THURSDAY, THE 9TH DAY OF OCTOBER 2014/17TH ASWINA, 1936

                                          Crl.MC.No.5670 of 2014
                                           ---------------------------------

CC NO.1237/2012 of JUDICIAL FIRST CLASS MAGISTRATE COURT-II,ATTINGAL
CRIME NO.751/2012 OF KAZHAKKUTTOM POLICE STATION,
THIRUVANANDAPURAM

PETITIONERS/ACCUSED NOS.1 TO 3:
-------------------------------------------------------

1.        LEJU KUTTAN.K,AGED 39 YEARS,
          S/O.KUTTAN,SUDHA VIHAR,KALLINMOODU,
          ELAMBA P.O.,ATTINGAL.

2.        SUDARMINI,AGED 62 YEARS,W/O.KUTTAN,SUDHA VIHAR,
          KALLINMOODU,ELAMBA P.O.,ATTINGAL.

3.        A.KUTTAN,AGED 70 YEARS,SUDHA VIHAR,
          KALLINMOODU,ELAMBA P.O., ATTINGAL.

           BY ADV. SRI.NEMOM CHANDRA BABU

RESPONDENTS/COMPLAINANT & STATE:
-------------------------------------------------------------

1.        THE STATE OF KERALA,REPRESENTED BY THE PUBLIC PROSECUTOR,
          OFFICE OF THE ADVOCATE GENERAL,HIGH COURT OF KERALA,
          ERNAKULAM.

2.        SINI R.MONIYAN,D/O.R.MONIYON,RESIDING AT SREEKARTHIKA,
          CHITTATTUMUKKU P.O.,THIRUVANANTHAPURAM-695 588.

           R1 BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SMT.BINDU GOPINATH
           R2 BY ADV.SRI.S.JUSTUS


          THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD
          ON 09-10-2014, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE
          FOLLOWING:




pk

Crl.MC.No.5670 of 2014
---------------------------------

                                             APPENDIX

PETITIONERS ANNEXURES
----------------------------------------

ANNEXURE-I:CERTIFIED OF THE FIRST INFORMATION REPORT DATED 8.8.2012.

ANNEXURE-II:CERTIFIED COPY OF THE FINAL REPORT DATED 22.3.2013.

ANNEXURE-III:ORIGINAL AFFIDAVIT SWORN BY THE 2ND RESPONDENT/
DEFACTO COMPLAINANT.

RESPONDENTS ANNEXURES:                                NIL
-------------------------------------------


                                                          //TRUE COPY//




                                                          P.S.TO JUDGE


pk


                       ALEXANDER THOMAS, J.
                    ==================
                      Crl.M.C.No.5670 of 2014
                    ==================
             Dated this the 9O day of October, 2014
                               th

                                 R D E R

      The petitioners herein are the three accused in crime

No.751/2012 of Kazhakuttam Police Station, Thiruvananthapuram,

for offences under Sections 498A and 34 of the IPC. The 2nd

respondent is the defacto complainant. The allegations against the

petitioners are that the petitioners had demanded more dowry from

the 2nd respondent's parents and that they had physically and

mentally harassed the defacto complainant, which has resulted in

Annexure-I FIR in crime No.751/2012 of Kazhakuttam Police

Station. Thereafter, the Kazhakuttam Police authorities investigated

the matter and submitted the final report before the Judicial First

Class Magistrate's Court-II, Attingal, as per Annexure-II final report

dated 22.3.2013 and the Magistrate has taken cognizance of the

evidence and numbered the matter as C.C.No.1237/2012. It is the

case of the petitioners that the petitioners and the 2nd respondent

defacto complainant had amicably settled the disputes as evidenced

by Annexure-III affidavit dated 8.8.2014 sworn to by the 2nd

respondent-defacto complainant. It is in the background of these

facts and circumstances that the petitioners have chosen to file this

                                  - : 2 :-

Crl.M.C. with the      prayers to quash Annexure-1 FIR in crime

No.751/2012 of Kazhakuttam Police Station and to quash Annexure

II final report in C.C.No. 1237/2012 on file of the Judicial First Class

Magistrate's Court-II, Attingal, in the aforementioned crime.

      2.    The Crl.M.C. has been admitted and Sri.S.Justus has

taken notice for the 2nd respondent and the learned Public

Prosecutor has taken notice for the 1st respondent-State of Kerala.

      3.    Heard Sri.Nemom Chandra Babu, the learned counsel

appearing for the petitioners, Sri.S.Justus, the learned counsel

appearing for R2 and the learned Public Prosecutor appearing for

the 1st respondent-State.

      4.    The learned counsel for the petitioners has submitted

that   during    the   pendency   of      the aforementioned   criminal

proceedings, the matter has been settled amicably between the

parties, which has resulted in the subject matter of the

aforementioned crime/case and that the continuation of the

proceedings in the above case/crime will cause miscarriage of

justice to both parties as the real disputants to the case have arrived

at an amicable settlement and any further continuation of the

criminal proceedings will amount to sheer wastage of time and

                                 - : 3 :-

money and would unnecessarily strain the judicial, administrative

and financial resources of the State.

      5.    The learned counsel appearing for the 2nd respondent

has submitted on the basis of the specific instructions furnished by

the 2nd respondent that the 2nd respondent has amicably settled the

disputes with the petitioners and that she has no objection in the

quashment of     the impugned criminal proceedings and that the

complainant/victim/injured does not intend to proceed any further

against the petitioners as she has no grievance against them and

that she will not raise any dispute/compliant in future if the prayer

for quashing the impugned criminal proceedings is allowed.

      6.    The learned Public Prosecutor also was heard, who also

has not raised any serious objections and submitted that that court

may consider the prayer in this case in the light of the law well

settled by the Apex Court in that regard.

      7.    After having carefully considered the submissions of the

parties and after having perused the pleadings as well as the

documents and materials placed in this matter, it can be seen that

the offences alleged are more or less personal in nature and not

much element of public interest is involved. The crucial aspect of

                                        - : 4 :-

the matter is that though such offences are involved, the real

disputants to the controversy which has led to the impugned

criminal proceedings, have actually arrived at an amicable

settlement of the matter. From the submissions made by the

learned counsel for the 2nd respondent, it is clear to the court that

the injured/victim/defacto complainant has no further grievance

against the petitioners/accused in the light of the settlement arrived

at by them. In this connection, it is relevant to note the decision of

the Apex Court in the case between Gian Singh v. State of Punjab

reported in 2013 (1) SCC (Cri) 160, para 61 = (2012) 10 SCC 303 =

2012(4) KLT 108(SC), wherein the Supreme Court has held as

follows in para 61 thereof [ See SCC (Cri)]:

                  "61. The position that emerges from the above
           discussion can be summarised thus: the power of the
           High Court in quashing a criminal proceeding or FIR or
           complaint in exercise of its inherent jurisdiction is
           distinct and different from the power given to a criminal
           court for compounding the offences under S.320 of the
           Code.
           statutoryInherent
                      limitationpoweritishas to be exercised in accord
                                          of wide plenitude with no
                                 but
           with the guideline engrafted in such power viz;(i) to
           secure the ends of justice or (ii) to prevent abuse of the
           process of any Court. In what cases power to quash the
           criminal proceeding or complaint or F.I.R. may be
           exercised where the offender andonvictim have settled
           their
           circumstances ofwould case and no category canand
                   dispute            depend         the   facts
                               each                                be
           prescribed..

It is further held as follows:-

                                       - : 5 :-

        "......... But the criminal cases having overwhelmingly and
        pre-dominatingly civil flavour stand on different footing
        for the purposes of quashing, particularly the offences
        arising from commercial, financial, mercantile, civil,
        partnership or such like transactions or the offences
        arising out of matrimony relating to dowry etc. or the
        family disputes where the wrong is basically private or
        personal in nature and the parties have resolved their
        entire dispute. In this category of cases, High Court may
        quash criminal proceedings if in its view, because of the
        compromise between the offender and victim, the
        possibility of conviction is remote and bleak and
        continuation of criminal case would put accused to great
        oppression and prejudice and extreme injustice would
        be caused to him by not quashing the criminal case
        despite full and complete settlement and compromise
        with the victim........"

Further, in the case Jitendra Raghuvanshi and Others v. Babita

Raghuvanshi and another reported in (2013) 4 SCC 58 [see 2013

(1) KLD 817 (SC)], the Apex Court has held as follows:-

                 "8. It is not in dispute that matrimonial disputes
        have been on considerable increase in recent times
        resulting in filing of complaints under Sections 498A
        and 406 of I.P.C. not only against the husband but also
        against the relatives of the husband. The question is
        when such matters are resolved either by the wife
        agreeing to rejoin the matrimonial home or by mutual
        settlement of other pending disputes for which both the
        sides approached the High Court and jointly prayed for
        quashing of the criminal proceedings or the FIR or
        complaint by the wife under Sections 498A and 406 of
        I.P.C., whether thethe  prayer can be declined on the sole
        ground that since320 offences arequashitthe
                                                 non-compoundable
        under
        impermissible for the court toCode,
                   Section          of   the             would   be
                                                           criminal
        proceedings or FIR or complaint.

                 9. It is not in dispute that in the case on hand
        subsequent to the filing of the criminal complaint under
        Sections 498A and 406 of IPC and Sections 3 and 4 of
        the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961, with the help and
        intervention of family members, friends and well-

                            - : 6 :-

wishers,differences
          the parties concerned have amicably settled
their
settlement.
said compromise beforethereto,
              Pursuantandthe executedappellants
                                          a   compromise/
                              Trialthe             filed the
                                    Court with a request to
place the same on record and to drop the criminal
proceedings against the appellants herein. It is also not
in dispute that in additional to the mutual settlement
arrived at by the parties, respondent/-wife has also filed
an affidavit stating that she did not wish to pursue the
criminal proceedings against the appellants and fully
supported the contents of the settlement deed. It is the
grievance of the appellants that no only the Trial Court
rejected such prayer of the parties but also the High
Court failed toe exercise its jurisdiction under Section
482 of the Code only on the ground that the criminal
proceedings relate to the offences punishable under
Sections 498A and 406 of IPC which are non-
compoundable in nature.

       15. In our view, it is the duty of the Courts to
encourage genuine settlements of matrimonial disputes,
particularly, when the same are on considerable
increase. Even if the offences are non-compoundable, if
they relate to matrimonial disputes and the Court is
satisfied that the parties have settled the same amicably
and without any pressure, we hold that for the purpose
of securing ends of justice, Section 320 of the Code
would not be a bar to the exercisesubsequent quashing
                                      of power of
of   FIR,   complaint    or   the                  criminal
proceedings.

       16. There has been an outburst of matrimonial
disputes in recent times.
occupies an important placeThe it has an important role
                                    institution of marriage
                               and
to play in the society. Therefore, every effort should be
made in the interest of the individuals in order to enable
them to settle down in life and live peacefully. If the
parties ponder over their defaults and terminate their
disputes amicably by mutual agreement instead of
fighting it out in a Court of law, in order to do complete
justice in the matrimonial matters, the Courts should be
less hesitant in exercising its extraordinary jurisdiction.
It is trite to state that the power under Section 482
should be exercised sparingly and with circumspection
only when the Court is convinced, on the basis of
material on record, that allowing the proceedings to
continue would be an abuse of the process of the Court
or that the ends of justice require that the proceedings

                                  - : 7 :-

          ought to be quashed."

      8.    Considering the facts and circumstances of this case, it

is seen further that the impugned criminal proceedings have arisen

consequent to the matrimonial disputes between the disputants and

the disputes have been settled amicably between the parties.

Accordingly, this Court is inclined to hold that in the light of the

facts and circumstances involved in the present case and

particularly in view of the settlement arrived at between the parties,

the principles laid down in the aforementioned decisions of the

Apex Court will be squarely applicable in the present case. This

Court also is inclined to hold that since the mediated settlement has

resolved the family disputes in this case, social interest and public

interest is also subserved by protecting the parties by giving them

impunity from the impugned criminal proceedings, as the

continuance of the criminal proceedings would only result in

upsetting and disharmonizing the settled the disputes between the

parties. Moreover, since the real disputants to the controversy have

amicably settled the disputes, which led to these impugned criminal

proceedings, it is also the duty of the court to promote such

settlement, instead of compelling the parties to go on with the

                                  - : 8 :-

dispute. It is also pertinent to note that since the matter is settled

out of court, in the event of proceeding with the trial, there may not

be any fruitful prosecution and the chances of conviction of the

accused is rather negligible and therefore, the net result of

continuance of criminal proceedings would be sheer waste of

judicial time rather meaningless and therefore would amount to

abuse of the process of court proceedings in the larger sense.

Hence following decisions of the Apex Court cited supra, this Court

is inclined to hold that the Crl.M.C. can be allowed by granting the

prayers sought for.

      9.    In the result, the Crl.M.C. is allowed and the impugned

Annexure I FIR in crime No.751/2012 of Kazhakuttam Police Station

is quashed and the impugned Annexure II final report in C.C.No.

1237/2012 pending before the Judicial First Class Magistrate's

Court-II, Attingal, in the aforementioned crime also stands quashed.

The petitioners shall produce certified copies of this order before

the court below concerned as well as before the Station House

Officer, Kazhakuttam Police Station.

                                                      Sd/-
sdk+                                      ALEXANDER THOMAS, JUDGE
         ///True copy///
                              P.S. to Judge

- : 9 :-



