
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                    PRESENT:

                  THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE ALEXANDER THOMAS

          THURSDAY, THE 23RD DAY OF OCTOBER 2014/1ST KARTHIKA, 1936

                                          Crl.MC.No.5978 of 2014
                                           ---------------------------------

CMP NO.1676/2013 IN CC NO.1651/2009 of JUDICIAL FIRST CLASS MAGISTRATE
COURT-I,ALUVA.

PETITIONERS/ACCUSED NO.1 AND 2
-----------------------------------------------------

1.        VINOD.K.P,AGED 39,S/O.LATE K.K.PARAMESWARAN,
          B-1333,ANUPAMA,SATELLITE TOWNSHIP,
          KAKKANADU WEST P.O,KOCHI-682030,
          VAZHAKKALA VILLAGE,KANAYANNUR TALUK,
          ERNAKULAM DISTRICT.

2.        GEETHA,AGED 58,W/O.K.K.PARAMESWARAN,
          B-1333,ANUPAMA,SATELLITE TOWNSHIP,
          KAKKANADU WEST P.O,KOCHI-682030,
          VAZHAKKALA VILLAGE,KANAYANNUR TALUK,
          ERNAKULAM DISTRICT.

           BY ADV.SRI.C.VARGHESE KURIAKOSE

RESPONDENTS:
------------------------

1.        THE STATE OF KERALA,REP.BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR,
          HIGH COURT OF KERALA,ERNAKULAM,PIN-682031.

2.        THE SUB INSPECTOR OF POLICE,
          (STATION HOUSE OFFICER),
          THRIKKAKARA POLICE STATION,
          KAKKANADU,PIN-682030.

3.        SITHARA M.S,AGED 32,D/O.P.V.SOMAN,
          MADATHINAL,KANJIRAMATTOM P.O,
          ERNAKULAM,PIN-682315.


           R1 & R2 BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SRI.R.GITHESH.
           R3 BY ADV. SRI.K.R.VINOD

          THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE HAVING COME UP FOR ADMISSION
          ON 23-10-2014, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE
          FOLLOWING:

pk

Crl.MC.No.5978 of 2014
---------------------------------

                                            APPENDIX

PETITIONERS ANNEXURES:
---------------------------------------

ANNEXURE A1:CERTIFIED COPY OF THE COMPLAINT AS CMP NO.1107/2009.

ANNEXURE A2:CERTIFIED COPY OF FIR REGISTRED IN CRIME NO.582/2009 ON
                      THE FILES OF THRIKKAKARA POLICE STATION.

ANNEXURE A3:CERTIFIED COPY OF THE CHARGE SHEET FILED BY
                      THRIKKAKARA POLICE STATION.

ANNEXURE A4:CERTIFIED COPY OF THE ORDER DTD 20/1/2014 IN CMP
                      NO.1676/2013.

ANNEXURE A5:TRUE PHOTOSTAT COPY OF THE SETTLEMENT AGREEMENT
                      DTD 29/1/2014.

ANNEXRUE A6:TRUE PHOTOSTAT COPY OF THE RECEIPT ISSUED BY THE 3RD
                      RESPONDENT.

ANNEXURE A7:ORIGINAL COPY OF HTE AFFIDAVIT SUBMITTED BY THE 3RD
                      RESPONDENT

RESPONDENTS ANNEXURES:                                  NIL
------------------------------------------


                                                        //TRUE COPY//




                                                        P.S.TOJUDGE


pk


                   ALEXANDER THOMAS, J.
            =========================
                   Crl.M.C No.5978 of 2014
         ============================
          Dated this the 23rd day of October, 2014

                            ORDER



     The above captioned Criminal Miscellaneous Case (Crl.M.C.),

seeking invocation of the inherent powers of this Court conferred

under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, has been

filed with a prayer to quash the impugned Annexure A3 final

report/charge sheet in the impugned Annexure A2 FIR in Crime

No.582 of 2009 of Thrikkakkara Police Station, which has led to

the institution of C.C No.1651 of 2009 on the file of Judicial First

Class Magistrate Court - I, Aluva and the impugned Annexure A4

order for further investigation etc. to secure the ends of justice.

The petitioners herein are accused Nos. 1 and 2 in Crime No.582

of 2009 of Thrikkakkara Police Station for the offences under

Sections 498A and 406 r/w 34 of Indian Penal Code. The crime

was registered on the basis of Annexure A1 private criminal

complaint filed before the jurisdictional Magistrate.

     2. The brief of the prosecution allegation is that after the

marriage of the 1st petitioner and 3rd respondent, it is alleged that

Crl.M.C No.5978 of 2014         2



cash worth Rs.1.5 lakhs and gold ornaments weighing 75

sovereigns were entrusted to the petitioners on behalf of the 3rd

respondent and that 2nd petitioner has domination over the 1st

petitioner and on account of her interference, the marriage fell

apart. The child born out of the wedlock died within six months

of his birth. The complaint was filed alleging cruelty and criminal

breach of trust for not return of the articles. After investigation

the Police filed the impugned Annexure A3 final report/charge

sheet in the aforementioned crime for offences under Sections

323 and 294 B of Indian Penal Code. The 3rd respondent herein

filed objection against the acceptance of such report and

thereupon by         the impugned Annexure      A4   order   dated

20.01.2014, the jurisdictional Magistrate concerned ordered

further investigation in respect of the above crime. There were

other pending litigations arisen out of the matrimonial disputes

in the Family Court concerned. Original Petition No.385 of 2009

on the file of Family Court Ernakulam was filed by the wife

seeking recovery of Rs.1.5 lakhs with 12 % interest per annum

and also seeking return of gold ornaments. Original Petition

No.384 of 2009 was filed seeking decree of divorce and both the

Crl.M.C No.5978 of 2014              3



Original Petitions were allowed by the Family Court as per order

dated 04.10.2012. Thereupon Mat. Appeal No.795 of 2012 was

filed to challenge the decree in O.P No.385 of 2009 and the

matter was referred to mediation and in the mediation a

settlement was arrived at on 29.01.2014 as evident from

Annexure A5 herein.         Clause No.3 of Anenxure A5 reads as

follows:

                     "3. That with this compromise the criminal
             case pending before the Judicial First Class
             Magistrate Court, Aluva as C.C No.1651/2009 has to
             be closed, if necessary, by the respondent moving
             the Hon'ble High Court of Kerala by invoking
             proceedings under Section 482 of the Criminal
             Procedure Code, to close the proceedings in the
             above case C.C No.1651/2009.

                   a) That the respondent has agreed that
                      the proceedings for the closure of C.C
                      No.1651/2009    will  be    taken   on
                      payment of the agreed amount, within
                      the period of 6 months and is not
                      postponing issue of closure of the
                      criminal proceedings to a date after 6
                      months on account of the assurance.

                   b) That the respondent will file affidavit,
                      if necessary, before the Hon'ble High
                      Court    enabling   closure   of   the
                      proceedings in the criminal case.

                   c) The respondent agrees not to initiate
                      any proceedings in connection with
                      the   criminal  case   C.C.1651/2009
                      during the above said period of 6
                      months."

Crl.M.C No.5978 of 2014           4



      Later, the payments due were made as per Annexure A6.

Third respondent has also filed an affidavit dated 16.10.2014

produced as Annexure A7 herein in this Crl.M.C stating that all

the disputes between the petitioners and the 3rd respondent had

been settled and she had received the amount payable by the

petitioners and that Annexure A6 is the receipt in that regard

and that she has no objection in this Crl.M.C being allowed and

the impugned criminal proceedings related to C.C No.1651 of

2009 on the file of Judicial First Class Magistrate Court - I, Aluva

being quashed including Annexure A4 order for further

investigation. It is in the background of these facts and

circumstances that the aforementioned Crl.M.C has been filed.

      3.    The Crl.M.C. has been admitted and Sri.K.R.Vinod has

taken notice for the 3rd respondent and the learned Public

Prosecutor has taken notice for the 1strespondent-State of Kerala

and 2nd respondent Sub Inspector of Police.

      4.    Heard Sri.Varghese Kuriakose, the learned counsel

appearing for the petitioners,     Sri.K.R.Vinod, learned counsel

appearing for 3rd respondent and the learned Public Prosecutor

appearing for the 1st and 2nd respondents.

Crl.M.C No.5978 of 2014         5



      5.    The learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted

that during the pendency of the aforementioned impugned

criminal proceedings, the matter has been settled amicably

between the parties, which is resulted in the subject matter of

the aforementioned crime/case and that the continuation of the

proceedings in the above case/crime will cause miscarriage of

justice to both parties as the real disputants to the case have

arrived at an amicable settlement and any further continuation

of the criminal proceedings will amount to sheer wastage of time

and money and would unnecessarily strain the financial,

administrative and financial resources of the State.

      6.    Sri.K.R.Vinod, the learned counsel appearing for the

3rd respondent, has submitted on the basis of the specific

instructions furnished by the 3rd respondent that the 3rd

respondent has amicably settled the disputes with the petitioners

and that she has no objection in the quashment of the impugned

criminal proceedings and that the complainant/victim/injured

does not intend to proceed any further against the petitioners as

she has no grievance against them and that she will not raise any

dispute/compliant in future if the prayer for quashing the

Crl.M.C No.5978 of 2014          6



impugned final report is allowed.

      7.    The learned Public Prosecutor also was heard, who

also has not raised any serious objections and submitted that this

court may consider the prayer in this case in the light of the law

well settled by the Apex Court in that regard.

      8.    After having carefully considered the submissions of

the parties and after having perused the pleadings as well as the

documents and materials placed in this matter, it can be seen

that the offences alleged are more or less personal in nature and

not much element of public interest is involved.       The crucial

aspect of the matter is that though such offences are involved,

the real disputants to the controversy which has led to the

impugned criminal proceedings, have actually arrived at an

amicable settlement of the matter. From the submissions made

by the learned counsel for the 3rd respondent, it is clear to the

court that the injured/victim/defacto complainant has no further

grievance against the petitioners/accused in the light of the

settlement arrived at by them. In this connection, it is relevant to

note the decision of the Apex Court in the case between Gian

Singh v. State of Punjab reported in 2013 (1) SCC (Cri) 160,

Crl.M.C No.5978 of 2014                 7



para 61 = (2012) 10 SCC 303 = 2012(4) KLT 108(SC), wherein

the Supreme Court has held as follows in para 61 thereof [See

SCC (Cri)]:

                  "61. The position that emerges from the above
         discussion can be summarised thus: the power of the
         High Court in quashing a criminal proceeding or FIR
         or complaint in exercise of its inherent jurisdiction is
         distinct and different from the power given to a
         criminal court for compounding the offences under
         S.320 of the Code. Inherent power is of wide plenitude
         with no statutory limitation but it has to be exercised
         in accord with the guideline engrafted in such power
         viz;(i) to secure the ends of justice or (ii) to prevent
         abuse of the process of any Court.        In what cases
         power to quash the criminal proceeding or complaint
         or F.I.R. may be exercised where the offender and
         victim have settled their dispute would depend on the
         facts and circumstances of each case and no category
         can be prescribed..

It is further held as follows:-

          "......... But the criminal cases having overwhelmingly
          and pre-dominatingly civil flavour stand on different
          footing for the purposes of quashing, particularly the
          offences          arising       from        commercial,
          financial,mercantile, civil, partnership or such like
          transactions or the offences arising out of matrimony
          relating to dowry etc. or the family disputes where the
          wrong is basically private or personal in nature and
          the parties have resolved their entire dispute. In this
          category of cases, High Court may quash criminal
          proceedings if in its view, because of the compromise
          between the offender and victim, the possibility of
          conviction is remote and bleak and continuation of
          criminal case would put accused to great oppression
          and prejudice and extreme injustice would be caused
          to him by not quashing the criminal case despite full
          and complete settlement and compromise with the
          victim........"

       Further, in the case Jitendra Raghuvanshi and Others v.

Crl.M.C No.5978 of 2014                8



Babita Raghuvanshi and another reported in (2013) 4 SCC

58 [see 2013 (1) KLD 817 (SC)], the Apex Court has held as

follows:-

                "8.    It is not in dispute that matrimonial
         disputes have been on considerable increase in recent
         times resulting in filing of complaints under Sections
         498A and 406 of I.P.C. not only against the husband
         but also against the relatives of the husband.       The
         question is when such matters are resolved either by
         the wife agreeing to rejoin the matrimonial home or
         by mutual settlement of other pending disputes for
         which both the sides approached the High Court and
         jointly   prayed   for   quashing     of   the   criminal
         proceedings or the FIR or complaint by the wife under
         Sections 498A and 406 of I.P.C., whether the prayer
         can be declined on the sole ground that since the
         offences are non-compoundable under Section 320 of
         the Code, it would be impermissible for the court to
         quash the criminal proceedings or FIR or complaint.

                9. It is not in dispute that in the case on hand
         subsequent to the filing of the criminal complaint
         under Sections 498A and 406 of IPC and Sections 3
         and 4 of the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961, with the
         help and intervention of family members, friends and
         well-wishers, the parties concerned have amicably
         settled their differences and executed a compromise/
         settlement. Pursuant thereto, the appellants filed the
         said compromise before the Trial Court with a request
         to place the same on record and to drop the criminal
         proceedings against the appellants herein. It is also
         not in dispute that in additional to the mutual
         settlement arrived at by the parties, respondent/-wife
         has also filed an affidavit stating that she did not wish
         to pursue the criminal proceedings against the
         appellants and fully supported the contents of the
         settlement deed. It is the grievance of the appellants
         that no only the Trial Court rejected such prayer of
         the parties but also the High Court failed toe exercise
         its jurisdiction under Section 482 of the Code only on
         the ground that the criminal proceedings relate to the
         offences punishable under Sections 498A and 406 of
         IPC which are non-compoundable in nature.

Crl.M.C No.5978 of 2014                9




                15. In our view, it is the duty of the Courts to
         encourage     genuine     settlements  of   matrimonial
         disputes,    particularly, when    the  same   are    on
         considerable increase. Even if the offences are non-
         compoundable, if they relate to matrimonial disputes
         and the Court is satisfied that the parties have settled
         the same amicably and without any pressure, we hold
         that for the purpose of securing ends of justice,
         Section 320 of the Code would not be a bar to the
         exercise of power of quashing of FIR, complaint or the
         subsequent criminal proceedings.


                16. There has been an outburst of matrimonial
         disputes in recent times. The institution of marriage
         occupies an important place and it has an important
         role to play in the society.    Therefore, every effort
         should be made in the interest of the individuals in
         order to enable them to settle down in life and live
         peacefully. If the parties ponder over their defaults
         and terminate their disputes amicably by mutual
         agreement instead of fighting it out in a Court of law,
         in order to do complete justice in the matrimonial
         matters, the Courts should be less hesitant in
         exercising its extraordinary jurisdiction. It is trite to
         state that the power under Section 482 should be
         exercised sparingly and with circumspection only
         when the Court is convinced, on the basis of material
         on record, that allowing the proceedings to continue
         would be an abuse of the process of the Court or that
         the ends of justice require that the proceedings ought
         to be quashed."

         9. Considering the facts and circumstances of this case,

it is seen further that the impugned criminal proceedings have

arisen consequent to the matrimonial disputes between the

disputants and the disputes have been settled amicably between

the parties. Accordingly, this Court is inclined to hold that in the

Crl.M.C No.5978 of 2014         10



light of the facts and circumstances involved in the present case

and particularly in view of the settlement arrived at between the

parties, the principles laid down in the aforementioned decisions

of the Apex Court will be squarely applicable in the present case.

Moreover, since the real disputants to the controversy have

amicably settled the disputes, which led to these impugned

criminal proceedings, it is also the duty of the court to promote

such settlement, instead of compelling the parties to go on with

the dispute. It is also pertinent to note that since the matter is

settled out of court, in the event of proceeding with the trial,

there may not be any fruitful prosecution and the chances of

conviction of the accused is rather negligible and therefore, the

net result of continuance of criminal proceedings would be sheer

waste of judicial time rather meaningless and therefore would

amount to abuse of the process of court proceedings in the

larger sense. Hence following decisions of the Apex Court cited

supra, this Court is inclined to hold that the Crl.M.C. can be

allowed by granting the prayers sought for.

         In the result, the Crl.M.C. is allowed and the impugned

Annexure A3 final report/ Charge Sheet in the impugned

Crl.M.C No.5978 of 2014         11



Annexure A2 FIR in Crime No.582 of 2009 of Thrikkakkara

Police Station, which has led to the institution of C.C No.1651 of

2009 of Judicial First Class Magistrate Court - Aluva, and

Annexure A4 order for further investigation and all further

proceedings arising therefrom stands quashed. The petitioners

shall produce certified copies of this order before the court

below concerned as well as before the Station House Officer,

Thrikkakkara Police Station.




                              ALEXANDER THOMAS, JUDGE.

vdv



