
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALAAT ERNAKULAM

                                PRESENT:

               THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE K.T.SANKARAN
                                    &
                  THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE P.D.RAJAN

       TUESDAY,THE 16TH DAYOF SEPTEMBER 2014/25TH BHADRA, 1936

                         AS.No. 93 of 2000 (D)


    AGAINST THE JUDGMENT IN OS.NO.82/1997 OF SUB COURT, THIRUVALLA
                             DATED 27-02-1999


APPELLANT:PLAINTIFF

     T.A.JAYAPRABHA, W/O.VIJAYAN,
     RESIDING AT KAVIRAYIL VEEDU,
     MEENTHALAKKARA MURI,
     KUTTAPPUZHA VILLAGE,
     THIRUVALLA TALUK.

      BY ADV. SRI.S.V.BALAKRISHNA IYER (SR.)

RESPONDENT: DEFENDANT:

     P.K.VIJAYAN,
     RESIDING AT PUTHUPARAMBIL.,
     AMALLOOR MURI,
     KUTTAPPUZHA VILLAGE,
     THIRUVALLA TALUK.

     BY ADV. SRI.SATHISH NINAN
     BY ADV. SRI.SANTHOSH MATHEW

      THIS APPEAL SUITS HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD ON 16-09-2014, THE
COURT ON THE SAME DAY DELIVERED THE FOLLOWING:

           C.M.P.NO.6294/1999 IN A.S.NO.93/2000

                   DISMISSED

                     SD/- K.T.SANKARAN, JUDGE

  16/09/2014         SD/-P.D.RAJAN, JUDGE



                      //TRUE COPY//



AHZ/


                K.T.SANKARAN & P.D.RAJAN, JJ.
              ----------------------------------------------------
                       A.S. NO. 93 OF 2000 (D)
              ----------------------------------------------------
           Dated this the 16th day of September, 2014


                             JUDGMENT

K.T.Sankaran, J.


      The plaintiff in O.S.No.82 of 1997 on the file of the Court of the

Subordinate Judge of Thiruvalla is the appellant. The suit was filed

by the appellant for realisation of the value of 342 grams of gold

ornaments and `50,000/- from the defendant.



      2. The marriage between the plaintiff and the defendant took

place on 16.3.1983 and two children were born in that wedlock. The

case of the plaintiff is that she was given ornaments weighing 35

sovereigns at the time of her marriage.           Thereafter, on different

occasions, gold ornaments were given to her either by way of gift or

by purchase. The defendant took all the ornaments making her

believe that the same should be deposited in a bank locker.

According to the plaintiff, the gold ornaments were misappropriated

by the defendant. The plaintiff also alleged that on the demand

A.S. NO. 93 OF 2000 (D)

                                     :: 2 ::

made by the defendant, a sum of `50,000/- was paid by the plaintiff

to the defendant on 6.6.1990, she having obtained the amount from

her father. It was alleged in the plaint that the amount was given by

the plaintiff's father as her share.



       3.   The defendant disputed the case of the plaintiff that

ornaments weighing 35 sovereigns were given at the time of

marriage. He also contended that he did not misappropriate the

gold ornaments. He also stated that he did not receive `50,000/-

from the plaintiff as alleged. The defendant contended that a few

days before the marriage, the plaintiff's father had borrowed from the

defendant a sum of `30,000/- towards marriage expenses.            The

defendant also contended that the plaintiff's father had no financial

capability to provide 35 sovereigns of gold to his daughter at the time

of marriage.



       4. After Ext.A9 was caused to be produced at the instance of

the plaintiff, the defendant admitted that ornaments were given to the

plaintiff at the time of marriage.     It is also proved and it is not

A.S. NO. 93 OF 2000 (D)

                                      :: 3 ::

disputed now that `30,000/- borrowed by the plaintiff's father was

duly repaid to the defendant.



       5. Before the court below PW1 to PW5 were examined and

Exts.A1 to A9 were marked on the side of the plaintiff. DW1 to DW4

were examined and Exts.B1 to B6 were marked on the side of the

defendant. Ext.X1 was marked as third party exhibit.



       6. The court below did not arrive at any specific finding as to

whether the defendant misappropriated the gold ornaments

belonging to the plaintiff. However, the court below held thus:

             "Assuming that the plaintiff is entitled to recover

       the value of ornaments, she had to act within limitation.

       Under Article 91 clause (b), the limitation of 3 years has

       to be reckoned from the date when the ornaments is

       wrongfully taken."

The court below held that the plaintiff knew that the ornaments were

misappropriated by the defendant in 1992 and therefore, the suit

filed in 1996 is barred by limitation.

A.S. NO. 93 OF 2000 (D)

                                       :: 4 ::

       7. On a fair reading of the pleadings and evidence, it is clear

that the case of the plaintiff is that the gold ornaments were given as

dowry. It is well settled by the decisions of this Court in Scariah

Varghese v. Marykutty (1991 (2) KLT 71); Chacko v. Annamma

(1993 (1) KLT 675) and Swapna v. Thankavelu (1990 (2) KLT 604)

that suit for return of dowry would not be barred by any period of

limitation.



       8. In Scariah Varghese v. Marykutty (1991 (2) KLT 71), it

was held thus:

              "7.  Counsel for the appellant submitted that the

       suit is barred by limitation. This aspect of the matter

       also has been considered in 1980 KLT 353 (Mary v.

       Cherchi & others). The Court said thus:--


              "The character of the Streedhanam being in the nature
       of a payment in trust and a suit for recovery of that amount
       is not governed by any specific article of the Limitation Act,
       the residuary Art.113 will apply. The period starts from the
       time the right to sue accrues. A right to sue in this case is
       equivalent to the cause of action".

A.S. NO. 93 OF 2000 (D)

                                     :: 5 ::



     Of course, in the Full Bench case reported in 1972 KLT

     24 (Commissioner of Incometax, Kerala v. P.M.Paily

     Pillai) the Court has found that the residuary Article is

     applicable and also found that the starting point of

     limitation is the cause of action itself and the cause of

     action is the demand for the dowry by the wife. Counsel

     submitted that there was no previous demand. Even if

     there was no previous demand, the plaint itself can be

     considered as a demand and if I calculate the period for

     limitation from the date of suit, there is absolutely no

     difficulty to say that the suit is not barred by limitation.

     But I feel that it is not a correct statement that the dowry

     would only part take the nature of a trust amount. True

     under the Trust Act, there are certain obligations which

     are in the nature of trust and certainly without any other

     statutory provision the amount given as dowry will

     legitimately assume the character and nature of trust in

     the hands of any person other than the person entitled

     to the amount, viz., the wife. Of course for recovery of a

     trust amount no period of limitation is prescribed. But I

     feel that by virtue of the Dowry Prohibition Act, the

     statute itself says that the amounts in the hands of the

     husband or the husband's parents for and on behalf of

     the wife is a trust amount and so there is no difficulty to

A.S. NO. 93 OF 2000 (D)

                                       :: 6 ::

       say that the obligation is not only in the nature of a trust,

       but the obligation is one under trust to return the amount

       by virtue of the statutory provision and so there is no

       limitation for such a suit.        So I find that there is

       absolutely no merit in the contention advanced by

       counsel on the basis that the suit is barred by limitation.

       I reject that contention."



In view of the settled legal position, the finding of the court below

that the suit is barred by limitation is unsustainable.



      9. The case of the plaintiff that the defendant took `50,000/-

from the plaintiff, was not accepted by the court below.            The

evidence of the plaintiff as PW1 and the evidence of PW4 were

considered by the court below in paragraph 9 of the judgment and it

was held that the claim for return of `50,000/- is unsustainable. We

have gone through the averments in the plaint and written statement

as well as the oral evidence of PW1 and PW4 in this regard. We are

of the view that the court below was right in holding that the plaintiff

is not entitled to get a decree for return of `50,000/- as claimed in

the plaint.

A.S. NO. 93 OF 2000 (D)

                                    :: 7 ::




       10. On the finding that the suit is not barred by limitation, we

are of the view that the matter requires a remand to the court below

for a fresh disposal. The court below having not arrived at any

specific finding as to the case of the parties with respect to the

alleged misappropriation of gold ornaments, we do not think it proper

to examine that question for the first time in this appeal. Therefore,

we remand the case to the trial court for fresh disposal on the

question whether the plaintiff is entitled to get a decree for the value

of the gold ornaments allegedly misappropriated by the defendant.

Since the parties have adduced oral evidence, it is not necessary to

allow them to adduce further evidence in the matter. It is made clear

that we have confirmed the finding of the trial court in paragraph 9 of

the judgment with respect to the claim for `50,000/- made by the

plaintiff.



       11. Accordingly, the appeal is allowed in part, the judgment

and decree of the court below to the extent indicated above are set

aside and the case is remanded to the trial court for fresh disposal

A.S. NO. 93 OF 2000 (D)

                                   :: 8 ::

with respect to the matters mentioned above. Since the suit is a

very old one, the trial court shall dispose of the suit on or before

15.1.2015.



      Proportionate court fee with respect to the matter now

remanded (court fee with respect to item 1 shown in the valuation in

the plaint) shall be refunded to the appellant.   The parties shall

appear before the court below on 27.10.2014.




                                           (K.T.SANKARAN)
                                                 Judge




                                             (P.D.RAJAN)
                                                 Judge
ahz/



