
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                   PRESENT:

                     THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE ALEXANDER THOMAS

               FRIDAY, THE 24TH DAY OF OCTOBER 2014/2ND KARTHIKA, 1936

                                       Bail Appl..No. 7239 of 2014 ()
                                           -------------------------------
  CRIME NO. 731/2014 OF ERUMAPETTY POLICE STATION , THRISSUR DISTRICT
                                       ------------------------

APPLICANT/ACCUSED:
---------------------------------------

            SANTHOSH,AGED 38 YEARS,
            S/O VELU, VENGILASSERY HOUSE,
            VELUR, THRISSUR DISTRICT.

            BY ADVS.SRI.P.SANTHOSH (PODUVAL)
                          SMT.R.RAJITHA
                          SRI.K.D.SREEVISAKH

RESPONDENT/STATE:
---------------------------------------

            STATE OF KERALA,
            REPRESENTED BY THE PUBLIC PROSECUTOR,
            HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM .

             BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SRI.DHANESH MATHEW MANJOORAN

            THIS BAIL APPLICATION HAVING COME UP FOR ADMISSION
            ON 24-10-2014, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE
            FOLLOWING:




sts


                  ALEXANDER THOMAS, J.
           =========================
                    B.A No.7239 of 2014
         ============================
          Dated this the 24th day of October, 2014

                             ORDER


      Petitioner is the sole accused in Crime No.731 of 2014 of

Erumapetty    Police   Station,   Thrissur   district for   offences

registered under Sections 306 and 498A of Indian Penal Code. As

he is apprehending arrest in the above crime he has filed this

application for anticipatory bail under Section 438 of the Code of

Criminal Procedure.

      2. The gist of the prosecution allegation raised against the

petitioner on the basis of the first information lodged by the sister

of the deceased lady is that the petitioner had harassed his wife,

who is the deceased, demanding more dowry and that on

17.07.2014 at about 8:45 p.m she had attempted to commit

suicide by pouring diesel on her body and set fire herself and later

succumbed to the injuries on 21.07.2014.

      3.   Sri.Santhosh P Poduval, learned counsel for the

petitioner, would submit that the petitioner is a carpenter by

profession and that the allegations are falsely foisted against him

at the instance of the sister of the deceased and that he has not in

B.A No.7239 of 2014             2



any way given any occasion to harass his wife in any manner and

that his wife had repeatedly requested him to help her parents

by giving money for the conduct of the marriage of her sister,

and that he could not afford this because he had no option and

he refused the request and this caused some difference of

opinion between him and his wife and that his wife's sister was

under the impression that the marriage could not taken place

because of the fact that they could not get the money expected

from the petitioner. The learned counsel for the petitioner would

further strongly submit that the police had recorded the

statement of the deceased, as she was hospitalized for about four

days after the incident and the deceased had given a statement

to the police that she had committed this action only to play a

trick on her husband, in order to create an apprehension in his

mind and that the petitioner is innocent in the incident which

related to setting herself of fire. The learned counsel for the

petitioner would also submit that it is now learnt reliably that the

jurisdictional Magistrate concerned had also recorded the

statement of the deceased under Section 164(3) of the Code of

Criminal Procedure, when she was hospitalized and before her

death wherein also it is recorded by the Magistrate that the

B.A No.7239 of 2014               3



deceased has stated that she had done this only to create an

apprehension in the mind of the petitioner and that the

petitioner is actually innocent of any blame in the incident in

question and that it is only thereafter that the deceased had

succumbed to the injuries and died on 21.07.2014.         In this

background, the learned counsel for the petitioner would

strongly urge that this Court may grant pre-arrest bail to the

petitioner in this case and that the petitioner undertakes to

comply with any stringent conditions imposed by this court in

order to protect the interest of the prosecution.

      4. The learned Public Prosecutor would submit that the

investigation is almost complete and that the deceased had given

statement not only to the police but also to the jurisdictional

Magistrate under Section 164(3) of the Code of Criminal

Procedure stating that she had done the act in order to create an

apprehension in the mind of the petitioner and that the

petitioner is innocent of any blame in the incident in question.

Learned Public Prosecutor would further submit that in case this

Court is inclined to grant anticipatory bail to the petitioner, it

may be subject to sufficient safeguards so as to safeguard the

interest of the prosecution.

B.A No.7239 of 2014                4



      5.    Having considered the submissions of the learned

counsel for the petitioner and the learned Public Prosecutor and

evaluating the totality of the facts and circumstances of this

case, this Court is inclined to grant anticipatory bail to the

petitioner, but, with sufficient safeguards so as to protect the

interest of the prosecution.

        Accordingly, it is ordered that in the event of the arrest of

the petitioner in connection with Crime No.731 of 2014 of

Erumapetty Police Station, Thrissur district, he shall be released

on bail on his executing bond for Rs.35,000/- (Rupees Thirty Five

Thousand Only) with two solvent sureties each for the like

amount to the satisfaction of the investigating officer in the

aforementioned crime, and subject to the following conditions:



               i)  The petitioner shall surrender his
                   passport,   if  any,       before   the
                   jurisdictional Magistrate    concerned
                   within three days from the execution of
                   the bail bond before the Investigating
                   Officer and if he is not a holder of
                   passport, he shall file an affidavit to
                   that effect in the said court.   If the
                   petitioner requires his passport in
                   connection with his travel abroad, then
                   he shall approach the court concerned
                   for the release of the same and for
                   necessary permission in that regard. In
                   case such an application is filed, the
                   trial  court   or   the   jurisdictional

B.A No.7239 of 2014                  5



                    Magistrate concerned, as the case may
                    be, is free to consider the same on
                    merits and to pass appropriate orders
                    thereon, taking necessary guidance
                    from the principles laid down in the
                    decision of this Court in the case Asok
                    Kumar v State of Kerala, (2009(2)
                    KLT    712),     notwithstanding     the
                    aforementioned conditions imposed by
                    this Court.


               ii) The petitioner shall not involve in any
                    criminal offence of similar nature.

               iii) The petitioner shall not influence the
                    witnesses or shall not tamper or
                    attempt to tamper evidence in any
                    manner whatsoever.

               iv) The petitioner shall fully co-operate
                    with the investigation and report before
                    the Investigating Officer as and when
                    required by him.


            If the petitioner fails to comply with any of the

aforementioned conditions, the bail granted to him is liable to be

cancelled.



                                   ALEXANDER THOMAS, JUDGE.

vdv



