
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                        PRESENT:

                  THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE C.T.RAVIKUMAR

     MONDAY, THE 15TH DAY OF DECEMBER 2014/24TH AGRAHAYANA, 1936

                              Crl.MC.No. 1871 of 2013 ()
                                ---------------------------
        (CC 291/2013 of JUDICIAL 1ST CLASS MAGISTRATE, CHAVAKKAD
       CRIME NO. 1299/2012 OF CHAVAKKAD POLICE STATION , TRISSUR)

PETITIONERS/ACCUSED NOS.2 TO 5:
----------------------------------------

       1. REGHUNATH
          CHAKKAMKANDATH PANDARIKKAL HOUSE
          CHAKKAMKANDAM DESOM.

       2. PREMALATHA
          W/O.REGHUNATH RESIDING DO

       3. ANITHA, RESIDING DO


       4. PUSHPANAND, RESIDING DO


         BY ADV. M.PREMCHAND

RESPONDENTS/COMPLAINANT/STATE:
------------------------------------------

       1. SUNENA SUDHEER, AGED 29 YEARS
         D/O.SUDHEER BABU, PADATH HOUSE, CHAMMUNDESWARI ROAD
         GURUVAYOOR - 680 101.

       2. SUB INSPECTOR OF POLICE
         CHAVAKKAD POLICE STATION - 680 506.

       3. STATE REP.BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR,
          HIGH COURT OF KERALA
          ERNAKULAM - 682 031.

         R2 & R3 BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SRI JUSTIN JACOB

         THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD ON
15-12-2014, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE FOLLOWING:

Crl.MC.No. 1871 of 2013 ()
---------------------------

                                 APPENDIX

PETITIONERS' EXHIBITS
---------------------------

ANNEXURE I: TRUE COPY OF THE FIRST INFORMATION REPORT

ANNEXURE II: TRUE COPY OF THE FINAL REPORT

RESPONDENTS' EXHIBITS: NIL
----------------------------




                                // TRUE COPY //


TKS


                                                  P.S. TO JUDGE


                         C.T.RAVIKUMAR, J.
                     ------------------------------
                      Crl.M.C.No.1871 of 2013
                     -------------------------------
                     Dated 15th December, 2014

                                 ORDER

           This petition under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal

Procedure has been filed seeking quashment of Annexure I FIR,

Annexure II final report and all further proceedings pursuant thereto, in

C.C.No.291 2013 on the files of the Court of Judicial First Class

Magistrate, Chavakkad. The case on hand is one where allegations of

harassment by close relatives of the husband have been raised

unwarrantly in a dispute between the couple to give colour and vigour.

A narration of the facts in succinct, necessary for the disposal of this

case would unravel the aforesaid position.




           2. The first accused in the above calender case and the first

respondent herein are husband and wife.            Their marriage was

solemnised at Guruvayoor Sree Krishna Temple as per the custom

prevalent in Hindu Community, on 9.9.2010. After the marriage the

couple lived in the matrimonial home for a very few days and thereafter

they went to Gulf Countries, on 27.9.2010, in connection with their

employment.       The first respondent, the wife of the first accused

Crl.M.C.1871/2013                    2


thereafter complained that she was subjected to cruelty by her husband

and his close relatives and complaint in that regard was lodged at

Guruvayoor Police Station, on 19.10.2012. Since the first respondent

resides within the jurisdiction of Chavakkad Police Station it was

transmitted to the said police station and thereafter she was summoned

to take further statement. Accordingly, she gave Annexure-II statement

on 5.11.2012. Based on the said statement given by her on 5.11.2012

Crime No.1299 of 2012 was registered against her husband and the

petitioners herein. Petitioners 1 to 3 herein respectively are the father,

mother and sister of the husband of the first respondent and the 4th

petitioner is the husband of the 3rd petitioner. Subsequently, cognizance

was taken and it was registered and numbered as C.C.No.291 of 2013 on

the files of the Court of Judicial First Class Magistrate, Chavakkad. The

petitioners herein are accused Nos.2 to 5 therein. The first accused is

the husband of the first respondent, the defacto complainant. Annexure-

I is the FIR registered in the said crime and Annexure-II is the final

report along with other statements and documents filed in the aforesaid

crime. Going by the allegations in Annexure-I FIR the marriage between

the first accused and the defacto complainant/the first respondent was

conducted on 9.9.2010 in accordance with the religious rites and while

they were living as husband and wife in Gulf Countries and also at the

matrimonial home of the first respondent at Chakkamkandath accused 1

Crl.M.C.1871/2013                  3


to 5 told them that gold and money were not adequately given and

demanded more money and for making her to bring more gold and

money that purpose subjected her to cruelty, both mentally and

physically.   Virtually, Annexure-II contains Annexure-I FIR, the final

report and all other documents in connection with the aforesaid crime

including the seizure mahazar, the statement dated 5.11.2012 recorded

from the first respondent and the other statements and documents.

Conspicuously, the statement of the first respondent allegedly recorded

on 19.10.2012 by Guruvayoor Police is not included in Annexure-II.

Going by the allegations in the statement recorded from her dated

5.11.2012 which actually led to the registration of the aforesaid crime

the marriage between the first accused and the first respondent was held

at Guruvayoor Sree Krishna Temple in accordance with the Hindu

religious rites on 9.9.2010. The marriage was registered at Guruvayoor

Municipality on 14.9.2010. In fact, the said marriage was bigamy as

regards the first accused and also the first respondent.    It is further

stated therein that at the time of marriage the parents of the first

respondent gave 125 sovereigns of gold ornaments and on the third day

of their marriage the first accused and the petitioners herein compelled

her to put all the gold ornaments in the locker. According to the first

respondent, she told them that there is no need to take a locker as her

father got a locker in a bank and later, she was made to hand over 111

Crl.M.C.1871/2013                  4


sovereigns of gold ornaments to the husband and his parents for the

purpose of starting Agricultural and Chicken Farms. Even according to

the first respondent, on 27.9.2010 she left for Gulf Countries along with

her husband, the first accused. It is also her allegation that at that point

of time, for the purpose of changing the sponsorship the husband

obtained ` 25,000 from her. She alleges that after returning to Gulf

Countries her husband remained idle and he did not go for any job. The

further allegations are thus:-

             The first respondent obtained a job in an American Company

for a salary of 9500 Dirham and she used to give ` 1,00,000 to her

husband for the purpose of sending it to his parents. In the meanwhile,

she became pregnant. The husband had not given any consideration

even then and continued to torture her physically and mentally. After

the birth of a son, for the purpose of conducting a ritualistic function of

their son they came back to the native place and she had to borrow an

amount of 10000 Dirham from her sister Aparna for the purpose. When

she demanded return of the gold ornaments entrusted with the husband

for the purpose of arranging the amount she borrowed from her sister,

the first accused and in-laws treated her cruelly.    She was locked in a

room and she was not given any food. On 15.11.2011 the mother-in-law,

the second petitioner herein pulled her hands while she was feeding the

child. The allegation about the mother-in-law in Annexure-II reads thus:-

Crl.M.C.1871/2013                   5




          "15.11.2011 `L WOY](V kLsV RWLaO>O RWL:]qOP yopU
          n>Lv] AZ I Wa]$ k]a]\O               vs](OWpOU `
                  NYL
                          ,                          
                                                          
                      '                         
                                  ,  
                   mf}        
                                     ."



The allegation against the 4th petitioner, the brother-in-law of the first

respondent is that on 16.1.2012 while they were in the Gulf Countries he

came to their flat and picked up a quarrel with her for not transferring

the registration certificate of her car in the name of her husband. The

allegation against him in Annexure-II reads thus:-




          "16.1.2012                                   
          flat-                                n>Lv]
                                                            
          "  Rsf      
                     "        ."



True that, against the first accused, the husband, the first respondent

had raised various allegations.       Since he is not a party to this

proceedings I do not propose to make any observation with respect to

them. At the same time, a scanning of Annexure-II and the statement

Crl.M.C.1871/2013                     6


recorded from the first respondent dated 5.11.2012 would reveal that

the only specific allegations raised against the 2nd and 4th petitioners are

as extracted above.       A careful scrutiny of Annexure-II complaint would

reveal that there is absolute absence of any specific allegation against

the 1st and 3rd petitioners who are respectively the father-in-law and

sister-in-law of the first respondent.         It is based on the aforesaid

complaint that Crime No.1299 of 2012            was registered at Chavakkad

Police Station under Section 498A read with Section 34 of the Indian

Penal Code against the petitioners and the first accused.




             3. As noticed hereinbefore, this Crl.M.C. has been filed

seeking quashment of Annexure-I F.I.R., Annexure-II final report and all

further proceedings pursuant thereto, in the aforementioned calendar

case.    It is the contention of the petitioners that even if the entire

allegations revealed from Annexures-I and II are taken in their entirety

they would not constitute an offence under Section 498A as against

them. Petitioners 1 and 2 are the aged parents of the first accused, the

3rd petitioner is his sister and the 4th petitioner is the husband of the third

petitioner. It is their contention that they were unnecessarily dragged in

the proceedings with an ulterior motive on the part of the first

respondent. It is also their case that the crime was registered against

them without properly analysing the statement and according to them,

Crl.M.C.1871/2013                   7


based on the statement recorded from the first respondent on 5.11.2012

they would not have been implicated in the aforesaid crime. This case

was admitted on 7.5.2013 and notice was issued to the first respondent.

Though notice was served on the first respondent she did not choose to

enter appearance to resist the case.




             4. I have heard the learned counsel for the petitioners and

also the learned Public Prosecutor.




             5. After referring to the allegations contained in the

statement made by the first respondent on 5.11.2012 which formed the

basis for the registration of the aforesaid crime the learned counsel for

the petitioners contended that continuance of the criminal prosecution

against them based on Annexures I and II would tantamount to abuse of

process of court.    It is further contended that a bare perusal of the

allegations therein would reveal that they are not sufficient to constitute

an offence under Section 498A IPC and in fact, they were implicated as

accused only with a view to harass them. There is absolute absence of

any specific allegation in Annexure-II.        In the said context, the

petitioners relied on a decision of the Hon'ble Apex Court in Preethi

Gupta v. State of Jharkhand ((2010) 7 SCC 667). That was a case

wherein the complainant Manisha Poddar was married to Kamal Poddar

Crl.M.C.1871/2013                   8


at Kanpur and their marriage was held on 10.12.2006.          Immediately

after their marriage she left for Mumbai along with her husband. On

reaching there she joined at Tata Consultancy Services, Mumbai. Later,

she filed a complaint on 8.7.2007 alleging commission of offences under

sections 498-A, 406, 341, 323 and 120-B of the Indian Penal Code read

with sections 3 and 4 of the Dowry Prohibition Act against all immediate

relations of her husband. Subsequently, the learned Judicial Magistrate

took cognizance and passed an order summoning them. The appellants

in that case approached the High Court seeking quashment of the

complaint contending that no specific allegations were raised against

them and therefore, they ought not have been summoned. The High

Court of Bombay declined to interfere with the complaint and it is in the

said circumstances that the Crl. Appeal was preferred before he Hon'ble

Apex Court. The Hon'ble Apex Court considered the question whether

High Court was justified in not exercising its inherent powers under

Section 482 Cr.P.C. in the facts and circumstances of the case. Taking

note of the factual situation obtained in that case the Hon'ble Apex Court

observed that consistently the Apex Court has been taking the view that

the extraordinary power under Section 482 Cr.P.C. has to be used to

prevent injustice and also to secure ends of justice. After referring to

various judicial authorities including the judgments in R.P.Kapur v.

State of Punjab (AIR 1960 SC 866), State of Karnataka v.

Crl.M.C.1871/2013                  9


L.Muniswamy and Others ((1977) 2 SCC 699), Madhu Limaye v.

The State of Maharashtra ((1977) 4 SCC 551),                    Madhavrao

Jiwajirao Scindla and Others v. Sambhajirao Chandrojirao Angre

and Others ((1988) 1 SCC 692), State of Haryana and Others v.

Bhajan Lal and Others (1992 Supp. (1) SCC 335) and G.Sagar Suri

and Another v. State of UP and Others ((2000) 2 SCC 636) the

Hon'ble Apex Court restated the consistent and constant view in regard

to the subject of exercise of the powers under Section 482 Cr.P.C. The

Apex Court further opined that it is common knowledge that

unfortunately matrimonial litigation has been rapidly increasing in our

country and it is a matter of common experience that most of the

complaints under Section 498-A IPC are filed in the heat of the moment

over trivial issues without proper deliberations. It is also observed that

at the time of filing of most of the complaints the implications and

consequences are not properly visualized by the complainants and

therefore, such complaints could lead to insurmountable harassment,

agony and pain to the complainant, accused and his close relations. It

was further held that the ultimate object of justice is to find out the truth

and punish the guilty and protect the innocent. To find out the truth is a

herculean task in majority of the complaints. The tendency of implicating

husband and all his immediate relations is also not uncommon.            The

allegations of harassment of husband's close relations who had been

Crl.M.C.1871/2013                  10


living in different cities and had never visited the place where the

complainant resided would have an entirely different complexion, it is

observed. After making detailed consideration of such aspects and the

relevant authorities, in the light of the facts obtained in that case, the

Hon'ble Apex court held that it would unfair to compel the appellants to

undergo the rigmarole of a criminal trial and thought it fit to quash the

complaint against the appellants. Consequently, the order of the trial

court was set aside and the appeal was allowed. The learned counsel for

the appellants contended that the facts obtained in that case is more or

less the same as obtained in this case. It is contended by the learned

counsel that even going by the contention of the first respondent the

marriage between herself and the first accused was solemnised on

9.9.2010 and on 27.9.2010 itself she left for Gulf Countries along with

her husband. Thus, it is evident that immediately after the marriage she

lived in the matrimonial home hardly for a very few days and thereafter,

left for Gulf Countries along with her husband.         According to the

statement recorded from her on 5.11.2012 she came back to India and

to the native place thereafter, for the purpose of performing a ritualistic

function of her son in 2011. The only allegation which she raised against

the mother-in-law, the 2nd petitioner is that on 15.11.2011 while the

child was being fed with milk she pulled her hands.         The allegation

against the brother-in-law, the 4th petitioner is that while she was living

Crl.M.C.1871/2013                   11


along with her husband in the Gulf Countries on 16.1.2012 he came to

the flat and quarrelled with her for not changing the documents of a car

registered in her name in favour of her husband. The said allegations in

Annexure-II have been extracted earlier. A scanning of the said

averments would undoubtedly reveal that they cannot be treated as

incidents of cruelty so as to form basis for accusation of offence under

Section 498-A IPC against the 2nd and 4th petitioners and consequently,

the basis of prosecution against them. A perusal of the said statement

dated 5.11.2012 would reveal that no specific allegations were made

against the 1st and 3rd petitioners who are none other than father-in-law

and sister-in-law of the first respondent.    In fact, there is absolute

absence of any allegation against the sister-in-law. The learned counsel

for the petitioners submitted that the father-in-law of the first

respondent is presently aged 72 and he is afflicted with renal cancer.

Evidently, the 3rd petitioner is residing with her husband and there is

absolute absence of any specific allegation against her in Annexure-II.

Despite such facts evidently, they were dragged into those proceedings

and they were made to face a criminal prosecution. As regards the 2nd

and 4th petitioners, who are respectively the mother-in-law and the

brother-in-law of the first respondent, I have already adverted to the

allegations made by the first respondent in the statement given by her.

True that some vague allegations have been raised by her that

Crl.M.C.1871/2013                  12


immediately after the marriage viz., on the 3rd day itself the parents of

the first accused and her husband himself asked her to place all the gold

ornaments in the locker of a bank. Though the learned counsel for the

petitioners has drawn the attention of this Court to the photographs

allegedly sent by the first respondent herself available in page Nos.35 to

51 of the memorandum of criminal miscellaneous case I do not think it

necessary to look into and make comments on them. I am of the view

that the views expressed by the Hon'ble Apex Court in the decision in

Preethi Gupta's case (supra) would squarely apply to the facts of this

case. A scanning of the allegations as aforementioned would reveal that

the allegations of harassment by the petitioners were made without any

basis and even if they are taken in their entirety as true and correct they

would not constitute an offence under Section 498 IPC, as against them.

It is sad that the father-in-law who is now a septuagenarian and ailing

from the dreaded disease of cancer is drawn unnecessarily to the

litigation. It may be true that the bickering between the husband and

wife has reached up to a stage making them difficult to live under the

same roof and they may be inclined to part their ways. But, that cannot

be a reason for unnecessarily dragging the close relations of the husband

and making them to face criminal proceedings. Without stating anything

regarding the circumstances the only allegation raised against the

mother-in-law is that she pulled the hands of the first respondent while

Crl.M.C.1871/2013                   13


she was giving milk to her son.         The allegation raised against the

brother-in-law, the 4th petitioner is also a silly one. It is not discernible

from the allegations as to what made him, if at all he made, to say that

the documents of the car should be given in favour of the first accused,

the husband of the first respondent.       No other allegations are raised

against him. In such circumstances, in view of the legal principles set

out in the decision of the Hon'ble Apex Court in Preethi Gupta's case

(supra) I am of the view that it would be absolutely unfair to compel the

petitioners to face the trial. In the interest of justice termination of the

criminal prosecution against them by invoking the inherent jurisdiction is

called for.




             In the result, this Crl.M.C. is allowed. Annexure-I FIR and

Annexure-II final report and all further proceedings against the

petitioners who are accused Nos.2 to 5 in C.C.No.291 2013 pending

before the Court of Judicial First Class Magistrate, Chavakkad are

quashed.




                                                   Sd/-
                                           C.T.RAVIKUMAR
                                                 Judge
TKS



