
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                       PRESENT:

               THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE ALEXANDER THOMAS

       THURSDAY, THE 30TH DAY OF OCTOBER 2014/8TH KARTHIKA, 1936

                               Crl.MC.No.6143 of 2014
                                ---------------------------
                     CC 2630/2014 of J.M.F.C.-I, CHENGANNUR

PETITIONERS/ACCUSED 1 TO 4:
------------------------------------

       1. RATHEESH R.NAIR, AGED 30 YEARS,
         S/O.RAVEENDRAN NAIR, RATHEESH BHAVANAM
         THIRUVANVANDOOR.P.O., ALAPPUZHA DISTRICT.

       2. REMYA R.NAIR, AGED 26 YEARS,
         W/O.RAJESH, RATHEESH BHAVANAM, THIRUVANVANDOOR.P.O.
         ALAPPUZHA DISTRICT.

       3. RAVEENDRAN NAIR, AGED 60 YEARS
         S/O.RAGHAVAN PILLAI, RATHEESH BHAVANAM
         THIRUVANVANDOOR. P.O., ALAPPUZHA DISTRICT.

       4. RADHAMANI, AGED 50 YEARS,
         W/O.RAVEENDRAN NAIR, RATHEESH BHAVANAM
         THIRUVANVANDOOR.P.O., ALAPPUZHA DISTRICT.

         BY ADV. SRI.P.VINODKUMAR

RESPONDENTS/COMPLAINANTS:
-------------------------------------

       1. THE STATE OF KERALA
         REP. BY THE PUBLIC PROSECUTOR, HIGH COURT OF KERALA
         ERNAKULAM. 682 031.

       2. SARANYA CHANDRAN, AGED 22 YEARS
         D/O.CHANDRAN, SHREYAS HOUSE, VENMONY.P.O.
         ALAPPUZHA. 689 101.

         R2 BY ADV.SRI.T.C.SANTHILAL
         R1 BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SRI.R.GITHESH

         THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD ON 30-10-
       2014, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE FOLLOWING:

Crl.MC.No. 6143 of 2014
---------------------------

                                  APPENDIX

PETITIONER(S)' EXHIBITS:
-------------------------------

ANNEXURE A1- CERTIFIED COPY OF THE FINAL REPORT IN C.C.NO.2630/14
PENDING BEFORE THE J.F.M.C-I, CHENGANNUR.

ANNEXURE A2- TRUE COPY OF THE AGREEMENT DATED 9.4.2014.

ANNEXURE A3- AFFIDAVIT SWORN BY THE 2ND RESPONDENT.


RESPONDENT(S)' EXHIBITS:              NIL
--------------------------------




                                               // TRUE COPY //




                                               P.A TO JUDGE.


                   ALEXANDER THOMAS, J.
                   -----------------------------
                   Crl.M.C.No.6143 Of 2014
                 ---------------------------------
           Dated this the 30th day of October, 2014.

                            O R D E R

     The   above    captioned    Criminal    Miscellaneous Case

(Crl.M.C), seeking invocation of the inherent powers conferred

on this Court under Section 482 Cr.P.C, has been filed with the

prayer   to   quash     the    impugned       Annexure-A1  Final

Report/Charge Sheet filed in the impugned Crime No.527/2013

of Chengannur Police Station, which has led to the pendency of

calender case, C.C.No.2630/2014 on the file of the Judicial

First Class Magistrate Court, Chengannur and all further

proceedings arising therefrom. The petitioners herein are the

accused Nos.1 to 4 in the aforementioned Crime No.527/2013

of Chengannur Police Station. The police after investigation

has filed the impugned Annexure-A1 Final Report/Charge

Sheet in the above said crime which has led to the institution

of C.C.No.2630/2014 on the file of the Judicial First Class

Magistrate Court, Chengannur. The crime was registered on

the basis of the complaint filed before the jurisdictional

Magistrate who directed investigation under Sec.156(3) of the

Cr.P.C. The offence alleged in this case are those punishable

under Sections 498A r/w 34 Indian Penal Code. The gist of the

                              ::2::

Crl.M.C.No.6143 Of 2014

prosecution allegation is that after the marriage between the

1st petitioner (accused No.1) and the 2nd respondent, while the

latter was staying in the matrimonial home, she has been ill-

treated by the petitioners demanding more dowry and

harassed her mentally due to which she left the matrimonial

home and thereafter she filed C.M.P.No.2515/2013 before the

jurisdictional  Magistrate  which   was    forwarded  to    the

Chengannur Police for investigation under Sec.156(3) Cr.P.C.

The police registered the aforementioned crime and later

submitted Annexure-A1 Final Report/Charge Sheet which has

led to the pendency of the above said calender case. It is

submitted that due to mediation that took place between the

1st petitioner and 2nd respondent, they entered into an

agreement dated 9.4.2014 in O.P.No.1426/2013 before the

Family Court, Mavelikkara where it was decided to move for

divorce through mutual consent and that all cases shall be

settled accordingly, including the aforementioned impugned

criminal proceedings which arose out of Crime No.527/2013 of

Chengannur police Station.     Annexure-2 is the copy of the

agreement dated 9.4.2014 entered into between the parties in

the course of mediation at the Family Court, Mavelikkara. The

                               ::3::

Crl.M.C.No.6143 Of 2014

2nd respondent (defacto complainant) has sworn to affidavit

dated 27.10.2014 produced as Annexure-A3 in this Crl.M.C

stating the above aspects wherein it is stated that the entire

issues between the 2nd respondent and the petitioners have

been settled and that the 1st petitioner and 2nd respondent are

living separately and the 2nd respondent is not willing to

prosecute     the    impugned       criminal   proceedings    in

C.C.No.2630/2014 before the jurisdictional Magistrate and that

she has no objection in the termination of all the impugned

criminal proceedings in this case. It is in the background of

these facts and circumstances, the petitioners have filed the

aforementioned Crl.M.C with the above said prayer.

      2.   The Crl.M.C. has been admitted and Sri.T.C.Santhilal

has taken notice for the 2nd respondent and the learned Public

Prosecutor has taken notice for the 1st respondent-State of

Kerala.

      3.   Heard Sri.P.Vinod Kumar, learned counsel for the

petitioners, Sri.T.C.Santhilal,  learned  counsel  for  the  2nd

respondent and the learned Public Prosecutor appearing for the

1st respondent-State of Kerala.

      4.   The learned counsel for the petitioners has submitted

                                 ::4::

Crl.M.C.No.6143 Of 2014

that during the pendency of the aforementioned criminal

proceedings, the matter has been settled amicably between the

parties, and that the continuation of the proceedings in the above

case/crime will cause miscarriage of justice to both parties as the

real disputants to the controversy have arrived at an amicable

settlement and any further continuation of the criminal

proceedings will amount to sheer wastage of time and money

and would unnecessarily strain the judicial, administrative and

financial resources of the State.

      5.    Sri.T.C.Santhilal, learned counsel appearing for the 2nd

respondent has submitted, on the basis of the specific

instructions furnished by the 2nd respondent, that the 2nd

respondent has amicably settled the disputes with the petitioners

as stated above and that she has no objection in the quashment

of   the   impugned     criminal     proceedings  and    that   the

complainant/victim/injured does not intend to proceed any

further against the petitioners as she has no grievance against

them and that she will not raise any dispute/complaint in future if

the prayer for quashing the impugned criminal proceedings is

allowed.

      6.    The learned Public Prosecutor also was heard, who

also has not raised any serious objections and submitted that the

                                  ::5::

Crl.M.C.No.6143 Of 2014

court may consider the prayer in this case in the light of the law

well settled by the Apex Court in that regard.

      7.    After having carefully considered the submissions of

the parties and after having perused the pleadings as well as the

documents and materials placed in this matter, it can be seen

that the offences alleged are more or less personal in nature and

not much element of public interest is involved.          The crucial

aspect of the matter is that though such offences are involved,

the real disputants to the controversy, which has led to the

impugned criminal proceedings, have actually arrived at an

amicable settlement of the matter. From the submissions made

by the learned counsel for the 2nd respondent, it is clear to the

Court that the injured/victim/defacto complainant has no further

grievance against the petitioners/accused in the light of the

settlement arrived at by them. In this connection, it is relevant

to note the decision of the Apex Court in the case between Gian

Singh v. State of Punjab reported in 2013 (1) SCC (Cri) 160,

para 61 = (2012) 10 SCC 303 = 2012(4) KLT 108(SC), wherein

the Supreme Court has held as follows in para 61 thereof [ See

SCC (Cri)]:

            "61.   The position that emerges from the above
      discussion can be summarised thus: the power of the High
      Court in quashing a criminal proceeding or FIR or complaint

                                      ::6::

Crl.M.C.No.6143 Of 2014

       in exercise of its inherent jurisdiction is distinct and different
       from the power given to a criminal court for compounding
       the offences under S.320 of the Code. Inherent power is of
       wide plenitude with no statutory limitation but it has to be
       exercised in accord with the guideline engrafted in such
       power viz;(i) to secure the ends of justice or (ii) to prevent
       abuse of the process of any Court. In what cases power to
       quash the criminal proceeding or complaint or F.I.R. may be
       exercised where the offender and victim have settled their
       dispute would depend on the facts and circumstances of
       each case and no category can be prescribed..

It is further held as follows:-

       "......... But the criminal cases having overwhelmingly
       and pre-dominatingly civil flavour stand on different
       footing for the purposes of quashing, particularly the
       offences arising from commercial, financial, mercantile,
       civil, partnership or such like transactions or the
       offences arising out of matrimony relating to dowry
       etc. or the family disputes where the wrong is basically
       private or personal in nature and the parties have
       resolved their entire dispute. In this category of cases,
       High Court may quash criminal proceedings if in its
       view, because of the compromise between the offender
       and victim, the possibility of conviction is remote and
       bleak and continuation of criminal case would put
       accused to great oppression and prejudice and
       extreme injustice would be caused to him by not
       quashing the criminal case despite full and complete
       settlement and compromise with the victim........"

Further, in the case Jitendra Raghuvanshi and Others v.

Babita Raghuvanshi and another reported in (2013) 4 SCC

58 [see 2013 (1) KLD 817 (SC)], the Apex Court has held as

follows:-

              "8.  It is not in dispute that matrimonial disputes
       have been on considerable increase in recent times
       resulting in filing of complaints under Sections 498A and
       406 of I.P.C. not only against the husband but also against

                                     ::7::

Crl.M.C.No.6143 Of 2014

      the relatives of the husband. The question is when such
      matters are resolved either by the wife agreeing to rejoin
      the matrimonial home or by mutual settlement of other
      pending disputes for which both the sides approached the
      High Court and jointly prayed for quashing of the criminal
      proceedings or the FIR or complaint by the wife under
      Sections 498A and 406 of I.P.C., whether the prayer can be
      declined on the sole ground that since the offences are non-
      compoundable under Section 320 of the Code, it would be
      impermissible     for  the   court   to  quash   the   criminal
      proceedings or FIR or complaint.
             9.   It is not in dispute that in the case on hand
      subsequent to the filing of the criminal complaint under
      Sections 498A and 406 of IPC and Sections 3 and 4 of the
      Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961, with the help and intervention
      of family members, friends and well-wishers, the parties
      concerned have amicably settled their differences and
      executed a compromise/ settlement. Pursuant thereto, the
      appellants filed the said compromise before the Trial Court
      with a request to place the same on record and to drop the
      criminal proceedings against the appellants herein.       It is
      also not in dispute that in additional to the mutual
      settlement arrived at by the parties, respondent/-wife has
      also filed an affidavit stating that she did not wish to pursue
      the criminal proceedings against the appellants and fully
      supported the contents of the settlement deed. It is the
      grievance of the appellants that no only the Trial Court
      rejected such prayer of the parties but also the High Court
      failed toe exercise its jurisdiction under Section 482 of the
      Code only on the ground that the criminal proceedings
      relate to the offences punishable under Sections 498A and
      406 of IPC which are non-compoundable in nature.
             15.   In our view, it is the duty of the Courts to
      encourage genuine settlements of matrimonial disputes,
      particularly, when the same are on considerable increase.
      Even if the offences are non-compoundable, if they relate to
      matrimonial disputes and the Court is satisfied that the
      parties have settled the same amicably and without any
      pressure, we hold that for the purpose of securing ends of
      justice, Section 320 of the Code would not be a bar to the
      exercise of power of quashing of FIR, complaint or the
      subsequent criminal proceedings.
             16.    There has been an outburst of matrimonial
      disputes in recent times.        The institution of marriage
      occupies an important place and it has an important role to
      play in the society. Therefore, every effort should be made
      in the interest of the individuals in order to enable them to
      settle down in life and live peacefully. If the parties ponder

                                    ::8::

Crl.M.C.No.6143 Of 2014

      over their defaults and terminate their disputes amicably by
      mutual agreement instead of fighting it out in a Court of
      law, in order to do complete justice in the matrimonial
      matters, the Courts should be less hesitant in exercising its
      extraordinary jurisdiction. It is trite to state that the power
      under Section 482 should be exercised sparingly and with
      circumspection only when the Court is convinced, on the
      basis of material on record, that allowing the proceedings to
      continue would be an abuse of the process of the Court or
      that the ends of justice require that the proceedings ought
      to be quashed."

      8.    Considering the facts and circumstances of this case,

it is seen further that the impugned criminal proceedings have

arisen consequent to the matrimonial disputes between the

disputants and the disputes have been settled amicably between

the parties. Accordingly, this Court is inclined to hold that in the

light of the facts and circumstances involved in the present case

and particularly in view of the settlement arrived at between the

parties, the principles laid down in the aforementioned decisions

of the Apex Court will be squarely applicable in the present case.

Moreover, since the real disputants to the controversy have

amicably settled the disputes, which led to these impugned

criminal proceedings, it is also the duty of the court to promote

such settlement, instead of compelling the parties to go on with

the dispute. It is also pertinent to note that since the matter is

settled out of court, in the event of proceeding with the trial,

there may not be any fruitful prosecution and the chances of

                                ::9::

Crl.M.C.No.6143 Of 2014

conviction of the accused is rather negligible and therefore, the

net result of continuance of criminal proceedings would be sheer

waste of judicial time rather meaningless and therefore would

amount to abuse of the process of court proceedings in the larger

sense. Hence following decisions of the Apex Court cited supra,

this Court is inclined to hold that the Crl.M.C. can be allowed by

granting the prayers sought for.

      In the result, Crl.M.C is allowed and the impugned

Annexure-A1 Final Report/Charge Sheet filed in the impugned

Crime No.527/2014 of Chengannur Police Station which has

led to the calender case, C.C.No.2630/2014 on the file of the

Judicial First Class Magistrate Court, Chengannur and all

further   proceedings     arising    therefrom   stand   quashed.

Petitioners shall forward certified copies of this order to the

Station House Officer concerned as well as to the jurisdictional

Magistrate court concerned.




                                          ALEXANDER THOMAS,
                                                   Judge.
bkn/-



