
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                      PRESENT:

                       THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE K.RAMAKRISHNAN

               TUESDAY,THE 4TH DAY OF MARCH 2014/13TH PHALGUNA, 1935

                                           Crl.MC.No. 1344 of 2014 ()
                                                ---------------------------
CRIME NO. 1142/2013 OF MUVATTUPUZHA POLICE STATION , ERNAKULAM DISTRICT
                                          -------------------------------------

PETITIONER/ACCUSED:-
-----------------------------------------

            R. RAJAN NAIR, AGED 75 YEARS,
            S/O.RAMAN PILLAI, INDHIRA NIVAS, JANA SAKTHI ROAD,
            VELLOORKUNNAM P.O., MUVATTUPUZHA,
            ERNAKULAM DISTRICT.

             BY ADV. SRI.A.V.JAMES

RESPONDENTS/DEFACTO COMPLAINANT:-
------------------------------------------------------------------

        1. STATE OF KERALA,
            REP. BY THE SUB INSPECTOR OF POLICE,
            MUVATTUPUZHA POLICE STATION,
            IN CRIME NO.1142/2013 THROUGH THE PUBLIC PROSECUTOR,
            HIGH COURT OF KERALA.

        2. JAYESH @ JAYAKRISHNAN,AGED 34 YEARS,
            S/O.LATE MOHANAN, RESIDING AT KANDOTH HOUSE,
            JANASHAKTHI ROAD, VELLOORKUNNAM POST, MOOVATTUPUZHA,
            ERNAKULAM DISTRICT.

            R1 BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SMT. S.HYMA
            R2 BY ADV. SRI.O.S.JAFARKHAN

            THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE HAVING COME UP FOR ADMISSION
            ON 04-03-2014, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE FOLLOWING:




sts

Crl.MC.No. 1344 of 2014 ()
--------------------------------------

                                               APPENDIX

PETITIONER(S)' ANNEXURES:
----------------------------------------------

ANNEX A1.            TRUE COPY OF THE THE FIR DATED 30.06.2013 REGISTERED BY THE
                     1ST RESPONDENT.

ANNEX A2.            THE TRUE COPY OF THE FINAL REPORT DATED 05.11.2013 FILED BY
                     THE 1ST RESPONDENT.

ANNEX A3.            THE TRUE COPY OF THE STATEMENT GIVEN BY THE DEFACTO
                     COMPLAINANT.




RESPONDENT(S)' ANNEXURES:                           NIL




                                                        /TRUE COPY/


                                                        P.A.TO.JUDGE




sts


                            K. RAMAKRISHNAN, J.
            ------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Crl. M.C. No.1344 of 2014
           ---------------------------------------------------------------------
                Dated this the 4th day of March, 2014


                                     O R D E R



          This criminal miscellaneous case is filed by the

sole accused in Crime No.1142/2013 of Muvattupuzha

Police Station to quash the proceedings under Section 482

of the Code of Criminal Procedure (hereinafter called the

'Code').

          2.      It is alleged in the petition that, the defacto-

complainant is the uncle of the petitioner and due to some

difference of opinion between them, in respect of a civil

matter, there was some altercation occurred, which resulted

in the incident. On the basis of the statement given by the

2nd  respondent,          the      uncle         of     the       petitioner,     crime

No.1142/2013         of      Muvattupuzha                  Police         Station  was

registered, alleging offence under Section 308 of the Indian

Penal Code against the petitioner. Subsequently, the dispute

Crl. M.C. No.1344 of 2014
                                   2

between them has been settled and the family relation ship

has been restored and the 2nd respondent does not want to

proceed with the prosecution against the petitioner. After

the investigation, Annexure-A2 final report has been filed

and it is now pending before the Judicial First Class

Magistrate Court, Muvattupuzha, as C.P.No.31/2013. Since

the matter has been settled between the parties, no purpose

will be served by proceeding with the case. Since it is a

non-compoundable offence, it is not possible to compound

the case before the trial court. So the petitioner has no

other remedy except to approach this court, seeking the

following relief:

            "It is humbly prayed that this Hon'ble Court may be
      pleased    to   quash  the  Annexure-A2    Final   Report
      registered    by  the Muvattupuzha Police in Crime
      No,1142/2013."

            3.     2nd respondent appeared through counsel

and submitted that, the petitioner is the uncle of the

defacto-complainant and the matter has been settled and he

has no grievance against the petitioner and he had field an

Crl. M.C. No.1344 of 2014
                                  3

affidavit supporting the above contentions.

            4.    The      learned   Public     Prosecutor     on

instructions submitted that, except this case, there is no

other case against the petitioner and he has no other

criminal antecedent and the parties are relatives, but

opposed the application on the ground that, it is a grave

offence that has been committed.

            5.    The counsel for the petitioner submitted that,

in view of the settlement arrived at between the parties,

there is no possibility of any conviction being entered into

against the petitioner and it is only a wastage of judicial

time to keep the case on file. So he prayed for allowing the

application.

            6.    It is an admitted fact that, on the basis of the

statement given by the 2nd respondent, Annexure-A1 crime

was registered, as Crime No.1142/2013 of Muvattupuzha

Police Station, against the petitioner, alleging offence under

Section     308     of   the  Indian  Penal    Code   and   after

Crl. M.C. No.1344 of 2014
                                       4

investigation, Annexure-A2 final report was filed, which was

taken on file by the learned Judicial First Class Magistrate,

Muvattupuzha, as C.P.No.31/2013. It is also seen from the

averments in the documents produced itself that, the

petitioner is the uncle of the defacto-complaint and due to

some civil disputes between them, an incident occurred, in

which the defacto-complainant sustained injuries. It is true

that a dangerous weapon like chopper was used, but the

nature of injury sustained by the 2nd respondent is not that

grave. The matter has been settled between the petitioner

and the 2nd respondent due to the intervention of the family

members and all disputes between them have been settled

and cordial relationship in the family has been restored.

            7.    In the decision reported in Gian Singh v.

State of Punjab [2012(4) KLT 108 (SC)], is stated that:

      "The position that emerges from the above discussion can be
      summarised thus: the power of the High Court in quashing a
      criminal proceedings or FIR or complaint in exercise of its
      inherent jurisdiction is distinct and different from the power
      given to a criminal court for compounding the offences under
      S.320 of the Code. Inherent power is of wide plenitude with
      no statutory limitation but has to be exercised in accord with
      the guideline engrafted in such power viz; (i) to secure the

Crl. M.C. No.1344 of 2014
                                       5

      ends of justice or (ii) to prevent abuse of the process of any
      Court. In what cases power to quash the criminal proceeding
      or complaint or FIR may be exercised where the offender and
      victim have settled their dispute would depend on the facts
      and circumstances of each case an no category can be
      prescribed. However, before exercise of such power, the High
      Court must have due regard to the nature and gravity of the
      crime. Heinous and serious offences of mental depravity or
      offences like murder, rape, dacoity, etc., cannot be fittingly
      quashed even though the victim or victim's family and the
      offender have settled the dispute.       Such offences are not
      private in nature and have serious impact on society.
      Similarly, any compromise between the victim and offender in
      relation to the offences under special statutes like Prevention
      of Corruption Act or the offences committed by public servants
      while working in that capacity etc; cannot provide for any
      basis for quashing criminal proceedings involving such
      offences. But the criminal cases having overwhelmingly and
      pre-dominatingly civil flavour stand on different footing for the
      purposes of quashing, particularly the offences arising from
      commercial, financial mercantile, civil, partnership or such
      like transactions or the offences arising out of matrimony
      relating to dowry, etc., or the family disputes where the wrong
      is basically private or personal in nature and the parties have
      resolved their entire dispute. In this category of cases, High
      Court may quash criminal proceedings if in its view, because
      of the compromise between the offender and victim, the
      possibility of conviction is remote and bleak and continuation
      of criminal case would put accused to great oppression and
      prejudice and extreme injustice would be caused to him by not
      quashing the criminal case despite full and complete
      settlement and compromise with the victim. In other words,
      the High Court must consider whether it would be unfair or
      contrary to the interest of justice to continue with the criminal
      proceedings or continuation of the criminal proceedings would
      tantamount to abuse of process of law despite settlement and
      compromise between the victim and wrongdoer and whether
      to secure the ends of justice, it is appropriate that criminal
      case is put to an end and if the answer to the above question
      (s) is in affirmative, the High Court shall be well within its
      jurisdiction to quash the criminal proceeding."


             8.     It is true that, normally, this court is not

expected to invoke the power under Section 482 of the

Crl. M.C. No.1344 of 2014
                                 6

'Code', to quash the proceedings, involving grave offences

and also having public interest. But in this case, though

Section     308     of   the Indian Penal  Code    has  been

incorporated, the dispute is between relatives and that has

been settled between them. It cannot be said that, it is

having any public interest as such, because even as per the

allegations, the incident itself has started on the basis of a

civil dispute between the parties, which resulted in the

unfortunate incident. Considering the fact that, the matter

has been settled between the parties, there is remote

possibility of conviction in this case, as the defacto-

complainant and the witnesses are not likely to support the

case of the prosecution due to the intervention of mediators

and family members, the relationship between the uncle

and nephew has been restored and they are living in

harmony now. So in view of the dictum laid down in the

above decision and also considering the fact the matter has

been settled and there is no possibility of any conviction

Crl. M.C. No.1344 of 2014
                                   7

being entered, if the prosecution is allowed to continue, it

will only be a wastage of judicial time, this court feels that,

it is a fit case to invoke the power under Section 482 of the

'Code', to quash the proceedings in order to promote the

harmony that has been restored in the family, on account of

the settlement arrived at between the parties, due to the

intervention of family members and well-wishers. So, the

application     is    allowed    and    further  proceedings      in

C.P.No.31/2013 (Crime No.1142/2013 of Muvattupuzha

Police Station) pending before the Judicial First Class

Magistrate Court, Muvattupuzha, against the petitioner is

quashed. Office is directed to communicate this order to

the concerned court for necessary further action.



                                               Sd/-
                                       K. Ramakrishnan, Judge

                            // True Copy //

                                                     P.A. to Judge

ss



