
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                      PRESENT:

                           THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE V.K.MOHANAN

             WEDNESDAY, THE 20TH DAY OF AUGUST 2014/29TH SRAVANA, 1936

                                         Bail Appl..No. 5752 of 2014 ()
                                              -------------------------------
    CRIME NO. 579/2014 OF POOCHAKKAL POLICE STATION, ALAPPUZHA DISTRICT
                                                   --------------------

PETITIONER/4TH ACCUSED :
-------------------------------------------

            SYAMKUMAR,
            S/O. SASI, AGED 25 YEARS
            PUTHUVEL CHIRA, MANAPURAM P.O.
            CHERTHALA.

            BY ADVS.SRI.M. SUNIL KUMAR
                          SRI.SUJESH MENON V.B.

RESPONDENT/COMPLAINANT & STATE :
-----------------------------------------------------------

            STATE OF KERALA,
            REPRESENTED BY THE PUBLIC PROSECUTOR
            HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM.

            BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SMT. BINDU GOPINATH


            THIS BAIL APPLICATION HAVING COME UP FOR ADMISSION ON 20-08-2014,
            THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE FOLLOWING:




Mn


                     V.K.MOHANAN, J.
                  -------------------------------
                    B.A.No.5752 of 2014
                  -------------------------------
         Dated this the 20th day of August, 2014.


                          O R D E R

     The petitioner who is the 4th accused in Crime

No.579/14 of Poochakkal Police Station, apprehending

arrest, preferred this application under section 438 of

Cr.P.C. seeking anticipatory bail.

     2. According to the prosecution, the marriage between

the 1st accused and the de facto complainant was on

8.9.2007 and two female children were born in the said

wedlock.    According to the prosecution, at the time of

marriage, 25 sovereigns of gold and Rs.75,000/- were given

to the de facto complainant and the said gold ornaments

were sold by the 1st accused when he left for gulf and after

his returning from Gulf, himself and his parents were turned

hostile to the de facto complainant, demanding more dowry,

and according to the de facto complainant, she was

subjected to cruelty both physically and mentally. It is the

B.A.No.5752 of 2014
                              2

further case of the de facto complainant that on 10.6.2014,

the petitioner herein attacked her and her baby and caught

hold of her hair and she was pulled down and he assaulted

the daughter of the de facto complainant by caught hold of

her hand etc.       Thus according to the prosecution, the

accused in the above crime committed the offences

punishable under sections 498A, 323, 324 r/w 34 of IPC and

Section 23 of Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection) Act,

2000.

      3. Heard the learned counsel for the petitioner and

the learned Public Prosecutor.

      4. The learned counsel for the petitioner submitted

that when the de facto complainant filed Annexure A

complaint, there was no whisper about the incident that

allegedly occurred on 10.6.2014. It is also the submission

of the learned counsel that on receiving complaint in the

Police Station, the police summoned both the de facto

complainant and the accused including the petitioner in the

police station and settlement was arrived as per Annexure

B.A.No.5752 of 2014
                               3

B document.        It is thereafter the petitioner preferred

Annexure A complaint. It is also pointed out by the learned

counsel that the wound certificate relied on by the

prosecution is pertained to the date 3.6.2014 and the same

is noway helpful for the prosecution to substantiate the

allegation against the petitioner connected with the

incident occurred on 10.6.2014.        The learned counsel

further submitted that, accused nos.1 to 3, who are the

main accused in the above case, had been granted

anticipatory bail. On the other hand, stoutly opposing the

bail application, the learned Public Prosecutor strenuously

submitted that it was the petitioner, who pulled down the

de facto complainant and her daughter and therefore the

custodial interrogation of the petitioner is required.

      5. I have carefully considered the submissions made

by the learned counsel for the petitioner and the learned

Public Prosecutor.

      6.     Having regard to the facts and circumstances

involved in the case, it appears to me that custodial

B.A.No.5752 of 2014
                                  4

interrogation of the petitioner is not necessary when the

prosecution has no case that the petitioner has used any

weapon against the de facto complainant or her baby. As

rightly pointed out by the learned counsel that the wound

certificate relied on by the prosecution is pertained to the

date 3.6.2014, whereas as per the prosecution allegation,

the incident occurred as per Annexure-A complaint was on

10.6.2014. If that be so, according to me, this petition can

be allowed, particularly when the other main accused in the

above crime were granted anticipatory bail.

      In the result, this petition is allowed and there will be a

direction that in the event of arrest of the petitioner

connected with Crime No.579/14 of Poochakkal Police

Station, he shall be released on bail on his executing a bond

for Rs.50,000/- with two solvent sureties each for the like

amount to the satisfaction of the Investigating Officer in the

above crime and on the following other conditions :

             1)    The petitioner is directed to report before the
             Investigating Officer in the above Crime between 9
             and 11 a.m. on all Mondays till filing of the final

B.A.No.5752 of 2014
                                   5

             report in the above crime.

            2)     The petitioner is directed to surrender his
            Passport before the Investigating Officer at the time
            of execution of bond and if he is not having the
            Passport, file an affidavit to that effect and the
            Investigating Officer is directed to produce the
            Passport, if he is having the same, or the affidavit as
            afore mentioned, as the case may be, before the
            jurisdictional Magistrate.

            3)     The   petitioner is free to approach          the
            jurisdictional Magistrate for the release of the
            Passport as and when required and in case of an
            application is filed in this regard, the learned
            Magistrate is directed to consider the same on merit
            and pass appropriate orders, guided by the decision
            rendered by this Court in Ashok Kumar Vs. State of
            Kerala (2009(2) KLT 712).

             4) The petitioner shall not directly or indirectly make
             any inducement, threat or promise to any person
             acquainted with the facts of the case so as to
             dissuade him from disclosing such facts to the Court
             or to any Police Officer.

             5)   The   petitioner   shall  co-operate    with   the
             investigation and he shall not interfere with the same
             or attempt to influence the witnesses or tamper the
             evidence.

                                                         Sd/-
                                                 V.K.MOHANAN,
                                                      Judge.
ami/
                            //True copy//

                            P.A.to Judge



