
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                      PRESENT:

                     THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE ALEXANDER THOMAS

               FRIDAY, THE 24TH DAY OF OCTOBER 2014/2ND KARTHIKA, 1936

                                           Crl.MC.No. 4893 of 2014 ()
                                                ---------------------------
                  CRIME NO. 805/2011 OF PEECHI POLICE STATION , TRISSUR

PETITIONER(S)/SOLE ACCUSED:
----------------------------------------------------

            SHEMITHA AGED 33 YEARS
            W/O.AFSAL, KOTTATH HOUSE, PANAMCHERY VILLAGE
            PATTIKAD DESOM, THRISSUR DISTRICT.

            BY ADV. SRI.G.SREEKUMAR (CHELUR)

RESPONDENT(S)/STATE OF KERALA AND COMPLAINANT:
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

        1. THE STATE OF KERALA
            REPRESENTED BY THE SUB INSPECTOR OF POLICE
            PEECHI POLICE STATION
            THRISSUR THROUGH THE PUBLIC PROSECUTOR
            HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM-682031.

        2. P.P.SATHY
            W/O.SATHEESA K.G., KANDOTHUMATTEL HOUSE, KAU QUARTERS
            VELLANIKARA, THRISSUR DISTRICT-680001.

            BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SRI.R.GITHESH

            THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE HAVING COME UP FOR ADMISSION ON 24-10-
2014, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE FOLLOWING:

Crl.MC.No. 4893 of 2014 ()
---------------------------

                                           APPENDIX

PETITIONER(S)' EXHIBITS
-------------------------------------

ANNEXURE 1: TRUE COPY OF THE FIR IN CRIME 805/2011 OF THE PEECHI POLICE
STATION DT.1-9-2011
ANNEXURE 2: TRUE COPY OF THE FINAL REPORT SUBMITTED BY THE PEECHI
POLICE, BEFORE JFCM III THRISSUR DT.14-10-2011.
ANNEXURE 3: TRUE COPY OF THE AFFIDAVIT OF THE R2 DT.8-8-2014.

RESPONDENT(S)' EXHIBITS
---------------------------------------

          NIL.

sdk+


                     ///True copy///




                                          P.S. to Judge


                         ALEXANDER THOMAS, J.
                     ==================
                       Crl.M.C.No. 4893 of 2014
                     ==================
             Dated this the    24th day of October, 2014
                               O R D E R

      The petitioner is the sole accused in the impugned Annexure-I

FIR in Crime No. 805/2011 of Peechi Police Station, dated 1.9.2011,

for offences punishable under Secs.415, 417, 418 and 420 of the

IPC. The husband of the 2nd respondent is the complainant in this

case. The gist of the complaint is that he and his wife purchased a

property from the petitioner herein on a belief that there is no

encumbrance. But according to the petitioner, it was later revealed

that substantial liability is due to the South Indian Bank, Mannuthy

Branch to be discharged by the accused. Accordingly, a private

criminal complaint has been filed, which was directed to be

investigated    as  per   the directions issued by the        learned

jurisdictional Magistrate under Sec. 156(3) of the Cr.P.C., which led

to the registration of Annexure-1 FIR in the above said crime. The

Police, after investigation submitted Annexure-II final report/charge

sheet in the impugned Annexure-1 crime. Later the entire liability to

Crl.M.C.4893/14                    - : 2 :-

the bank is settled and the amount has been paid and that the 2nd

respondent does not want to continue the impugned criminal

proceedings and that in the mean time, the original complainant,

who is the husband of the 2nd respondent had expired. It is stated

that the impugned crime arose out of matters which are purely

private dispute between the petitioner and the 2nd respondent. That

the matters have been settled between the petitioner and the 2nd

respondent and the 2nd respondent has no objection for the

quashment of the impugned criminal proceedings. The 2nd

respondent has sworn to affidavit dated 14.8.2014, produced as

Annexure-III in this Crl.M.C., stating the above said aspects,

wherein it is also stated that the disputes between the petitioner

and the 2nd respondent have been amicably settled and that the

impugned criminal proceedings need not be continued any further

and that she concedes for quashing of the impugned criminal

proceedings and that Annexure-I and II now pending before the

Judicial First Class Magistrate's Court-III, Thrissur, may be quashed

in the interest of justice. It is in the background of these facts and

circumstances that the above captioned Crl.M.C. has been filed with

Crl.M.C.4893/14                 - : 3 :-

the prayer to quash the impugned Annexure-II final report/charge

sheet in Annexure-I Crime No. 805/2011 of Peechi Police Station,

and all further proceedings arising therefrom.

      2.     The Crl.M.C. has been admitted and Sri.K.Ashish,

Advocate has taken notice for R-2 and the learned Public Prosecutor

has taken notice for the 1st respondent-State of Kerala.

      3.     Heard Sri.G.Sreekumar, learned counsel appearing for

the petitioner, Sri.K.Ashish.K, learned counsel appearing for R-2

and the learned Public Prosecutor appearing for the 1st respondent-

State.

      4.     The learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted that

during the pendency of the aforementioned criminal proceedings,

the matter has been settled amicably between the parties, which is

resulted in the subject matter of the aforementioned crime/case and

that the continuation of the proceedings in the above case/crime

will cause miscarriage of justice to both parties as the real

disputants to the case have arrived at an amicable settlement and

any further continuation of the criminal proceedings will amount to

sheer wastage of time and money and would unnecessarily strain

Crl.M.C.4893/14                   - : 4 :-

the judicial, administrative and financial resources of the State.

      5.     The learned counsel appearing for respondent No.2 has

submitted, on the basis of the specific instructions furnished by the

2nd respondent, that she has amicably settled the disputes with the

petitioner and that she has no objection in the quashment of the

impugned      criminal  proceedings       and that the   complainant/

victim/injured does not intend to proceed any further against the

petitioner as she has no grievance against him and that she will not

raise any dispute/compliant in future if the prayer for quashing the

impugned final report is allowed.

      6.     The learned Public Prosecutor also was heard, who also

has not raised any serious objections and submitted that this Court

may consider the prayer in this case in the light of the law well

settled by the Apex Court in that regard.

      7.     After having carefully considered the submissions of the

parties and after having perused the pleadings as well as the

documents and materials placed in this matter, it can be seen that

the offences alleged are more or less personal in nature. The crucial

aspect of the matter is that though such offences are involved, the

Crl.M.C.4893/14                           - : 5 :-

real disputants to the controversy which has led to the impugned

criminal proceedings, have actually arrived at an amicable

settlement of the matter. From the submissions made by the

learned counsel for the 2nd respondent, it is clear to the court that

the injured/victim/defacto complainant has no further grievance

against the petitioner/accused in the light of the settlement arrived

at by them.

        8.        In this connection, it is relevant to note the decision of

the Apex Court in the case between Gian Singh v. State of Punjab

reported in 2013 (1) SCC (Cri) 160, para 61 = (2012) 10 SCC 303 =

2012(4) KLT 108(SC), wherein the Supreme Court has held as

follows in para 61 thereof [ See SCC (Cri)]:

                  "61. The position that emerges from the above discussion can
        be summarised thus: the power of the High Court in quashing a
        criminal proceeding or FIR or complaint in exercise of its inherent
        jurisdiction is distinct and different from the power given to a
        criminal court for compounding the offences under S.320 of the
        Code.
        limitationInherent has to be exercised in accord with the guideline
                            power is of wide plenitude with no statutory
                     but it
        engrafted in such power viz;(i) to secure the ends of justice or (ii) to
        prevent abuse of the process of any Court. In what cases power to
        quash the criminal proceeding or complaint or F.I.R. may be
        exercised where the offender and victim have settled their dispute
        would depend on the facts and circumstances of each case and no
        category can be prescribed.."

It is further held as follows:-

        "......... But the criminal cases having overwhelmingly and pre-

Crl.M.C.4893/14                          - : 6 :-

       dominatingly civil flavour stand on different footing for the purposes
       of quashing, particularly the offences arising from commercial,
       financial,mercantile, civil, partnership or such like transactions or the
       offences arising out of matrimony relating to dowry etc. or the family
       disputes where the wrong is basically private or personal in nature
       and the parties have resolved their entire dispute. In this category of
       cases, High Court may quash criminal proceedings if in its view,
       because of the compromise between the offender and victim, the
       possibility of conviction is remote and bleak and continuation of
       criminal case would put accused to great oppression and prejudice
       and extreme injustice would be caused to him by not quashing the
       criminal case despite full and complete settlement and compromise
       with the victim........"

In the decision reported in the case Yogendra Yadav & others v.

The State of Jharkhand & another reported in 2014 (8) SCALE 634

= III (2014) Current Criminal Reports CCR 426 (SC), the Apex Court

has held as follows:

              "When the High Court is convinced that the offences are
      entirely personal in nature and, therefore, do not affect public peace
      or tranquility and where it feels that quashing of such proceedings on
      account of compromise would bring about peace and would secure
      ends of justice, it should not hesitate to quash them".

The Apex Court in the above case was dealing with a case involving

offences under Secs. 341, 323, 324, 504 & 307 r/w Sec. 34 Indian

Penal Code.

       9.     Considering the facts and circumstances of this case, it

is seen further that the impugned criminal proceedings have arisen

consequent to the personal disputes between the disputants and

the disputes have been settled amicably between the parties.

Crl.M.C.4893/14                   - : 7 :-

Accordingly, this Court is inclined to hold that in the light of the

facts and circumstances involved in the present case and

particularly in view of the settlement arrived at between the parties,

the principles laid down in the aforementioned decisions of the

Apex Court will be squarely applicable in the present case.

Moreover, since the real disputants to the controversy have

amicably settled the disputes, which has led to these impugned

criminal proceedings, it is also the duty of the court to promote

such settlement, instead of compelling the parties to go on with the

dispute. It is also pertinent to note that since the matter is settled

out of court, in the event of proceeding with the trial, there may not

be any fruitful prosecution and the chances of conviction of the

accused is rather negligible and therefore, the net result of

continuance of criminal proceedings would be sheer wastage of

judicial time rather meaningless and therefore would amount to

abuse of the process of court proceedings in the larger sense.

Hence, following the decisions of the Apex Court cited supra, this

Court is inclined to hold that this Crl.M.C. can be allowed by

granting the prayers sought for.

Crl.M.C.4893/14                   - : 8 :-

      10.    In the result, the Crl.M.C. is allowed and the impugned

Annexure-II final report/charge sheet in Crime No.805/2011 of

Peechi Police Station and all further proceedings arising therefrom

pending on the file of the Judicial First Class Magistrate's Court-III,

Thrissur,    stand   quashed. The petitioner shall produce certified

copies of this order before the court below concerned as well as

before the Station House Officer, Peechi Police Station.


                                                      Sd/-
sdk+                                      ALEXANDER THOMAS, JUDGE

          ///True copy///



                              P.S. to Judge



