
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALAAT ERNAKULAM

                                                        PRESENT:

                            THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE A.HARIPRASAD

                  FRIDAY, THE 31ST DAY OF OCTOBER 2014/9TH KARTHIKA, 1936

                                              CRL.A.No. 476 of 2004 ( )
                                                   --------------------------
  AGAINST THE JUDGMENT IN SC 92/2000 of ADDITIONAL SESSIONS COURT (ADHOC-I),
                                            MANJERI DATED18-03-2004
APPELLANT(S)/ACCUSED::
------------------------------------------

            BALAKRISHNAN ALIAS MANI,
            S/O. VELAYUDHAN, MOOLAYIL HOUSE, RESIDING ATKOLAMANNA
            PANAKKAD AMSOM.

            BY ADVS.SRI.BABU KARUKAPADATH
                         SMT.VAHEEDA BABU

RESPONDENT(S)/COMPLAINANT::
------------------------------------------------------

            STATE OF KERALA, REPRESENTED BY DEPUTY
            SUPERINTENDENT OF POLICE, MALAPPURAM THROUGH
            THE PUBLIC PROSECUTOR, HIGH COURT OF KERALA
            ERNAKULAM.

             BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SHRI K.K.RAJEEV

            THIS CRIMINALAPPEAL HAVING BEEN FINALLYHEARD ON 23.10.2014, THE
COURT ON 31-10-2014 DELIVERED THE FOLLOWING:


                             A.HARIPRASAD, J.
                        --------------------------------------
                        Crl.Appeal No.476 of 2004
                        --------------------------------------
                 Dated this the 31st day of October, 2014.

                                  JUDGMENT

             Appellant faced a trial in S.C.No.92 of 2000 before the

Additional Sessions Court (Adhoc-I), Manjeri for an offence punishable

under Section 304B of the Indian Penal Code (in short, "IPC"). During the

trial, eight witnesses were examined on the prosecution side and four

witnesses on the side of the accused/appellant. Nine documents were

marked by the prosecution and seven documents by the accused. MO1 is

also marked.

       2.    Heard the learned counsel for the appellant/accused and the

learned Public Prosecutor.

       3.    Prosecution case, stated briefly, is thus: Appellant married

Shiny, the deceased and after marriage they resided in the matrimonial

home. Appellant subjected her to cruelty and harassment by demanding

dowry. As the harassment became unbearable, she committed suicide by

self-immolation on 11.05.1999. The incident was between 4.00 p.m. and

6.00 p.m. on that day.     She was taken to hospital, nevertheless she

succumbed to the burn injuries at about 10.30 p.m. on the same day. It is

alleged that the appellant's cruel and inhuman acts drove her to commit

Crl.Appeal No.476 of 2004               2

suicide.

        4.       Learned counsel for the appellant submitted that the court

below failed to notice the improbabilities in the prosecution evidence. The

testimony of witnesses are artificial and unnatural.         The prosecution

witnesses intentionally framed up the appellant. This being a first appeal

on facts, I shall go through the evidence in detail.

        5.       PW1, Santhosh, is the brother-in-law of deceased Shiny. PW1

deposed that marriage between the appellant and deceased Shiny took

place about one and a half year before the incident. Even according to the

contention of the appellant, deceased Shiny was a permanent resident in

the matrimonial home since the marriage. PW1 deposed that the appellant

demanded gold ornaments weighing 12 sovereigns and `20,000/- as cash

at the time of marriage. Due to financial difficulties, deceased Shiny could

be married away by giving only 12 sovereigns and `10,000/-. It is an

undisputed fact that in their relationship though a boy child was born, the

infant expired within three months. PW1 asserted that the appellant and

his house-hold harassed the deceased continuously demanding more

money. Testimony of PW1 would show that during the night previous to the

date of incident, the appellant and deceased came to the family house

wherein PW1, his wife (PW3), children and mother-in-law (PW2) are

residing. It is come out in evidence through PWs 1 and 2 that PW2 had

Crl.Appeal No.476 of 2004               3

only two girl children. It is, therefore, the prosecution case that PW1 was

looking after the affairs in the family house of the deceased. PW1 naturally

took initiative for the marriage of the deceased with appellant. On the

previous night, the appellant and deceased Shiny came home and Shiny

showed her hands to PWs 1 to 3 stating that the appellant beat mercilessly.

PWs 1 to 3 deposed that deceased Shiny's hands were swollen due to

brutal assault. When PW1 questioned the appellant, he stated that the

deceased should remain in her family house until `10,000/- was paid. The

appellant thereafter went away leaving the deceased in the family house.

During that night, she narrated her grief stricken story to PWs 1 to 3. On

the date of occurrence, at about 4.00 p.m., PWs 1 to 3 went to a hospital at

Morayur, a nearby place, for treating a wound on the leg of PW2. At that

time, Shiny was alone in the house. They returned home at about 6.00

p.m. PW1 testified that they could smell kerosene and a burnt odour.

Immediately they called neighbours. When the door was opened, they

could find Shiny lying on the floor in a charred state. Signs of life still could

be seen.          Immediately she was taken to Medical College Hospital,

Kozhikode. Doctor examined her and admitted in the hospital. At about

10.30 p.m., she expired. PW1's definite version is that Shiny committed

suicide due to intolerable harassment meted out by the appellant.

        6.       This witness was cross-examined at length. Appellant has a

Crl.Appeal No.476 of 2004               4

case that a monitory dispute had arisen between himself and PW1 a

couple days before the incident. According to the appellant, PW1 was

trying to fix him due to animosity. This suggestion is denied by PW1.

Defence witnesses were also examined to show that PW1 was enmical to

the appellant and a criminal case was pending between the parties. PW1

stated that the appellant, after securing bail, filed a false complaint against

him. It is also suggested to PW1 that Shiny might have committed suicide

since he tried to molest her. This case also is strongly denied by PW1. In

respect of the allegation of the prosecution that the appellant habitually

assaulted the deceased demanding more money revealed through PW1

remains believable in spite of cross-examination.

        7.       PW2 is the mother of the deceased and mother-in-law of PW1.

She also deposed that Shiny's son died on the 90th day of his birth. PW2

stated that Shiny resided in her husband's house after marriage. According

to PW2, her life was miserable in the matrimonial home. They could not

pay the entire amount demanded by the appellant and for non-payment of

`10,000/-, the appellant used to physically assault the deceased, deposed

PW2. PW2 also spoke about the arrival of Shiny and the appellant at

about 7.00 p.m. during previous day of the incident. PW2 deposed that

Shiny was profusely weeping in front of them. She went and talked to

Shiny. At that time, she showed her hands in a swollen condition allegedly

Crl.Appeal No.476 of 2004            5

beaten up by the appellant. PW2 also stated that the appellant asked

Shiny to remain in the family house until they paid `10,000/- to him.

According to PW2, after the death of Shiny, she was seeing the appellant

for the first time in court. PW2 also testified that at about 6.00 p.m. she

saw the burnt body of her daughter when she returned from the hospital

along with PWs 1 and 3. Neighbours thronged in their house took her to

hospital. At about 10'o clock in the night, she died. Cross-examination on

this witness did not yield much result. It is the contention of the defence

that as PW2 had only two daughters and she needed support of PWs 1

and 3 for her future life and therefore she was unduly supporting PW1 to

falsely implicate the appellant in this case.    This defence case is not

probabilised in spite searching cross-examination. Another defence case

put to PW2 that PW1's immoral advances caused the suicide of Shiny is

strongly denied by PW2.

        8.       PW3 is the wife of PW1 and daughter of PW2.      She also

narrated the prosecution case in harmony with the versions of PWs 1 and

2. PW3 also deposed about the incessant harassment meted out by the

appellant to the deceased by demanding dowry. PW3 also deposed about

the incident happened during the previous evening. PW3 stated that she

saw her sister with swollen hands at about 7.00 p.m. during the previous

evening. The appellant informed them that Shiny would be taken back to

Crl.Appeal No.476 of 2004                6

matrimonial home only on payment of `10,000/-. It is come out in evidence

through material prosecution witnesses that occasionally deceased Shiny

and appellant used to stay in the family house. But, Shiny stayed alone in

the family house only on the night previous to the date of occurrence. She

also stated that at about 4.00 p.m. on the date of occurrence, PWs 1 to 3

went to a hospital for treating PW2. It is come out in evidence that the

deceased was also asked to go to hospital, but she refused to do so.

When they returned home, kerosene smell was coming out and when the

door was opened, they found the deceased on the floor with burn injuries.

In spite of cross-examination of this witness, no serious dent or discredit

could be made on her testimony.

        9.       PWs 4 and 5 are official witnesses and PW6 is a mahazar

witness. Their testimony is of a formal nature. PW7 registered Ext.P1 first

information statement and Ext.P6 first information report.

        10.      PW8 is the investigating officer. He collected material objects.

He recovered a black can having a capacity of five litres and a match box

allegedly used by the deceased for pouring kerosene and to set herself

ablaze. As part of the investigation, he questioned the witnesses, collected

the postmortem certificate and other things required for completing the

investigation. This witness was cross-examined to elicit answers that he

did not question the Doctor, who treated the deceased. PW8 answered

Crl.Appeal No.476 of 2004                  7

that the deceased was in a state of unconsciousness when she was

hospitalised. She was unable to speak. Suggestion that non-examination

of the Doctor was an attempt on the part of the prosecution to intentionally

suppress the real case is denied by this witness. The defence tried to

make out a case from the statement in the inquest report that PW1 was the

last person who had seen the deceased before the incident. According to

the defence version, he tried to molest the deceased immediately before

the incident. But, there is absolutely no material to accept this defence

case or even to probabilise such a version.

        11.      Ext.P7 is the postmortem certificate. The postmortem findings

are as follows:

                         "    POSTMORTEM FINDINGS

                A.GENERAL

                         Body of a moderately built and nourished

                female of length 152 cm and weight 51 k.g. Eyes

                closed. Conjunctivae pale. Corneae hazy. Finger

                nails blue.    Hairs or entire scalp, eyebrows and

                eyelashes were synged.            Burnt remnants of

                brassiere, panties and underskirt were seen around

                the waist. Rigor mortis established and retained all

                over the body. Postmortem staining could not be

                made out due to burns

                         (Body refrigerated at 10.35 p.m. on 12.5.99)

                B.INJURIES (ANTEMORTEM) BURNS

Crl.Appeal No.476 of 2004                   8

                         Dermo epidermal burns involving entire body,

                except soles of both feet and left palm, with peeling

                off of skin at multiple places exposing crythematous

                areas underneath.

                C. OTHER FINDINGS

                         Skull intact.  Brain 1400 gm congested.

                Trachea and bronchi contained soot particles.

                Lungs Rt.300 gm, Lt.250 gm congested and

                oedematous.       Heart 250 gms, walls, valves and

                chambers normal. coronaries patent. Liver 1400

                gm congested.         Spleen 150 gm congested.

                Kidneys 150 gms each congested. Stomach and

                contents 200 gms, contained greenish brown

                mucoid fluid without any unusual smell. Mucosa

                normal.     Urinary bladder empty.    Genital organs

                uterus-normal size, cavity empty.       Appendages

                normal. Spinal column and cord intact.

                OPINION AS TO THE CAUSE OF DEATH:

                         Deceased died due to Burns."

        12.      It is true that the Doctor who issued Ext.P7 was not examined,

but there is no dispute regarding the findings in the postmortem certificate

that the deceased died on account of extensive burn injuries.

        13.      Now I shall deal with the defence evidence. DW1 is a Head

Constable in Malappuram Police Station and he was cited to prove that the

appellant filed a complaint (Ext.D2) before the Police and Ext.D3 is the first

Crl.Appeal No.476 of 2004               9

information report. The allegation in the case filed by the appellant against

PW1 and others is that on 15.05.1999 at about 15 hours, the accused

trespassed into the courtyard of the appellant and stole an autorickshaw

parked in the compound. The case was registered on the basis of a private

complaint filed by the appellant against the accused persons therein. It

came out in evidence that the case was filed by the appellant after he was

arrested in this case and released on bail. DW2 proved the investigation

and filing of Ext.D4 final report in the case filed by the appellant. DW3

proved Exts.D6 and D7. DW4 is a neighbour of the deceased. According

to him, he was the first person to enter the house after the mishap. At that

time, the house-hold members were not there. DW4 stated that he found

smoke emanating from the room wherein Shiny was found. He broke open

the door and found a burning kerosene lamp in the room. Testimony of

DW4 will only support the prosecution case that PW1 and other members

in her family were not there at the time when deceased Shiny set fire on

herself.

        14.      The case propounded by the defence that PW1 is the real

villan of the drama and because of his lascivious advancement towards the

deceased, she was forced to immolate herself is not established either by

evidence of the defence witnesses or in the cross-examination of PWs 1 to

3. It is true that there is evidence to show that the appellant and PW1 were

Crl.Appeal No.476 of 2004              10

engaged in a dispute before the incident. But, the defence case that PW1,

in order to wreak vengeance against the appellant, tangled him in a false

case and PWs 2 and 3, out of their servility to PW1, supported him cannot

be believed. In the absence of any reason to hold that mother of the

deceased had any intention to shield the actual offender from prosecution,

it cannot be held that she was unduly supporting PW1. Therefore, facts

and circumstances proved through material prosecution witnesses show

that the deceased committed suicide on account of the harassment meted

out by the appellant.

        15.      Learned counsel for the appellant placed reliance on the

decision of the Supreme Court in Sunil Bajaj v. State of M.P. ((2001) 9

SCC 417) to contend that the appellant in this case is entitled to an

acquittal since the prosecution failed to establish two essential ingredients

in Sec.304B IPC, viz., soon before the death the deceased has been

subjected to cruelty or harassment by her husband and the same was for

or in connection with demand of dowry. The principle in the above decision

can be easily distinguished in the facts and circumstances of this case.

        16.      Learned counsel for the appellant contended that there is no

material to hold that the incident happened within seven years of marriage

between the appellant and the deceased. Sec.304B IPC dealing with

'dowry death' reads as follows:

Crl.Appeal No.476 of 2004                 11

                         "Dowry death.-(1) Where the death of a

                woman is caused by any burns or bodily injury or

                occurs otherwise than under normal circumstances

                within seven years of her marriage and it is shown

                that soon before her death she was subjected to

                cruelty or harassment by her husband or any

                relative of her husband for, or in connection with,

                any demand for dowry, such death shall be called

                "dowry death", and such husband or relative shall

                be deemed to have caused her death.

                Explanation.-For the purposes of this sub-section,

                "dowry" shall have the same meaning as in section

                2 of the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961 (28 of 1961).

                (2) Whoever commits dowry death shall be

                punished with imprisonment for a term which shall

                not be less than seven years but which may extend

                to imprisonment for life."

The following essentials must be satisfied to attract an offence under

Sec.304B IPC:

                         "1) The death of a woman must have been

                caused by burns or bodily injury or otherwise than

                under normal circumstances;

                2) Such death must have occurred within 7 years of

                her marriage;

                3) Soon before her death, the woman must have

                been subjected to cruelty or harassment by her

                husband or by relatives of her husband;

Crl.Appeal No.476 of 2004                 12

                4) Such cruelty or harassment must be for or in

                connection with demand of dowry."

Sec.113 A of the Evidence Act deals with a presumption as to abetment of

suicide by a married woman. The provision reads as under:

                         "113A. Presumption as to abetment of

                suicide by a married woman.-When the question

                is whether the commission of suicide by a woman

                had been abetted by her husband or any relative of

                her husband and it is shown that she had committed

                suicide within a period of seven years from the date

                of her marriage and that her husband or such

                relative of her husband had subjected her to cruelty,

                the court may presume, having regard to all the

                other circumstances of the case, that such suicide

                had been abetted by her husband or by such

                relative of her husband.

                Explanation.-For the purposes of this section,

                "cruelty" shall have the same meaning as in section

                498A of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860)."

The expression 'soon before death' occurring in Sec.304B IPC has been

interpreted to mean that the harassment or cruelty meted out must have

happened within a reasonable time before the death. In this case, there is

ample evidence to show that on the previous night, the deceased

accompanied by the appellant came to her family house and narrated the

extreme sufferings experienced by her in the matrimonial home.

Crl.Appeal No.476 of 2004              13

Therefore, there is no reason to doubt whether the facts and circumstances

revealed by evidence show that the appellant is guilty of an offence under

Sec.304B IPC. It is also noteworthy that PWs 1 to 3 emphatically deposed

that the marriage between the deceased and the appellant was about two

years before the sad demise of Shiny. There is no challenge to this case of

PWs 1 to 3. Even though no document is produced to show the date of

marriage, considering the age of the parties and the reliable oral evidence,

I find that the marriage was well within seven years and the presumption

under Sec.113B of the Evidence Act is attracted in this case. There is no

material to rebut the presumption churned out either from the prosecution

evidence or by the defence evidence. Therefore, I find no legal infirmity in

the conviction of the appellant under Sec.304B IPC by the trial court.

        17.      Court below imposed rigorous imprisonment of five years on

the appellant and directed him to pay `1,000/- as fine. It is relevant to note

that PW2, the mother of the deceased, is entitled to get compensation for

the untimely and unnatural death of her daughter. True, the ability of the

accused to pay compensation is a relevant factor. It is also well settled that

if the substantive sentence is reduced in an appeal filed by the accused

and if fine amount is enhanced, it cannot be viewed as enhancement of the

sentence. Considering the age of the appellant and the social strata to

which the parties belong, I find that some modification in the sentence is

Crl.Appeal No.476 of 2004                 14

necessary to meet the ends of justice.

                 In the result, the appeal is partly allowed. Conviction of the

appellant under Sec.304B IPC is confirmed. The appellant shall undergo

rigorous imprisonment for a period of three years and pay a fine of

`25,000/- (Rupees Twentyfive thousand only), failing which, he shall

undergo simple imprisonment for a period of three months as default

sentence.         If fine amount is recovered, it shall be paid to PW2 as

compensation under Sec.357(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure. The

appellant is entitled to get set off under Sec.428 of the Code of Criminal

Procedure.         Court below shall take steps to execute the sentence on

receipt of records from this Court.

                 All pending interlocutory applications will stand dismissed.




                                                 A. HARIPRASAD, JUDGE.




cks



