
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                     PRESENT:

                          THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE P.BHAVADASAN

                 FRIDAY, THE 3RD DAY OF JANUARY 2014/13TH POUSHA, 1935

                                           CRL.A.No. 116 of 2005 ( )
                                                --------------------------


    AGAINST THE JUDGMENT IN SC 156/2000 OF ADDL. DISTRICT COURT (ADHOC),
                                        KALPETTA DATED 14-01-2005

APPELLANT/ACCUSED NOS.1 AND 2:
----------------------------------------------------

        1. MANU @ MUHAMMED, S/O. ALAVI,
            MOOPPAINAD AMSOM, MEPPADY, WAYANAD DISTRICT.

        2. AMINA @ KUJAMI, W/O. MANU @ MUHAMMAD,
            MOOPPAINAD AMSOM, MEPPADY, WAYANAD DISTRICT

            BY ADV. SRI.SUNNY MATHEW

RESPONDENTS/COMPLAINANTS:
------------------------------------------------

        1. THE SUB INSPECTOR OF POLICE,
            MEPPADY POLICE STATION.

        2. THE DEPUTY SUPERINTENDENT OF POLICE,
            KALPETTA.

            (RESPONDENTS 1 AND 2 REPRESENTED BY THE PUBLIC
            PROSECUTOR, HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM.)


            THIS CRIMINAL APPEAL HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD ON 03-01-2014, THE
COURT ON THE SAME DAY DELIVERED THE FOLLOWING:


sp


                           P.BHAVADASAN, J.
                     ---------------------------------------
                      Crl. Appeal No.116 OF 2005
                     ---------------------------------------
                Dated this the 3rd day of January, 2014

                                JUDGMENT

      Three persons were sought to be prosecuted for the offences

punishable under Sections 498A and 304B read with Section 34 IPC.

The 3rd accused is the husband of the deceased and the 1st and 2nd

accused are the parents of the 3rd accused. The 3rd accused was not

available for trial and hence 1st and 2nd accused were tried and they

were found guilty of the offences punishable under Section 498A IPC.

Each of them were sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for

three years and to pay a fine of Rs.10,000/- with a default clause of

simple imprisonment for six months each. In addition to the said

conviction, the 1st accused was also sentenced to undergo rigorous

imprisonment for four years and to pay a fine of Rs.20,000/- with

default clause of simple imprisonment for two years for the offence

under Section 306 IPC.

      2. The marriage between the deceased Khadeeja and the 3rd

accused was solemnized on 18.04.1993. As per the allegations and

as per the records, it is seen that at the time of marriage, 13

sovereigns of gold ornaments and Rs.25,000/- were promised to be

given. But only 5= sovereigns of gold ornaments and Rs.25,000/-

were given at the time of marriage and the balance 7= sovereigns of

Crl. Appeal No.116 OF 2005         2




gold ornaments was agreed to be given within one year of marriage.

But only 5= sovereigns of gold ornaments were given within the

agreed period. It appears that since the balance gold was not given

within the time, Khadeeja was sent back to her home and after the 2

sovereigns were given she was taken back. A month thereafter

Khadeeja returned home for delivery. After delivery, she was taken to

her matrimonial house. The allegation is that the accused persons

demanded Rs.15,000/- more as dowry and since the said amount was

not paid they used to physically and mentally harass the victim and

also prevented her from either going to her house or her relatives from

seeing her. Unable to bear the torture any more, she committed

suicide by consuming poison on 16.03.1998.

      3. PW1, who is the uncle of the victim, laid Ext.P1 First

Information Statement. PW21 recorded the First Information

Statement given by PW1 and thereafter he registered a crime as per

Ext.P1(a) FIR. Investigation was taken over by the then Dy.S.P., who

was no more by the time when trial began. His successor in office,

who conducted subsequent investigation, was examined as PW22. He

speaks about recovery of Exts.P6,7 and 8 series of letters and seizure

of MO1 tin, which contains poison. He then speaks about having made

arrangements for conducting the inquest over the body of the victim.

Crl. Appeal No.116 OF 2005           3




Inquest was conducted and Ext.P21 report was obtained. The body

was sent for autopsy and PW19 conducted autopsy and furnished

Ext.P23 certificate. The chemical analysis report is Ext.P24. PW22

had the articles seized by him sent for chemical analysis and obtained

Ext.P29 report. He recorded statement of witnesses. He speaks about

having seized Exts.P3 and P4 letters as per Ext.20 Mahazar. After

completing investigation, charges were framed before the court

concerned.

      4. The court, before which, final report was laid, took cognizance

of the offences. Finding that the offences are exclusively triable by a

Court of Sessions, the said court committed the case to Sessions

Court, Wayanad under Section 209 Cr.P.C. That Court made over the

case to Additional Sessions Court, (Adhoc), Kalpetta for trial and

disposal. The latter court, on receipt of records, framed charges for the

offences punishable under Sections 498A and 304B read with Section

34 IPC. To the charge accused pleaded not guilty and claimed to be

tried. The prosecution, therefore, had PWs 1 to 22 examined and

Exts.P1 to P30 marked. MOs 1 to 5 were got identified and marked.

      5. After the close of the prosecution evidence, the accused were

questioned under Section 313 Cr.P.C. They denied all the incriminating

circumstances brought out in evidence against them and maintained

Crl. Appeal No.116 OF 2005          4




that they were innocent. They further stated that they have not done

any act which amounts to cruelty and they have been falsely

implicated. They seems to have filed a statement stating their defence.

       6. Finding that the accused could not be acquitted under Section

232 Cr.P.C., they were asked to enter on their defence. The accused

had DWs 1 to 5 examined and Exts.D1 to D5 marked.

       7. On an appreciation of evidence in the case, mainly relying on

the testimony of PWs 1,2,3 and 5, the court below came to the

conclusion that there was a demand for dowry of a sum of Rs.15,000/-

and due to the non-payment of that amount by the family members of

the victim, she was mentally and physically tortured by the accused

and they would have suffered conviction. Holding so, they were found

guilty.

       8. The learned counsel appearing for the appellants contended

that the court below has not considered the evidence in the proper

perspective and has mechanically acted on the evidence given by the

witnesses, who are closely related to the victim. It is significant to

notice, according to the learned counsel, that Ext.P2, which was a

complaint said to have been laid by the father of the victim does not

mention about the demand for dowry of Rs.15,000/-, which the court

below found in favour of the prosecution. Had there been any such

Crl. Appeal No.116 OF 2005             5




demand and had it been a point of dispute between the two families,

necessarily and surely the said demand made by the accused persons

would have certainly found a place in Ext.P2 complaint. Drawing

attention to Ext.P18, the reply given by the 1st accused to the mosque

committee, on being informed about the complaint received by the

committee from PW2, it was pointed out that, it reveals the true state

of affairs. According to the learned counsel, Ext.P18 would show that

Hamsa, the brother of the victim, who was involved in a rape case

along with others, had gone to the house of the accused persons and

picked up quarrel with them. Unable to bear the activities of those

persons, the accused was forced to take a stand that the family

members of the victim shall not come to their house. This being the

true state of affairs, the findings of the court below that the victim was

not allowed to go to her house and was not allowed to meet her family

members because Rs.15,000/- demanded by the accused persons

was not given, cannot be true. This crucial aspect has been omitted to

be noticed by the court below.

      9. The learned counsel for the appellants conceded that it is

true, PWs 1,2,3,5 etc. do say about the demand for dowry of

Rs.15,000/- but that can be taken only with a pinch of salt in the light

of the contents of Ext.P2. Except for a general and vague statement

Crl. Appeal No.116 OF 2005          6




that the victim was mentally and physically harassed by the accused

persons, there is no reference of any specific incident of harassment

which would indicate that the accused were cruel to the victim. The

letters relied on by the lower court has to be read as a whole and it

would clearly show that there was no ill-treatment at all. In all

probability, according to the learned counsel, for sending the husband

of the victim abroad, the family might have incurred expenses and they

hoped they could recoup it from the family of the victim. There is

absolutely no evidence to show that either the 1st accused or the 2nd

accused had ill-treated the victim or had made her life so miserable

that she was driven to commit suicide. Even the letters addressed by

the 1st accused to his wife do not indicate any ill-treatment by the

members of the family of the accused. Of course, there is a reference,

according to the learned counsel, that the 1st accused cautioned them

to move careful and not to go to her house except after settlement of

the dispute. Even assuming, according to the learned counsel, that

there is some material as against the 3rd accused, there is absolutely

no evidence as against the 1st and 2nd accused having committed any

act which would amount to cruelty whether it be physical or mental.

      10. The learned counsel for the appellants then contended that

even assuming that the 1st and 2nd accused were strict and harsh on

Crl. Appeal No.116 OF 2005           7




the victim, that by itself cannot be termed as cruelty under Section

498A IPC. There is absolutely no evidence to show that any act of

cruelty was meted out for non-payment of dowry as claimed by the

prosecution.

      11. At any rate, according to the learned counsel for the

appellants, even assuming that there was some displeasure shown by

the 1st and 2nd accused, the finding of the court below that the 1st

accused is guilty of the offence under Section 306 IPC is unjustified

and is not supported by any legal evidence. The learned counsel

therefore contended that the conviction and sentence cannot stand.

      12. The learned Public Prosecutor, on the other hand,

contended that the evidence of PWs 1,2,3,5,6 etc. are sufficient to

show that the victim was being ill-treated because a sum of

Rs.15,000/- demanded as dowry was not paid by the members of the

family of the victim. All of them do say about the said fact. Relying on

Ext.P18, the learned Public Prosecutor contended that, to a certain

extent, it is admitted by the 1st accused that the members of the family

of the victim were not allowed to enter the matrimonial house of the

victim and that would show that their relationship was far from

pleasant. Pointing out that the 3rd accused had left the deceased in her

paternal house on failure of the father of the victim to give the balance

Crl. Appeal No.116 OF 2005          8




two sovereigns of gold ornaments within the time stipulated, the

learned Public Prosecutor contended that the said conduct would

show the attitude of the members of the family of the 3rd accused

towards the victim. At any rate, according to the learned Public

Prosecutor, the court below had chosen to accept the findings of PWs

1,2,3,5 & 6 and there is no reason for this Court to take a different

view.

      13. The prosecution case appears to be that the accused

demanded a sum of Rs.15,000/- as dowry in addition to what was

given at the time of marriage. Going by the evidence of the

prosecution witnesses namely PWs 1,2,3 and 5, it would appear that

at the time of marriage, they had agreed to give 7= sovereigns of gold

ornaments and Rs.25,000/- in cash. Even though their demand was

much more. It is also seen from their evidence that at the time of

marriage only 5= sovereigns of gold was given and they promised to

give balance two sovereigns of gold within a year of marriage.

Admittedly, even going by the evidence of PWs 1,2 and 3, it can be

seen that they could not keep their word of giving two sovereigns

within an year and that made the 3rd accused to send the victim to her

house and she was left in her house. The evidence is also clear to the

effect that it was only after two sovereigns were given that the victim

Crl. Appeal No.116 OF 2005            9




was taken back to the matrimonial house. These facts cannot be

disputed the defence.

       14. At the time when the 3rd accused took the victim back to the

matrimonial house, she was carrying and almost a month thereafter,

she returned to her house for delivery. The evidence would show that

after 76 days of delivery, the child and the victim were taken to the

matrimonial house.

       15. The evidence of PWs 2,3 and 5 is to the effect that

subsequently the accused person demanded a sum of Rs.15,000/- as

dowry and when that was not given, they started to ill-treat her. These

witnesses would say that the accused did not let the victim go to her

house and when the family members of the victim went over to the

matrimonial house of the victim and tried to meet the victim and the

child, they were prevented from doing so.

       16. The evidence given by PWs 2,3 and 5 in the above effect

was found to be impressive by the court below. The court below also

drew its conclusion from Exts.P6,7 & 8, which are letters said to have

been written by the 3rd accused to the victim, cautioning her about her

life in the matrimonial house. It would also appear from those letters

that he did not like the victim going to her house.

       17. Ext.P2, admittedly, is a petition given by PW2 before the

Crl. Appeal No.116 OF 2005          10




Mosque Committee complaining about the conduct of the accused

persons. A reading of that petition would clearly show that it must have

been given after the demand of Rs.15,000/- was made. Surprisingly

enough, Ext.P2 is totally silent about the demand for Rs.15,000/- as

dowry by the accused persons. It may be remembered here that the

main complaint of PWs 2,3 and 5 was that it is because the demand

for dowry of the additional Rs.15,000/- was not met that the victim was

not sent to her house and they were not allowed to meet the victim. As

already noticed, this crucial aspect spoken to by these witnesses at

the time of evidence is conspicuously absent in Ext.P2. In Ext.P2, all

what is stated is that for the reasons not known to them, the accused

prevented the victim from going to her house or letting them seeing

her and they sought the intervention of the Mosque Committee to

resolve the issue. It is here that Ext.P18 has importance. On getting

Ext.P2 complaint, it appears that the Mosque Committee had

addressed the 1st accused regarding the issue and Ext.P18 is the reply

given by the 1st accused. That gives in detail the reasons as to why the

accused persons were constrained to object to the members of the

family of the victim coming to their house. Ext.P18 indicates that, the

son of PW2 and others had gone to the matrimonial house of the

victim and created problems there and it ultimately resulted in the

Crl. Appeal No.116 OF 2005           11




police intervening in the matter. The 1st accused replied to the Mosque

Committee that he had to spend a lot of amount for settling the issues

or unless he is recouped, he will not be able to settle the disputes

amicably. The witnesses examined to prove the conciliation talks by

the prosecution do not speak about the demand for dowry at all.

       18. It is also important to notice that it is not clear from the

evidence as to when the demand for additional dowry of Rs.15,000/-

was made and by whom and to whom. The prosecution allegation is

that the 1st accused had a litigation with one Moidieen and to settle

that dispute, they demanded Rs.15,000/-. The evidence in the case

shows that, that matter was settled even though Rs.15,000/- was not

paid to the accused by the family of the victim.

       19. The defence also had produced certain letters namely

Exts.D1 to D5, which they claim that the letters written by the victim to

her husband. They gave a different picture altogether. Even assuming

that much importance cannot be given to those letters, the question

remains is whether the prosecution has established that the victim was

ill-treated by the 1st and 2nd accused.

       20. None of the witnesses examined namely PWs2,3 and 5 say

about they having seen any physical assault either by the 1st accused

or by the 2nd accused on the victim. But their main grievance is that the

Crl. Appeal No.116 OF 2005          12




victim was not allowed to go to her house nor were they allowed to see

her. The reason for the same, the 1st accused had already been

referred to. Of course, all these witnesses say that deceased

Khadeeja used to tell them that she was being ill-treated by the

accused persons. But none of these witnesses referred to any specific

ill-treatment or assault by accused 1 and 2. All these three witnesses

simply say that "V^x`x_5N^Oa" N^HX_5N^Oa" I`A_M_A^yaI^O_xaKa"

without giving any details.

        21. Under the above unsatisfactory state of affairs, it is difficult to

understand how the court below came to the conclusion that the

offences under Sections 498A and 304B IPC have been made out.

True, the death of the victim was an unnatural one and that was within

seven years of marriage. But, in order to attract Section 113A of the

Indian Evidence Act, certain ingredients will have to be established. It

is for the prosecution to establish the ingredients to attract Section

113A in the case on hand ie. (i) a woman committed suicide (ii) such

act was committed within a period of seven years from the marriage

(iii) the husband or his relatives are subjected to have cruelty. In the

case on hand, there is want of evidence to show that the victim was ill-

treated by the 1st and 2nd accused. Even assuming that the position

Crl. Appeal No.116 OF 2005           13




may not be such as far as the 3rd accused is concerned, no particular

overt act is attributed either to the 1st accused or to the 2nd accused,

which would indicate that they had ill-treated the victim.

      In the above circumstances, this Court is unable to uphold the

finding of the court below that the 1st and 2nd accused are guilty of the

offence punishable under Section 498A IPC and also that the 1st

accused is guilty of the offence under Section 306 IPC.

      For the above reasons, this appeal is allowed. The conviction

and sentence passed by the court below for the offence under Section

498A IPC as against the 1st and 2nd accused are set aside, so also the

conviction and sentence as against the 1st accused for the offence

under Section 306IPC, as they are not guilty of the said offences.

Their bail bonds shall stand cancelled and they are set at liberty. If the

fine amount has already been paid, the same shall be refunded to

them.




                                             P. BHAVADASAN, JUDGE

sp



