
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                             PRESENT:

             THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE V.K.MOHANAN

   WEDNESDAY, THE 1ST DAY OF OCTOBER 2014/9TH ASWINA, 1936

                     Crl.MC.No. 5564 of 2014 ()
                   ---------------------------
    CRIME NO. 139/2014 OF ELATHUR POLICE STATION , KOZHIKODE

PETITIONER(S)/PETITIONERS/ACCUSED:
--------------------------------

      1. RITHESH AGED 38 YEARS
         S/O.BALARAJAN, DIVYASREE, EDAKKADU
         POST WEST HILL, KOZHIKODE-673005

      2. PRABHAVATHY AGED 67 YEARS
         W/O.BALARAJAN, DIVYASREE, EDAKKADU
         POST WEST HILL, KOZHIKODE-673005

      3. REENA AGED 39 YEARS
         W/O.AJAI KUMAR , KALLUNGAL HOUSE, POST EATHUR
         PUTHIYANIRATHU , KOZHIKODE

      4. DIVYA AGED 29 YEARS
         W/O.SARIL, THEKKINADATH HOUSE, AMRITHA LANE
         POST KURIACHIRA , THRISSUR

      BY ADV. SRI.K.A.SALIL NARAYANAN

RESPONDENT(S)/RESPONDENTS:
--------------------------

      1. STATE OF KERALA
         REP BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR, HIGH COURT OF KERALA
         ERNAKULAM

      2. LEENU
         D/O.SUDHAKARAN, PULPRA KUTTAUM POYIL CHALIL VEEDU
         POST MALAPPARAMBA, KOZHIKODE-673009

                 R2 BY ADV. SRI.B.HARISH KUMAR
                       BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SMT. R. REMA

       THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE HAVING COME UP FOR ADMISSION
ON    01-10-2014, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE
FOLLOWING:

            Crl.MC.No. 5564 of 2014 ()
          ---------------------------

                    APPENDIX

             PETITIONER(S)' EXHIBITS
          ---------------------------

ANNEXURE 1:-COPY OF THE FIR IN CRIME NO 139/14 OF
THE ELATHUR POLICE STATION, KOZHIKODE DISTRICT

ANNEXURE 2:-AFFIDAVIT SWORN TO BY THE 2ND
RESPONDENT


                         V.K. MOHANAN, J.
              ---------------------------------
                     Crl.M.C. No. 5564 of 2014
            -----------------------------------
             Dated this the Ist day of October, 2014


                                ORDER

       he above petition is filed under Section 482 of the Criminal

Procedure Code (for short 'Cr.P.C.') at the instance of the petitioners,

who are the accused in Crime No. 139 of 2014 of Elathur Police

Station, Kozhikode District for offences    punishable under Sections

498 A, 406, 294 (b) and 324 read with Section 34 of IPC, with a prayer

to quash the entire proceedings in the above case, as the matter is

settled out of court.

          2. The allegation in the above case is the marriage between

the first accused and the 2nd respondent was solemnized on 12th June

Crl.M.C. No. 5564 of 2014
                                      2


2011. They stayed together for a period of two years. After marriage,

the complainant used to harass the de facto complainant both mentally

and physically on the ground that the dowry brought by her was

insufficient and also found fault with her not having a child and

now, the case of the petitioner is that the matter is settled out of court.

          3. Heard the learned counsel for the petitioners as well as the

2nd respondent. I have also heard the learned Public Prosecutor.

          4.   The learned counsel for the petitioners submitted that during

the pendency of the above crime, the matter is settled amicably between the

parties to the dispute which is the subject matter of the above case.

Therefore, the continuation of the proceedings in the above case/crime is

abuse of process of law and proceedings.

          5. The learned counsel for the 2nd respondent who on the basis

of specific instruction received from the 2nd respondent submitted that the

above respondent, who is the de facto complainant does not intend to

proceed any further against the petitioners and she has no grievance against

them.

Crl.M.C. No. 5564 of 2014
                                       3


          6. I have carefully considered the above submissions of the

respective counsel. I have verified the documents and materials produced

along with the above petition. In the given facts and circumstances of the

case and especially in the light of the settlement arrived between the parties

to the dispute, the learned Public Prosecutor has also no objection in

allowing the above petition.

          7. Having regard to the facts and circumstances involved in the

case, it can be seen that the offences involved in the above case are only

498 A, 406, 294 (b) and 324 read with Section 34 of IPC which are

more or less personal in nature and no public interest is involved. It is

pertinent to note that though such offences are involved, the real parties to

the dispute approached this Court after having amicably settled the matter.

From the submission made by the counsel for the 2nd respondent, it appears

to me that the de facto complainant has no further grievance against the

petitioners/accused in the light of the settlement arrived by them. In this

juncture, it is relevant to note the decisions of the Honourable Apex Court

reported in Gian Singh v. State of Punjab [2012(4) KLT 108(SC)] and

Crl.M.C. No. 5564 of 2014
                                                4


Jitendra Raghuvanshi and Others v. Babita Raghuvanshi and another

[2013 (1) KLD 817 (SC)]. In Gian Singh's case, the Supreme Court has held

as follows:-

                       "57.    The position that emerges from the above
            discussion can be summarised thus:         the power of the High
            Court in quashing a criminal proceeding or FIR or complaint in
            exercise of its inherent jurisdiction is distinct and different from
            the power given to a criminal court for compounding the
            offences under S.320 of the Code. Inherent power is of wide
            plenitude with no statutory limitation but it has to be exercised
            in accord with the guideline engrafted in such power viz;(i) to
            secure the ends of justice or (ii) to prevent abuse of the process
            of any Court.        In what cases power to quash the criminal
            proceeding or complaint or F.I.R. may be exercised where the
            offender and victim have settled their dispute would depend on
            the facts and circumstances of each case and no category can be
            prescribed..

It is further held as follows:-

             "......... But the criminal cases having overwhelmingly and pre-
             dominatingly civil flavour stand on different footing for the
             purposes of quashing, particularly the offences arising from
             commercial, financial,mercantile, civil, partnership or such like
             transactions or the offences arising out of matrimony relating to
             dowry etc. or the family disputes where the wrong is basically
             private or personal in nature and the parties have resolved their
             entire dispute. In this category of cases, High Court may quash
             criminal proceedings if in its view, because of the compromise
             between the offender and victim, the possibility of conviction is
             remote and bleak and continuation of criminal case would put
             accused to great oppression and prejudice and extreme injustice
             would be caused to him by not quashing the criminal case despite
             full and complete settlement and compromise with the victim........"


Further, in Jitendra Raghuvanshi's case, the Apex Court has held as

Crl.M.C. No. 5564 of 2014
                                                5


follows:-


                   "7. It is not in dispute that matrimonial disputes have been
          on considerable increase in recent times resulting in filing of
          complaints under Sections 498A and 406 of I.P.C. not only against
          the husband but also against the relatives of the husband.        The
          question is when such matters are resolved either by the wife
          agreeing to rejoin the matrimonial home or by mutual settlement of
          other pending disputes for which both the sides approached the High
          Court and jointly prayed for quashing of the criminal proceedings or
          the FIR or complaint by the wife under Sections 498A and 406 of
          I.P.C., whether the prayer can be declined on the sole ground that
          since the offences are non-compoundable under Section 320 of the
          Code, it would be impermissible for the court to quash the criminal
          proceedings or FIR or complaint.
                   8. It is not in dispute that in the case on hand subsequent to
          the filing of the criminal complaint under Sections 498A and 406 of
          IPC and Sections 3 and 4 of the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961, with
          the help and intervention of family members, friends and well-
          wishers, the parties concerned have amicably settled their
          differences and executed a compromise/settlement.             Pursuant
          thereto, the appellants filed the said compromise before the Trial
          Court with a request to place the same on record and to drop the
          criminal proceedings against the appellants herein. It is also not in
          dispute that in additional to the mutual settlement arrived at by the
          parties, respondent/-wife has also filed an affidavit stating that she
          did not wish to pursue the criminal proceedings against the
          appellants and fully supported the contents of the settlement deed. It
          is the grievance of the appellants that no only the Trial Court
          rejected such prayer of the parties but also the High Court failed toe
          exercise its jurisdiction under Section 482 of the Code only on the
          ground that the criminal proceedings relate to the offences
          punishable under Sections 498A and 406 of IPC which are non-
          compoundable in nature."
                   "12. In our view, it is the duty of the Courts to encourage
          genuine settlements of matrimonial disputes, particularly, when the
          same are on considerable increase. Even if the offences are non-
          compoundable, if they relate to matrimonial disputes and the Court
          is satisfied that the parties have settled the same amicably and
          without any pressure, we hold that for the purpose of securing ends
          of justice, Section 320 of the Code would not be a bar to the exercise
          of power of quashing of FIR, complaint or the subsequent criminal

Crl.M.C. No. 5564 of 2014
                                              6


          proceedings.
                  13. There has been an outburst of matrimonial disputes in
          recent times.   The institution of marriage occupies an important
          place and it has an important role to play in the society. Therefore,
          every effort should be made in the interest of the individuals in order
          to enable them to settle down in life and live peacefully.       If the
          parties ponder over their defaults and terminate their disputes
          amicably by mutual agreement instead of fighting it out in a Court of
          law, in order to do complete justice in the matrimonial matters, the
          Courts should be less hesitant in exercising its extraordinary
          jurisdiction. It is trite to state that the power under Section 482
          should be exercised sparingly and with circumspection only when
          the Court is convinced, on the basis of material on record, that
          allowing the proceedings to continue would be an abuse of the
          process of the Court or that the ends of justice require that the
          proceedings ought to be quashed."


Considering the particular facts and circumstances in this case, it can be

seen further that the criminal proceedings are initiated consequent to the

matrimonial dispute arose among the parties and both the disputes are now

amicably settled between the parties.            According to me, in the light of the

facts and circumstances involved in the present case and particularly in

view of the settlement arrived in the present case, the dictum laid in the

above decisions will be squarely applicable in the present case. I am of the

view that as the parties to the dispute settled the issues amicably, it is the

duty of this Court to promote such settlement, instead of compelling the

parties to go on with the dispute. It is pertinent to note that since the matter

Crl.M.C. No. 5564 of 2014
                                        7


is settled out of court, in the event of proceeding with the trial, there would

not have any fruitful prosecution, resulting the conviction of the accused,

rather the net result would be sheer waste of judicial time and abuse of

process of the court and proceedings. Thus, according to me, following the

decisions cited supra, this Crl.M.C. can be allowed granting the relief as

sought for.

          In the result, following the dictum laid down in the above

decisions, this Crl.M.C. is allowed, quashing the entire proceedings

against the petitioners in Crime No. 139/2014 of Elathur Police

Station, Kozhikode District.



                                                     V.K.MOHANAN,
                                                           Judge

ani/



