
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                      PRESENT:

                       THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE K.RAMAKRISHNAN

                  MONDAY,THE 2ND DAY OF JUNE 2014/12TH JYAISHTA, 1936

                                           Crl.MC.No. 2260 of 2014 ()
                                                ---------------------------
     CRIME NO. 141/2012 OF GURUVAYOOR POLICE STATION, THRISSUR DISTRICT
                                                     ----------------

PETITIONERS/ACCUSED :
---------------------------------------

        1. UDAYAN, AGED 41 YEARS
            S/O.SARASWATHIYAMMA
            KURUVANGATTU PUTHANVEETTIL HOUSE
            GURUVAYUR AMSOM DESOM, CHAVAKKAD TALUK
            THRISSUR DISTRICT.

        2. SUNIL LAL, AGED 34 YEARS
            S/O. SURENDRAN, KATTUNGAL HOUSE, PAZHAVEEDU P.O.,
            PALLATHURUTHY, ALAPPUZHA DISTRICT.

            BY ADV. SRI.RAJIT

RESPONDENTS/STATE & DEFACTO COMPLAINANT :
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

        1. STATE OF KERALA,
            REP. BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR
            HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM.

        2. VIMAL, AGED 30 YEARS
            S/O.KRISHNAN VAIDYAR, VALIYATH HOUSE
            THAMARAYOOR DESOM, POOKODE VILLAGE,
            CHAVAKKAD TALUK, THRISSUR DISTRICT-680 506.

             R1 BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SMT. S. HYMA
             R2 BY ADV. SRI.V.V.JOY

            THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE HAVING COME UP FOR ADMISSION
            ON 02-06-2014, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE FOLLOWING:




Mn
                                                                                 ...2/-

Crl.MC.No. 2260 of 2014 ()
-------------------------------------

                                                      APPENDIX

PETITIONERS' ANNEXURES :
--------------------------------------------

ANNEXURE-A                     COPY OF THE FINAL REPORT FILED BY THE GURUVAYOOR
                               POLICE STATION, THRISSUR DISTRICT.

ANNEXURE-B                     COPY OF THE AFFIDAVIT FILED BY THE 2ND RESPONDENT
                               EVIDENCING THE ABOVE FACT.

RESPONDENT(S)' EXHIBITS :                        NIL
-------------------------------------------------------

                                                                        //TRUE COPY//




                                                                        P.A. TO JUDGE
Mn


                K.RAMAKRISHNAN, J.
               ---------------------------
               Crl.M.C.No.2260 of 2014
              -------------------------------
        Dated this the 2nd day of June, 2014

                         ORDER




        This is an application filed by the accused Nos.

1 and 2 in C.C.No. 1861/2013 on the files of the

Judicial First Class Magistrate's Court, Chavakkad to

quash the proceedings in view of the settlement under

Section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure

(hereinafter called as the 'Code').

        2. It is alleged in the petition that the

petitioners were arrayed as accused Nos. 1 and 2 in

C.C.No.1861/2013 on the files of        the Judicial First

Class Magistrate's Court, Chavakkad. The above case

was originated on the basis of private complaint filed

by the second respondent against the petitioners

alleging that the petitioners have conspired together

and created false documents in respect of the shop

room belonging to the mother of the de facto

complainant and created documents and using these

Crl.M.C.No.2260 of 2014       2

false documents as genuine documents obtained license

to conduct business in the shop room from the

Guruvayoor       Municipality and  thereby   they   have

committed the offences punishable under Sections 120

(B), 420, 465, 468, 471 and Section 34 of the Indian

Penal code. He filed two complaints in respect of these

transactions one in respect of creating documents in

respect of the shop and other in respect of obtaining

license from the Guruvayoor Municipality using these

false documents. Both these complaints were forwarded

to the police by the learned Magistrate and two crimes

were registered namely the present Crime No.141/2012

of Guruvayoor Police Station and another Crime was

also registered and after the completion of investigation

separate final reports were filed and they were taken on

file as C.C.No.1861/2013 and 1675/2013 on the files of

the Judicial First Class Magistrate's Court, Chavakkad

against the same petitioners.

         3. The petitioner filed Crl.M.C.No.639/2014

before this Court for quashing C.C.No.1675/2013 and

Crl.M.C.No.2260 of 2014          3

this Court by judgment dated 20/01/2014 quashed the

proceedings.      Now the present case has been settled

between the parties. Since some of the offences are

non compoundable in nature,            they could not file

application before the concerned Magistrate's court for

compounding. So the petitioners have no other remedy

except to approach this court seeking the following

relief.

    1. "Quash the proceedings pending against the

         petitioner as C.C.No.1861/2013 of JFCM,

         Chavakkad     arising from Crime No.141 of

         2012 of Guruvayoor Police Station, Thrissur

         District.

     2. Grant such other relief deemed fit to this

         Hon'ble Court."



         4. Second respondent appeared through counsel

and submitted that the matter has been settled between

the parties and the connected case was quashed by this

Court and he has no objection in quashing the

proceedings. He had filed Annexure B affidavit stating

these facts.

Crl.M.C.No.2260 of 2014       4

         5. Counsel for the petitioner submitted that

since the matter has been settled between the parties

and the connected case       which was registered on the

basis of similar allegations was quashed by this Court on

the basis of settlement, no purpose will be served by

keeping this case on file and so he prayed for allowing

the application.

         6. The learned Public Prosecutor on instructions,

as directed by this Court submitted that there was no

other case against the petitioners but opposed the

application on the ground that serious offences were

alleged have been committed.

         7. Heard both sides.

         8. It is an admitted fact that the shop room

belongs to the mother of the de facto complainant and

the petitioners were in possession of the building. After

the death of the mother of the de facto complainant,

when the de facto complainant        came to know that

some documents have been created forging the

signature of his mother, he filed two complaints before

Crl.M.C.No.2260 of 2014         5

the Judicial First Class Magistrate's Court, Chavakkad

which was forwarded to the police           and Guruvayoor

police has registered Crime No.141/2012 and another

crime against       the petitioners alleging offences under

Sections 420, 465, 468, 471, 120(B) and Section 34 of

the Indian Penal Code.         After investigation, separate

final reports were filed in both the cases and they were

taken on file as C.C.No.1861/2013 and 1675/2013, both

on the files of the Judicial First Class Magistrate's Court,

Chavakkad. Both these cases were settled between the

parties. The petitioners herein filed Crl.M.C. 639/2014

before this Court       to quash the proceedings in C.C.

NO.1675/2013        and this    Court   by     order  dated

20/01/2014 allowed the application to quash the

proceedings accepting the settlement. The present case

also arose on the basis of similar allegations. This case

was also settled between the parties now. Further it is a

property transaction between the parties and it is not

having any public interest. Now they have settled the

property dispute due to the intervention of mediators.

Crl.M.C.No.2260 of 2014             6

So no purpose will be served by allowing the case to

continue in view of the settlement              and conviction of

such cases will be remote as well.

          9. In the decision reported in Gian Singh

V.State of Punjab [2012 (4) KLT 108(SC)] the

Hon'ble Supreme Court has held as follows:

                  "The position that emerges from the above

        discussion can be summarised thus: the power of

        the High Court in quashing in criminal proceeding or

        F.I.R. or complaint in exercise of its inherent

        jurisdiction is distinct and different from the power

        given to a criminal court for compounding the

        offences under S.320 of the Code. Inherent power

        is of wide plenitude with no statutory limitation but

        it has to be exercised in accord with the guideline

        engrafted in such power viz;(i) to secure the ends

        of justice or (ii) to prevent abuse of the process of

        any Court.     In what cases power to quash the

        criminal proceeding or complaint or F.I.R may be

        exercised where the offender and victim have

        settled their dispute would depend on the facts and

        circumstances of each case and no category can be

        prescribed.     However, before exercise of such

        power, the High Court must have due regard to the

        nature and gravity of the crime.         Heinous and

        serious offences of mental depravity or offences like

        murder, rape, dacoity, etc., cannot be fittingly

Crl.M.C.No.2260 of 2014            7

        quashed even though the victim or victim's family

        and the offender have settled the dispute.      Such

        offences are not private in nature and have serious

        impact on society.       Similarly, any compromise

        between the victim and offender in relation to the

        offences under special statutes like Prevention of

        Corruption Act or the offences committed by public

        servants while working in that capacity etc; cannot

        provide   for  any   basis   for   quashing  criminal

        proceedings involving such offences.        But the

        criminal cases having overwhelmingly and pre-

        dominatingly civil flavour stand on different footing

        for the purposes of quashing, particularly the

        offences   arising   from    commercial,   financial,

        mercantile,   civil,    partnership   or  such   like

        transactions   or   the  offences   arising  out   of

        matrimony relating to dowry, etc; or the family

        disputes where the wrong is basically private or

        personal in nature and the parties have resolved

        their entire dispute. In this category of case, High

        Court may quash criminal proceedings if in its view,

        because of the compromise between the offender

        and victim, the possibility of conviction is remote

        and bleak and continuation of criminal case would

        put accused to great oppression and prejudice and

        extreme injustice would be caused to him by not

        quashing    the  criminal   case   despite full  and

        complete settlement and compromise with the

        victim.   In other words, the High Court must

        consider whether it would be unfair or contrary to

        the interest of justice to continue with the criminal

Crl.M.C.No.2260 of 2014             8

        proceeding    or   continuation    of   the  criminal

        proceeding would tantamount to abuse of process

        of law despite settlement and compromise between

        the victim and wrongdoer and whether to secure

        the ends of justice, it is appropriate that criminal

        case is put to end and if the answer to the above

        question(s) is in affirmative, the High Court shall be

        well within its jurisdiction to quash the criminal

        proceeding."




         10. In view of the dictum laid down in the above

decision and also considering the fact that the matter

has been settled between the parties due to the

intervention     of mediators and the connected case in

respect of the same shop room which was obtained by

using the alleged forged document in this case has been

quashed by this Court and in view of the settlement, no

purpose will be served by keeping the case on file as

conviction of such cases will be remote and it will be

only a wastage of Judicial time as well, this Court feels

that it is a fit case where the power under Section 482

of the Code has to be invoked to quash the proceedings.

         So the application is allowed and further

Crl.M.C.No.2260 of 2014       9

proceedings in C.C.No.1861/2013 (Crime No.141/2012

of Guruvayoor Police Station) now pending before the

Judicial First Class Magistrate's Court, Chavakkad as

against the petitioners is quashed.

         Office is directed to communicate this order to

the concerned court immediately for necessary further

action in this regard.


                          Sd/-K.RAMAKRISHAN
                                   JUDGE




MJL



