
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                      PRESENT:

                            THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE K.HARILAL

              THURSDAY, THE 16TH DAY OF JANUARY 2014/26TH POUSHA, 1935

                                           Crl.Rev.Pet.No. 879 of 2013
                                              -------------------------------


CRL.A 172/2012 of III ADDITIONAL DISTRICT & SESSIONS COURT (ADHOC-I),
THODUPUZHA
MC 29/2010 of J.M.F.C.,NEDUMKANDAM

REVISION PETITIONER(S)/APPELLANT/RESPONDENT:
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

            SHIJO, S/O.VELAPPAN
            MOLATHU HOUSE, SENAPATHY KARA
            VATTAPARA VILLAGE, UDUMBANCHOLA TALUK, IDUKKI.

            BY ADVS.SRI.V.G.ARUN
                        SRI.T.R.HARIKUMAR

COMPLAINANT(S)/RESPONDENTS/APPLICANT & STATE:
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

       1. RENJU RAJAN, D/O.RAJAN
            PANANKUNNEL HOUSE, PARATHODU KARA, UDUMBANCHOLA TALUK
            PATHANAMTHITTA DISTRICT - 685 554

       2. STATE OF KERALA
            REPRESENTED BY THE PUBLIC PROSECUTOR
            HIGH COURT OF KERALA, KOCHI-682 031.

            R1 BYADV. SRI.M.B.SANDEEP
            R1 BYADV. SMT.R.PRIYA
            R1 BYADV. SRI.V.VISALAJAYAN
            R2 BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SRI. ROY THOMAS

            THIS CRIMINAL REVISION PETITION HAVING COME UP FOR ADMISSION
ON 16-01-2014, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE FOLLOWING:




OKB


                         K.HARILAL, J.

                   _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _

                   Crl.R.P. No.879 of 2013
                   _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _

            Dated this the 16th day of January, 2014



                             O R D E R



           The   revision    petitioner    is   the  respondent in

M.C.No.29/2010 on the files of the Judicial First Class

Magistrate's Court, Nedumkandam as well as the appellant in

Criminal Appeal No.172/2012 on the files of the III Additional

District and Sessions Judge (Ad hoc-I), Thodupuzha. The 1st

respondent herein filed the above M.C. under Section 12 of the

Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2005, seeking

reliefs under Sections 18 and 20.

      2.  The allegation in the original petition is that the

marriage of the revision petitioner and the 1st respondent was

solemnized on 6.4.2005 and 10 sovereigns of gold ornaments

were given to the revision petitioner by the parents of the 1st

respondent.    From the 8th day of the marriage, the revision

petitioner, his mother and sister abused the 1st respondent by

alleging that the dowry given to her is very low. On 19.6.2005,

Crl.R.P.879/13                     :2:



the revision petitioner along with his mother and sister

assaulted her and caused injury. The mother and sister of the

revision petitioner used to tell him false allegations about her

and, based on those allegations, the revision petitioner brutally

attacked her.     The further allegation is that out of the 10

sovereigns, the revision petitioner sold away 7 sovereigns of

gold ornaments for his personal purpose.        On 26.8.2009 at

night, the revision petitioner, his mother and sister assaulted

the 1st respondent. However, the neighbours interfered and

rescued her and she was taken to Nedumkandam Medical Trust

Hospital for medical attendance for the injuries caused by the

revision petitioner, his mother and sister.        In the above

situation, she was constrained to leave the matrimonial home

and now she his living separately without forfeiting her right to

claim maintenance allowance from the revision petitioner.

Hence the 1st respondent prayed for maintenance allowance at

the rate of ` 4,000/- per month, a compensation of ` 10,000/-

and an order directing the revision petitioner to return 7

sovereigns of gold ornaments taken by him and also a protection

order under Section 18 of the D.V. Act.

      3.     The revision petitioner filed an objection admitting

Crl.R.P.879/13                   :3:



the marriage, but denying the allegations of harassment and

cruelties said to have been meted out to the 1st respondent by

him and other family members.       He specifically denied the

allegations of assault on 1.1.2006 and 26.8.2009. According to

him, due to financial stringency, the gold ornaments were sold

by the 1st respondent herself. But, a pair of anklet and one

bangle were pledged by the revision petitioner in the Co-

operative Bank. He is ready to give back the same to the 1st

respondent. According to him, he has no income or ability to

give the amount claimed by the 1st respondent.

      4.     The 1st respondent was examined as P.W.1 and

Exts.A1 to A4 were marked for her. The revision petitioner was

examined as D.W.1 and no documentary evidence has been

adduced by him. After considering the rival contentions, the

court below passed the order directing the revision petitioner to

give maintenance allowance @ `3,000/- to the 1st respondent

and her daughter from the date of order. Further, the revision

petitioner was directed to give `60,000/- towards the price of 7

sovereigns of gold ornaments within 3 months from the date of

order. So also, the revision petitioner was restrained from

committing any physical or verbal harassment to the 1st

Crl.R.P.879/13                    :4:



respondent. The legality, propriety and correctness of the said

order are under challenge in this Revision Petition.

      5.     Heard the learned counsel for both the parties. The

short question that arises for consideration in this Revision

Petition is, whether there is any illegality or impropriety in the

impugned order under challenge?          The marriage and the

paternity of the child are admitted.        Though the revision

petitioner had flatly denied the allegations of mental and

physical harassments and assault, the 1st respondent had given

oral evidence to substantiate her grievance which she had

suffered in the matrimonial home and produced Ext.A2 F.I.R.

and A3 wound certificate.      She would swear that she was

assaulted on 19.6.2005, 25.7.2005, 1.1.2006 and 26.8.2009.

According to her, as a result of the assault, she was admitted in

Nedumkandam Medical Trust Hospital and, as per her

statement to the police, a case has been registered against the

revision petitioner. After appreciating the oral evidence given

by P.W.1, the court below found that the evidence adduced

before the court is believable and trustworthy.        When the

learned Judge, who had an opportunity to witness the

demeanour of the witness in the witness box, placed reliance on

Crl.R.P.879/13                     :5:



the evidence of the 1st respondent, there is no contra material to

disbelieve her oral account of the physical and mental cruelties

which she suffered in her matrimonial home. Therefore, in the

absence of any kind of perversity in the appreciation of evidence

given by the 1st respondent as P.W.1, I do not find any illegality

in granting a protection order under Section 18 of the D.V. Act.

      6.     Coming to the claim of maintenance allowance, when

the marriage and paternity of the child are admitted, unless

there are sufficient evidence to show that she is residing

separately without sufficient reasons, the revision petitioner is

liable to pay maintenance allowance to his wife and the only

child. According to the 1st respondent, she has no job or income

and she is unable to maintain herself and their only daughter.

As per the evidence of the 1st respondent, she and her minor

daughter are looked after by her parents and towards the

educational expenses of the child as well as the day-to-day living

expenses, a substantial amount is required.

      7.     Per contra, the revision petitioner had no case that

he is physically unhealthy or disabled or incapacitated to do

work so as to earn livelihood for his family. An able bodied man

is presumed to be having sufficient earning capacity to earn for

Crl.R.P.879/13                    :6:



livelihood.

      8.    Having regard to the standard of life and the day-to-

day living expenses of two persons, of whom one is a child

studying at school level, I find that the direction to pay

maintenance allowance @ `3,000/- per month is just and proper

and the determination of the quantum of maintenance

allowance does not call for any interference under the revisional

jurisdiction.

      9. Coming to the direction to pay `60,000/- as the value of

7 sovereigns of gold ornaments, it is pertinent to note that the

revision petitioner himself admitted that he is in possession of

one pair of anklet and one bangle of the 1st respondent. It is the

specific case of the 1st respondent that at the time of marriage,

she was given 10 sovereigns of gold. But, she claimed only 7

sovereigns of gold from the revision petitioner on the allegation

that the said ornaments were taken away by him for his

personal use. He himself admitted that he has taken away two

items of gold ornaments and pledged in a Co-operative Bank. If

that be so, I am also of the opinion that in the evidence on

record, there is nothing to disbelieve the evidence of P.W.1. In

the absence of any other evidence, the evidence of P.W.1 that 7

Crl.R.P.879/13                    :7:



sovereigns of gold were taken away and pledged by the revision

petitioner is liable to be accepted, as rightly found by the court

below. Therefore, I am inclined to confirm the said direction

also.

      10.     On an overall appreciation of both the oral and

documentary evidence, it could be seen that there are sufficient

evidence of mental and physical cruelties and        harassments

meted out to her by the revision petitioner.       The claim for

maintenance allowance and also the direction to return the gold

ornaments which were said to have been taken by the revision

petitioner are also supported by cogent and convincing

evidence.     Consequently, I find that there is no ground

warranting interference of this Court under the revisional

jurisdiction.   The Revision Petition is devoid of merits and

dismissed accordingly.

      11.     The learned counsel for the revision petitioner

submits that the revision petitioner is suffering from acute

financial crisis and he wants some time to pay the arrear.

Having regard to the facts and circumstances of the case, the

revision petitioner is given four months time to pay the arrear

provided that half of the entire arrear shall be remitted within

Crl.R.P.879/13                   :8:



two months and the remaining half shall be remitted within the

next two months. If the revision petitioner had deposited any

amount towards monetary claims, the same shall be given credit

to and the balance alone needs to be paid. It is made clear that

in the event of failure to pay the first instalment within the

specified time, the instalment facility will automatically stand

vacated and the court below will be free to enforce realisation of

the entire arrear in lump sum.




                                         (K.HARILAL, JUDGE)

okb.



