
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                    PRESENT:

                  THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE ALEXANDER THOMAS

           TUESDAY, THE 28TH DAY OF OCTOBER 2014/6TH KARTHIKA, 1936

                                          Crl.MC.No.6079 of 2014
                                           ---------------------------------

CC NO.3452/2013 of the JUDICIAL FIRST CLASS MAGISTRATE-I,KASARAGOD

PETITIONERS/ACCUSED NO.1 TO 3 & DEFACTO COMPLAINANT:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

1.        KUNHIKANNAN C.H,S/O.NARAYANAN,AGED 31 YEARS,
          'NARAYANA NILAYA',BERLAM,KARADKA,
          P.O.MULLERIA,PIN:671543,KASARAGOD DISTRICT.

2.        MADHAVI,W/O.NARAYANAN,AGED 60 YEARS,
          'NARAYANA NILAYA',BERLAM,
          KARADKA P.O.MULLERIA,
          PON:671543,KASARAGOD DISTRICT.

3.        NEETHU GANGADHARAN,D/O.SUKANYA,
          AGED 22 YEARS,'NARAYANA NILAYA',BERLAM
          KARADKA, P.O.MULLERIA,KASARAGOD DISTRICT.
          PIN-671543.

4.        BAVITHA,D/O.VASANTHAN,AGED 22 YEARS,
          'KRISHNA NIVAS',KUTHUR,ADKATHBAIL,
          KASARAGOD DISTRICT,PIN - 671 121.

           BY ADVS.SRI.K.V.SOHAN
                         SMT.SREEJA SOHAN.K.
                         SRI.ROVIN RODRIGUES

RESPONDENT/STATE:
---------------------------------

          STATE OF KERALA,REP.BY SUB INSPECTOR OF POLICE,
          ADHUR POLICE STATION,KASARAGOD DISTRICT
          (CRIME NO.152/2013)REP. BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR,
          HIGH COURT OF KERALA,ERNAKULAM,PIN - 682 031).

            BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SRI.R.GITHESH

          THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD
          ON 28-10-2014, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE
          FOLLOWING:




pk

Crl.MC.No.6079 of 2014
----------------------------------

                                            APPENDIX

PETITIONERS ANNEXURES
----------------------------------------

ANNEXURE-1:TRUE COPY OF THE CHARGE SHEET/FINAL REPORT, DT.19.9.2013
                    UNDER SECTION 173 CRL.P.C.

ANNEXURE-2:TRUE COPY OF THE ORDER DT.31.7.2014 APPROVING THE
                    COMPROMISE IN M.C 64/2014 PASSED BY THE JUDICIAL FIRST
                    CLASS MAGISTRATE - I, KASARAGOD.

ANNEXURE-3:TRUE COPY OF THE AGREEMENT, DT.31.7.2014 SETTLING ALL
                    DISPUTES WHICH LED TO ANNEXURE-1 CHARGE IN CRIME
                    NO.152/2013

RESPONDENTS ANNEXURES:                                        NIL
------------------------------------------




                                                        //TRUE COPY//




                                                        P.S.TO JUDGE


pk


                    ALEXANDER THOMAS, J.
                    -----------------------------
                    Crl.M.C.No.6079 Of 2014
                  ---------------------------------
           Dated this the 28th day of October, 2014.

                             O R D E R


      This Criminal Miscellaneous Case (Crl.M.C) has been filed

invoking the powers under Section 482 Cr.P.C with the prayer

to quash the impugned Annexure-1 Final Report/Charge Sheet

in Crime No.152/2013 of Adhur Police Station, Kasaragod

District, which has led to the institution of C.C.No.3452/2013

on the file of the Judicial First Class Magistrate Court-I,

Kasaragod and all further proceedings arising therefrom. The

petitioners 1 to 3 are accused Nos.1 to 3 in Crime

No.152/2013 of Adhur Police Station which has led to the

institution of the above said Calender Case. The 4th petitioner

is the wife (defacto complainant) of the 1st petitioner. Crime

No.152/2013 of Adhur Police Station was registered for

offences under Sections 406, 498A, 506(2) r/w Section 34 IPC

at the instance of the 4th petitioner (defacto complainant). The

police   after   investigation    submitted     Annexure-1  Final

Report/Charge Sheet which has led to the institution of

C.C.No.3452/2013 on the file of the Judicial First Class

                               ::2::

Crl.M.C.No.6079 Of 2014

Magistrate Court-I, Kasaragod. Apart from the above criminal

proceedings, the 4th petitioner also filed M.C.No.64/2014 under

Section 12 of the Protection of Women from Domestic Violence

Act, 2005.    During the pendency of the above impugned

criminal proceedings and M.C.No.64/2014, the entire disputes

between the petitioners 1 to 3 on the one hand and the 4th

petitioner on the other hand compromised and the compromise

petition was filed in M.C.No.64/2014 before the court below

concerned by which the petitioner paid Rs.2,50,000/- towards

compensation for all the valuables of the 4th petitioner. The 4th

petitioner also agreed to return seven sovereigns of gold with

her which belongs to the 1st petitioner and the compromise

was accepted by the Judicial First Class Magistrate Court-I,

Kasaragod in M.C.No.64/2014 as per Annexure-2 order dated

31.7.2014. It is further stipulated in Clause (iii) of Annexure-2

that the aforesaid compensation amount shall be paid to the

defacto complainant by the petitioners 1 to 3 herein on the

termination of the proceedings in Crime No.152/2013 of Adhur

Police Station. That all the disputes between the parties have

been settled and that continuation of the impugned criminal

                                ::3::

Crl.M.C.No.6079 Of 2014

proceedings will be an abuse of the process of the court and

the same may be quashed. It is in the background of these

facts and circumstances, this Crl.M.C has been filed.

      2.    The Crl.M.C. has been admitted and the learned Public

Prosecutor has taken notice for the respondent-State of Kerala.

      3.    Heard   Sri.K.V.Sohan,    learned   counsel   for   the

petitioners, and the learned Public Prosecutor appearing for the

respondent-State of Kerala.

      4.    The learned counsel for the petitioners has submitted

that during the pendency of the aforementioned criminal

proceedings, the matter has been settled amicably between the

parties, and that the continuation of the proceedings in the above

case/crime will cause miscarriage of justice to both parties as the

real disputants to the controversy have arrived at an amicable

settlement and any further continuation of the criminal

proceedings will amount to sheer wastage of time and money

and would unnecessarily strain the judicial, administrative and

financial resources of the State.

      5.    Sri.K.V.Sohan, learned counsel appearing for the 4th

petitioner (defacto complainant) has submitted, on the basis of

the specific instructions furnished by the 4th petitioner, that the

                               ::4::

Crl.M.C.No.6079 Of 2014

4th petitioner has amicably settled the disputes with the

petitioners 1 to 3 as stated above and that she has no objection

in the quashment of the impugned criminal proceedings and that

the complainant/victim/injured does not intend to proceed any

further against the petitioners 1 to 3 as she has no grievance

against them and that she will not raise any dispute/complaint in

future if the prayer for quashing the impugned criminal

proceedings is allowed.

      6.   The learned Public Prosecutor also was heard, who

also has not raised any serious objections and submitted that the

court may consider the prayer in this case in the light of the law

well settled by the Apex Court in that regard.

      7.   After having carefully considered the submissions of

the parties and after having perused the pleadings as well as the

documents and materials placed in this matter, it can be seen

that the offences alleged are more or less personal in nature and

not much element of public interest is involved.      The crucial

aspect of the matter is that though such offences are involved,

the real disputants to the controversy, which has led to the

impugned criminal proceedings, have actually arrived at an

amicable settlement of the matter. From the submissions made

                                   ::5::

Crl.M.C.No.6079 Of 2014

by the learned counsel for the 4th petitioner, it is clear to the

Court that the injured/victim/defacto complainant has no further

grievance against the petitioners 1 to 3/accused in the light of

the settlement arrived at by them.          In this connection, it is

relevant to note the decision of the Apex Court in the case

between Gian Singh v. State of Punjab reported in 2013 (1)

SCC (Cri) 160, para 61 = (2012) 10 SCC 303 = 2012(4) KLT 108

(SC), wherein the Supreme Court has held as follows in para 61

thereof [ See SCC (Cri)]:

              "61. The position that emerges from the above
       discussion can be summarised thus: the power of the
       High Court in quashing a criminal proceeding or FIR or
       complaint in exercise of its inherent jurisdiction is
       distinct and different from the power given to a criminal
       court for compounding the offences under S.320 of the
       Code.     Inherent power is of wide plenitude with no
       statutory limitation but it has to be exercised in accord
       with the guideline engrafted in such power viz;(i) to
       secure the ends of justice or (ii) to prevent abuse of
       the process of any Court.        In what cases power to
       quash the criminal proceeding or complaint or F.I.R.
       may be exercised where the offender and victim have
       settled their dispute would depend on the facts and
       circumstances of each case and no category can be
       prescribed..

It is further held as follows:-

       "......... But the criminal cases having overwhelmingly
       and pre-dominatingly civil flavour stand on different
       footing for the purposes of quashing, particularly the
       offences arising from commercial, financial, mercantile,
       civil, partnership or such like transactions or the
       offences arising out of matrimony relating to dowry

                                 ::6::

Crl.M.C.No.6079 Of 2014

      etc. or the family disputes where the wrong is basically
      private or personal in nature and the parties have
      resolved their entire dispute. In this category of cases,
      High Court may quash criminal proceedings if in its
      view, because of the compromise between the offender
      and victim, the possibility of conviction is remote and
      bleak and continuation of criminal case would put
      accused to great oppression and prejudice and
      extreme injustice would be caused to him by not
      quashing the criminal case despite full and complete
      settlement and compromise with the victim........"

Further, in the case Jitendra Raghuvanshi and Others v.

Babita Raghuvanshi and another reported in (2013) 4 SCC

58 [see 2013 (1) KLD 817 (SC)], the Apex Court has held as

follows:-

            "8. It is not in dispute that matrimonial disputes
      have been on considerable increase in recent times
      resulting in filing of complaints under Sections 498A
      and 406 of I.P.C. not only against the husband but also
      against the relatives of the husband. The question is
      when such matters are resolved either by the wife
      agreeing to rejoin the matrimonial home or by mutual
      settlement of other pending disputes for which both
      the sides approached the High Court and jointly prayed
      for quashing of the criminal proceedings or the FIR or
      complaint by the wife under Sections 498A and 406 of
      I.P.C., whether the prayer can be declined on the sole
      ground that since the offences are non-compoundable
      under Section 320        of the Code, it would be
      impermissible for the court to quash the criminal
      proceedings or FIR or complaint.
            9. It is not in dispute that in the case on hand
      subsequent to the filing of the criminal complaint under
      Sections 498A and 406 of IPC and Sections 3 and 4 of
      the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961, with the help and
      intervention of family members, friends and well-
      wishers, the parties concerned have amicably settled
      their   differences   and   executed    a  compromise/

                                  ::7::

Crl.M.C.No.6079 Of 2014

      settlement. Pursuant thereto, the appellants filed the
      said compromise before the Trial Court with a request
      to place the same on record and to drop the criminal
      proceedings against the appellants herein. It is also
      not in dispute that in additional to the mutual
      settlement arrived at by the parties, respondent/-wife
      has also filed an affidavit stating that she did not wish
      to pursue the criminal proceedings against the
      appellants and fully supported the contents of the
      settlement deed. It is the grievance of the appellants
      that no only the Trial Court rejected such prayer of the
      parties but also the High Court failed toe exercise its
      jurisdiction under Section 482 of the Code only on the
      ground that the criminal proceedings relate to the
      offences punishable under Sections 498A and 406 of
      IPC which are non-compoundable in nature.
            15. In our view, it is the duty of the Courts to
      encourage     genuine    settlements    of   matrimonial
      disputes,   particularly,  when    the   same    are  on
      considerable increase. Even if the offences are non-
      compoundable, if they relate to matrimonial disputes
      and the Court is satisfied that the parties have settled
      the same amicably and without any pressure, we hold
      that for the purpose of securing ends of justice,
      Section 320 of the Code would not be a bar to the
      exercise of power of quashing of FIR, complaint or the
      subsequent criminal proceedings.
            16. There has been an outburst of matrimonial
      disputes in recent times. The institution of marriage
      occupies an important place and it has an important
      role to play in the society.     Therefore, every effort
      should be made in the interest of the individuals in
      order to enable them to settle down in life and live
      peacefully.   If the parties ponder over their defaults
      and terminate their disputes amicably by mutual
      agreement instead of fighting it out in a Court of law,
      in order to do complete justice in the matrimonial
      matters, the Courts should be less hesitant in
      exercising its extraordinary jurisdiction. It is trite to
      state that the power under Section 482 should be
      exercised sparingly and with circumspection only when
      the Court is convinced, on the basis of material on
      record, that allowing the proceedings to continue
      would be an abuse of the process of the Court or that

                                ::8::

Crl.M.C.No.6079 Of 2014

      the ends of justice require that the proceedings ought
      to be quashed."

      8.    Considering the facts and circumstances of this

case, it is seen further that the impugned criminal proceedings

have arisen consequent to the matrimonial disputes between

the disputants and the disputes have been settled amicably

between the parties. Accordingly, this Court is inclined to hold

that in the light of the facts and circumstances involved in the

present case and particularly in view of the settlement arrived

at between the parties, the principles laid down in the

aforementioned decisions of the Apex Court will be squarely

applicable in the present case. Moreover, since the real

disputants to the controversy have amicably settled the

disputes, which led to these impugned criminal proceedings, it

is also the duty of the court to promote such settlement,

instead of compelling the parties to go on with the dispute. It

is also pertinent to note that since the matter is settled out of

court, in the event of proceeding with the trial, there may not

be any fruitful prosecution and the chances of conviction of the

accused is rather negligible and therefore, the net result of

continuance of criminal proceedings would be sheer waste of

                               ::9::

Crl.M.C.No.6079 Of 2014

judicial time rather meaningless and therefore would amount

to abuse of the process of court proceedings in the larger

sense. Hence following decisions of the Apex Court cited supra,

this Court is inclined to hold that the Crl.M.C. can be allowed

by granting the prayers sought for.

      In the result, Crl.M.C is allowed and the impugned

Annexure-1 Final Report/Charge Sheet in Crime No.152/2013

of Adhur Police Station, Kasaragod District, which had led to

the institution of C.C.No.3452/2013 on the file of the Judicial

First Class Magistrate Court-I, Kasaragod and all further

proceedings arising therefrom stand quashed. The petitioners

1 to 3 shall produce certified copies of this order before the

Magistrate Court concerned as well as before the Station

House Officer concerned.




                                         ALEXANDER THOMAS,
                                                  Judge.

bkn/-



