
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                    PRESENT:

                          THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE P.D.RAJAN

              TUESDAY, THE 17TH DAY OF JUNE 2014/27TH JYAISHTA, 1936

                                      CRL.MC.NO. 1977 OF 2011 ( )
                                             ----------------------------
       CC. NO.205/2010 OF CHIEF JUDICIAL MAGISTRATE COURT, THRISSUR.
                                                        .......

PETITIONERS/ACCUSED:
-------------------------------------

        1. K. VIJAY MENON, S/O.LATE R.N.U. MENON,
           C-2, SKANDA CEEBROS, NEAR PAZHAMUDIR NILAYAM,
           SHASTRI NAGAR, ADAYAR, CHENNAI.

        2. DR.K. VIMALA MENON, W/O. LATE R.N.U. MENON,
           C-2, SKANDA CEEBROS, NEAR PAZHAMUDIR NILAYAM,
           SHASTRI NAGAR, ADAYAR, CHENNAI.

           BY MRS.NALINI CHIDAMBARAM, SENIOR ADVOCATE.
                ADV. SRI.MILLU DANDAPANI.

RESPONDENTS/STATE-COMPLAINANT:
----------------------------------------------------------

        1. THE STATE OF KERALA,
           (CR.NO.913/2010 OF THRISSUR TOWN WEST POLICE STATION),
           REPRESENTED BY THE PUBLIC PROSECUTOR,
           HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM-682 031.

        2. VIDYA, D/O.V. SURENDRAN,
           F8, PENTAPARK, POOTHOLE,
           THRISSUR-680 004.


           R1 BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR MR.JUSTIN JACOB.
           R2 BY ADVS. SRI.S.RAJEEV,
                                SRI.K.K.DHEERENDRAKRISHNAN.


           THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD
           ON 17-06-2014, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE
           FOLLOWING:
rs.

CRL.MC.NO. 1977 OF 2011


                               APPENDIX

PETITIONER'S ANNEXURES:-


ANNEXURE A       COPY OF THE CHARGE SHEET CUM FINAL REPORT IN
                 C.C. NO.205/2010 ON THE FILE OF CHIEF JUDICIAL
                 MAGISTRATE COURT, THRISSUR, ALONG WITH TRUE
                 ENGLISH TRANSLATED VERSION.

ANNEXURE B       COPY OF THE COMPLAINT FILED BY THE 2ND RESPONDENT
                 BEFORE THE CHIEF JUDICIAL MAGISTRATE COURT,
                 THRISSUR, ALONG WITH TRUE ENGLISH TRANSLATED
                 VERSION.

ANNEXURE C       COPY OF THE FIRST INFORMATION REPORT NO.913
                 DATED 23/09/2010 BY THE SUB INSPECTOR OF POLICE,
                 WEST POLICE STATION, THRISSUR, ALONG WITH TRUE
                 ENGLISH TRANSLATED VERSION.

ANNEXURE D       COPY OF THE CERTIFICATE OF EMPLOYMENT ISSUED TO
                 THE 2ND PETITIONER FROM M/S.NOWROJEE WADIA
                 COLLEGE, VIDE REF. NO.A-30/MIS/687 DATED 08/01/2011.

ANNEXURE E       COPY OF THE CERTIFICATE DATED 07/01/2011 ISSUED
                 FROM STATE BANK OF INDIA, PUNE, IN FAVOUR OF
                 2ND PETITIONER AND 2ND RESPONDENT.

RESPONDENT'S ANNEXURES:-             NIL.




                                           //TRUE COPY//


                                           P.A. TO JUDGE

rs.


                                                                CR

                         P.D. RAJAN, J.
               - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                   Crl.M.C.No.1977 of 2011
               - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
           Dated this the 17th day of June, 2014

                              O R D E R

     This petition is filed under Section 482 of the Code of

Criminal Procedure (hereinafter referred to as "the Code")

to quash Annexure A Final Report in crime No.913/2010 of

Thrissur Town West Police Station for offences punishable

under Sections 406, 498(A), 506 (ii) r/w. 34 IPC by invoking

inherent jurisdiction. The above crime was registered on a

complaint filed by the second respondent in the Chief

Judicial Magistrate Court, Thrissur which was forwarded to

the Thrissur Town West Police Station for investigation

under Section 156 (3) of the Code. The petitioners

contended that they are innocent and if trial is proceeded it

will be a mere abuse of the process of court. More over the

Chief Judicial Magistrate Court, Thrissur has no jurisdiction

to entertain Annexure B complaint and Annexure A final

report.

Crl.M.C.No.1977 of 2011
                             -2-

      2.    The undisputed facts are that the second

respondent married the first petitioner on 10.11.2002 as per

customary rites at Thrissur and after that they resided

together for two days in her ancestral house at Thrissur.

The negotiation of the marriage was initiated and settled by

the parents of both parties and after the marriage they

resided in a flat at Pune where the first petitioner is

permanently settled and afterwards in Mumbai, where he is

working. Her allegation is that while residing at Mumbai,

petitioners ill-treated her both physically and mentally

demanding more amount as dowry. While so, a child was

born to them on 09.09.2003 with cerebral palsy. Finally on

12.10.2009 the first petitioner expelled the second

respondent from his residence at Chennai.            In this

circumstance she came to Thrissur, stayed with her

parents, and the subsequent mediation talk was also failed.

Hence she filed Annexure B complaint before the Chief

Judicial Magistrate Court, Thrissur which was forwarded to

the Town West Police Station, Thrissur for investigation.

Crl.M.C.No.1977 of 2011
                               -3-

      3.    The learned counsel for the petitioners Smt.Nalini

Chithambaram contended that none of the incidents

happened at Thrissur since after the marriage both of them

resided at Pune and Mumbai (except for two days in the

ancestral house at Thrissur). When matrimonial offences

are alleged to have occurred outside the local jurisdiction of

the courts in Kerala, the courts in Kerala have no

jurisdiction to entertain a complaint.     In the year 2009

October, 2nd respondent left her matrimonial home, after

that she filed a complaint on 08.09.2010 which is an

afterthought.       The reason for the delay is not properly

explained in Annexure B complaint. He relied on the

decisions reported in Bhura Ram and Ors. v. State of

Rajasthan and Anr. [(2008) 11 SCC 103], Y. Abraham

Ajith v. Inspector of Police, Chennai [(2004) 8 SCC

100], Preeti Gupta v. State of Jharkhand [(2010)

7 SCC 667] and Ruchi Agarwal v. Amit Kumar Agarwal

and Ors. [(2005) 3 SCC 299].

      4.    The learned counsel for the second respondent

Crl.M.C.No.1977 of 2011
                                  -4-

Adv.S.Rajeev contended that all ingredients attracting the

offences are properly alleged in the complaint. Moreover

the matrimonial offence is a continuing offence and other

offences were committed while they are residing together.

Gold and other utensils were entrusted to the petitioners at

Vadakara. That entrustment is sufficient to attract criminal

breach of trust as alleged in the petition. Since the offence

is a continuing offence, separate pleading is not necessary

for explaining that aspect which is saved under Section

472 of the Code. When a prima facie case is made out in a

complaint there is no reason to disturb Annexure A.

      5.    The jurisdiction of the criminal court in inquiry

and trial are defined under Sections 177 and 178 of the

Code of Criminal Procedure, which reads thus:

            "177. Ordinary place of inquiry and trial.- Every
      offence shall ordinarily be inquired into and tried by a
      Court within whose local jurisdiction it was committed.

            178. Place of inquiry or trial.- (a) When it is
      uncertain in which of several local areas an offence was
      committed, or

            (b) where an offence is committed partly in one local
      area and partly in another, or

Crl.M.C.No.1977 of 2011
                                   -5-

            (c) where an offence is a continuing one, and
      continues to be committed in more local areas than one, or

            (d) where it consists of several acts done in different
      local areas, it may be inquired into or tried by a Court
      having jurisdiction over any of such local areas."

The basic concept under Section 177 of the Code is that

every offence shall ordinarily be inquired into and tried by a

court within whose local jurisdiction it was committed. If

the inquiry and trial ordinarily takes place in the proximity

of the crime, the witness can reasonably be expected to be

available in that locality.        In such situation, it would be

convenient to both the prosecution and the defence to

participate in the trial if it takes place in the court of that

locality. Therefore, any act or omission which amounts to

an offence is to be inquired into and tried by a Court under

Section 177 of the Code within whose local jurisdiction such

acts or omissions were committed.               The Apex Court in

Y. Abraham Ajith's case (cited supra) in paragraph 12

held thus:

                    "The crucial question is whether any part
            of the cause of action arose within the
            jurisdiction of the court concerned. In terms of
            Section 177 of the Code, it is the place where

Crl.M.C.No.1977 of 2011
                                   -6-

            the offence was committed. In essence it is the
            cause of action for initiation of the proceedings
            against the accused."

      6.   Under Section 178 of the Code, there are four

situations explained with regard to the place of inquiry and

trial.- (a) when it is uncertain in which of several local areas

an offence was committed (b) where an offence is

committed partly in one local area and partly in another

(c) where an offence is a continuing one, and continues to

be committed in more local areas than one (d) where it

consists of several acts done in different local areas. It

appears from the complaint that the petitioner started

torturing the 2nd respondent (complainant) as a result of

which 2nd respondent had returned back to Thrissur with

her parents. It is well settled that every offence shall be

inquired into and tried by the court within whose local

jurisdiction it was        committed.        From the facts    the

negotiation of the marriage was initiated and discussed by

the parents at Thrissur and Vadakara with the husband and

other family members and thereafter marriage was

Crl.M.C.No.1977 of 2011
                              -7-

solemnised at Thrissur, after that she resided with the

husband and his family members at Chennai, Pune and

Mumbai.       The local areas of the commission of offence

means local area within which the Code applies alone.

When the offence is committed partly in one local area and

partly in another, such offence may be tried in either of the

two courts. Section 178 (b) of the Code does not envisage a

position in which one ingredient of the offence is committed

at one place and other is committed in another place but it

speaks of cases when an offence is committed partly in one

area and partly in another area, the courts having

jurisdiction in both areas have got territorial jurisdiction to

take cognizance of an offence.

      7.   In case of continuing offence, u/s. 178(c) of the

Code, it means an offence continues to be committed in

more than one local area and it may be inquired into or

tried by the court having jurisdiction over that area.

A conspiracy to commit such offence is considered as a

continuing offence.      When several acts constituting the

Crl.M.C.No.1977 of 2011
                              -8-

offence are done in different local areas it may be inquired

into and tried by the Courts having jurisdiction over such

local areas. The allegations in Annexure A Final Report and

Annexure B complaint show that matrimonial offences

alleged against the petitioners were committed while they

were residing in Pune and Mumbai. In Annexure B itself it

is stated that immediately after the marriage they resided

together in the matrimonial house for a few days and

thereafter in the parental house of the first petitioner at

Vadakara which is in Calicut district and thereafter at the

first petitioner's work place at Mumbai and Pune. There

was no allegation in Annexure B that any cruelty was

committed by the first petitioner while they were residing at

her residence at Thrissur. After one week both parties left

Kerala and several times they had occasion to visit Kerala.

There is no averment in the complaint that in those

occasions the first and second petitioners had assaulted the

second respondent. It is the rule that every offence shall be

inquired into and tried by a court within whose local

Crl.M.C.No.1977 of 2011
                                  -9-

jurisdiction it was committed. If that be the position, the

entire incident might have happened outside Kerala and

every such offence shall be inquired into and tried by a

court within whose local jurisdiction it was committed. The

Apex Court in Bhura Ram's case (cited supra) in para

No.6. held thus:

            "The facts stated in the complaint disclose that the
      complainant left the place where she was residing with
      her husband and in-laws and came to the city of Sri
      Ganganagar, State of Rajasthan and that all the alleged
      acts as per the complaint had taken place in the State of
      Punjab.     The court at Rajasthan does not have the
      jurisdiction to deal with the matter. On the basis of the
      factual scenario disclosed by the complainant in the
      complaint, the inevitable conclusion is that no part of
      cause of action arose in Rajasthan and, therefore, the
      Magistrate concerned has no jurisdiction to deal with the
      matter. As a consequence thereof, the proceedings before
      the Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate, Sri Ganganagar
      are quashed.      The complaint be returned to the
      complainant and if she so wishes she may file the same in
      the appropriate court to be dealt with in accordance with
      law."

      8.    The learned counsel for the second respondent

relies on the decision of the Apex Court in Sujata

Mukherjee v. Prashant Kumar Mukherjee [AIR 1997

SC 2465] in which their Lordships discussed the scope of

Section 178 (c) of the Code which is a continuing offence

Crl.M.C.No.1977 of 2011
                             -10-

and territorial jurisdiction attracted in such situation and

observed that the Magistrate of the local area where the

complaint is lodged has territorial jurisdiction to proceed

against all. The Apex Court in Naresh Kavarchand Khatri

v. State of Gujarat [(2008) 8 SCC 300] held that:

"whether an officer in charge of a police station has

requisite jurisdiction to make investigation or not will

depend upon a large number of factors including those

contained in Sections 177, 178 and 181 of the Code of

Criminal Procedure. In a case where a trial can be held in

any of the places falling within the purview of the

aforementioned provisions, investigation can be conducted

by the officer in charge of the police station concerned

which has jurisdiction to investigate in relation thereto.

Sub-section (4) of Section 181 of the Code of Criminal

Procedure would also be relevant therefore."

      9.    I have considered the allegations with regard to

the commission of offence under Section 406 IPC in which

second petitioner is involved. In order to attract offence

Crl.M.C.No.1977 of 2011
                                  -11-

under Section 406 IPC, the ingredients for criminal breach

of trust explained under Section 405 IPC is to be stated in

their petition. Section 405 IPC reads as follows:

            405. Criminal breach of trust.- Whoever, being in
      any manner entrusted with property, or with any dominion
      over property, dishonestly misappropriates or converts to
      his own use that property, or dishonestly uses or disposes
      of that property in violation of any direction of law
      prescribing the mode in which such trust is to be
      discharged, or of any legal contract, express or implied,
      which he has made touching the discharge of such trust, or
      wilfully suffers any other person so to do, commits
      "criminal breach of trust".

The essential ingredients of criminal breach of trust are

(i) the accused must be entrusted with property or dominion

over it and (ii) he must have dishonestly misappropriated

the property or converted to his own use or disposes of it in

violation of any trust. Thus, the two distinct parts of the

offence of criminal breach of trust are (1) the creation of an

obligation in relation to the property over which dominion

or control by the accused (2) Misappropriation in dealing

with the property dishonestly, which is contrary to the

terms of the obligation created. A reading of the Section

suggest that the gist of the offence is dishonest

Crl.M.C.No.1977 of 2011
                              -12-

misappropriation or conversion to one's own use of

another's property.

      10. In this context the question is whether the

entrustment of the property alone is sufficient to attract

offence under Section 406 IPC. The answer is that when

entrusted property is dishonestly misappropriated then the

ingredients will come into action. Similarly when an offence

is a continuing one and committed in more local areas than

one, it may be inquired into or tried by those courts having

territorial jurisdiction. According to Section 181 (4) of the

Code any offence of criminal misappropriation or of criminal

breach of trust may be inquired into or tried by a Court

within whose local jurisdiction the offence was committed

or any part of the property which is the subject of the

offence was received or retained, or was required to be

returned or accounted for, by the accused person. The

learned counsel further submits that the property was

entrusted at Vadakara, even then Thrissur court has no

jurisdiction to receive such a complaint.         Even for

Crl.M.C.No.1977 of 2011
                               -13-

arguments sake if Section 181 (4) of the Code is accepted, if

the entrustment is made at her parental home, the

Vadakara, Thrissur courts have no jurisdiction. If trial is

proceeded in Thrissur it will amount to mere abuse of the

process of the court.         Therefore, entrustment of the

property alone is not sufficient to attract offence under

Section 406 IPC. The allegation regarding dishonest

misappropriation or conversion of those articles into their

own use in violation of any direction is necessary in a

complaint.

      11. It is well settled that every offence shall ordinarily

inquired into and tried by the court within whose

jurisdiction it was committed. But, in Section 179 there is

an exception to the general rule. It provides that when an

act is an offence by reason of anything which has been done

and any consequence of which has ensued therefrom, the

offence may be inquired into or tried by a court within

whose local jurisdiction the act was committed or the

consequence was ensued.         The allegations made in the

Crl.M.C.No.1977 of 2011
                             -14-

complaint and final report was that matrimonial offences

were committed while residing at Mumbai, Pune and

Chennai. Moreover complainant has no case that she had

been admitted for treatment in a hospital at Thrissur as a

consequence of the physical torture to attract jurisdiction

under Section 179 of the Code. Therefore the act and

consequence are so interlinked that the consequence is the

direct result of the act. In Annexure A Final Report it is

mentioned that they have entrusted property at Vadakara.

The petitioners contended that after one week of the

marriage the entire things were delivered at Chennai and

the entrustment was made by the second respondent's

parents at Chennai. If that be the position, the entrustment

portion also will come either in Vadakara, Calicut district in

Kerala State or Chennai which is outside Kerala, in both

situation which is outside Thrissur district. But they have

not stated when and where the alleged misappropriation is

committed whether it is partly in one local area or partly in

another, then court having jurisdiction in both areas will get

Crl.M.C.No.1977 of 2011
                               -15-

territorial jurisdiction to take cognisance of the offence. In

Kashi Ram Mehta v. Emperor [AIR 1934 All 499 (FB)]

it was held that the words "any consequence" which has

ensued, have been held to mean only such consequence is a

necessary ingredient of the alleged offence. Having regard

to the facts of the case there was no allegation that

consequence of the alleged offence resulted in Thrissur to

get territorial jurisdiction to try the offence invoking

Section 179 of the Code.

      12. For invoking inherent powers under Section

482 of the Code three grounds mentioned therein has to be

considered i.e. to make such orders as may be necessary to

give effect to any order under this Code, or to prevent the

abuse of the process of any Court or otherwise to secure the

ends of justice. The above grounds were explained by the

Apex Court in State of Haryana v. Bhajan Lal [1992 SCC

(Cri) 426] and other following decisions: State of

Karnataka v. L.Muniswamy [1977 SCC (Cri) 404],

Madhu Limaye v. State of Maharashtra [1978 SCC

Crl.M.C.No.1977 of 2011
                                  -16-

(Cri) 10], Zandu Pharmaceutical Works Ltd. v. Mohd.

Sharaful Haque [2005 SCC (Cri) 283] and in Inder

Mohan Goswami v. State of Uttaranchal [(2008) 1 SCC

(Cri) 259].          The learned counsel appearing for the

petitioners contended that the second petitioner was a

Professor in Pune till 2008.           After her retirement she

continued in Pune for taking courses in Communication

Skills. Since her husband passed away and she also fell ill

she came to Chennai with her son only in 2008-09. There

was no dowry harassment and no entrustment was made

with her at this time. In Preeti Gupta and another v.

State of Jharkhand and another [2010(7) SCC 667]

held as follows:

           "The allegations of harassment by the husband's close
    relations who had been living in different cities and never
    visited or rarely visited the place where the complainant
    wife resided would have an entirely different complexion.
    Such allegations of the complainant are required to be
    scrutinized with great care and circumspection."

Here the mother was residing far away from the first

petitioner's residence. Vague allegations are made against

the second petitioner.        That itself is sufficient to invoke

Crl.M.C.No.1977 of 2011
                              -17-

Section 482 of the Code.        Therefore, if petitioners are

proceeded with the above ordeal trial it will be a mere

abuse of the process of the court.

      Hence,       I  quash Annexure  A   final report   and

Annexure B complaint pending before the Chief Judicial

Magistrate's Court, Thrissur. However, I make it clear that

this will not affect the right of the second respondent to

agitate her grievances in appropriate forum. Therefore, the

complaint shall be returned to the complainant. On receipt

of the complaint the complainant is free to file the

complaint before appropriate court.

      The Crl.M.C. is allowed as above.




                                             P.D. RAJAN,
                                                  JUDGE

shg/



