
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                      PRESENT:

                     THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE ALEXANDER THOMAS

           WEDNESDAY, THE 29TH DAY OF OCTOBER 2014/7TH KARTHIKA, 1936

                                           Crl.MC.No. 6098 of 2014 ()
                                                ---------------------------
CC.NO.298/2011 OF JUDICIAL FIRST CLASS MAGISTRATE COURT -I, ATTINGAL
                                                    -------------------

PETITIONER(S)/ACCUSED NOS: 1, 2,3 AND 4:
-------------------------------------------------------------------

        1. SRI. BIJUKRISHNAN, AGED 34 YEARS,
            S/O. RADHAKRISHNAKURUP, VILAYILPUTHENVEEDU,
            CHEMBOOR, MUDHAKKALP.O., CHIRAYINKEEZHU TALUK,
            THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

        2. SRI. RADHAKRISHNAKURUP, AGED 62 YEARS,
            VILAYILPUTHENVEEDU, CHEMBOOR, MUDHAKKALP.O.,
            CHIRAYINKEEZHU TALUK, THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

        3. SMT. VIJAYAKUMARI @ JAYAKUMARI, AGED 54 YEARS,
            W/O. RADHAKRISHNAKURUP, VILAYILPUTHENVEEDU,
            CHEMBOOR, MUDHAKKALP.O., CHIRAYINKEEZHU TALUK,
            THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

        4. SMT. VIJITHA VINODH, AGED 36 YEARS,
            D/O. VIJAYAKUMARI, ''REVATHI'', SAVARMATHY LANE,
            VENJARAMOODU, NELLANAD VILLAGE, VENJARAMOODU,
            THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

             BY ADV. SRI.R.B.RAJESH

RESPONDENT(S)/STATE/COMPLAINANT :
------------------------------------------------------------

        1. THE STATE OF KERALA,
            REPRESENTED BY THE PUBLIC PROSECUTOR,
            HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM-31.

        2. SMT. RESHMA,AGED 23 YEARS, D/O. RAVEENDRAN NAIR,
            RESHMA BHAVAN, KOTTUKKUNNUM P.O.,
            VAMANAPURAM, NEDUMANGAD TALUK,
            THIRUVANANTHAPURAM -695 033.

             R1 BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SRI.R.GITHESH
             R2 BY ADV.SRI.S.U.NAZAR

            THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD
            ON 29-10-2014, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE FOLLOWING:
sts

CRL.M.C.NO.6098/2014


                                  APPENDIX

PETITIONER'S ANNEXURES:


ANNEX 1     CERTIFIED COPY OF THE FINAL REPORT IN C.C.NO.298/11 ON THE
            FILE OF J.F.M.C.-I, ATTINGAL

ANNEX 2     COPY OF THE COMPROMISE PETITION FILED IN O.P.NO.264/2012
            BEFORE THE FAMILY COURT, NEDUMANGAD DATED 10/10/2014

ANNEX 3     COPY OF THE RECEIPTS GIVEN BY THE 2ND RESPONDENT DATED
            15/10/2014

ANNEX 4     COPY OF THE RECEIPTS GIVEN BY THE 2ND RESPONDENT DATED
            15/10/2014

ANNEX 5     COPY OF THE NOTARIZED AFFIDAVIT DATED 15/10/2014

ANNEX 6     COPY OF THE AFFIDAVIT SWORN BY THE 2ND RESPONDENT.


RESPONDENT'S ANNEXURES:                    NIL




                                                 /TRUE COPY/


                                                 P.A.TO.JUDGE


sts


                   ALEXANDER THOMAS, J.
                   -----------------------------
                   Crl.M.C.No.6098 Of 2014
                 ---------------------------------
           Dated this the 29th day of October, 2014.

                            O R D E R


      The   above   captioned    Criminal    Miscellaneous Case

(Crl.M.C), invoking the powers conferred on this Court under

Section 482 Cr.P.C, has been filed with the prayer to quash the

impugned Annexure-1 Final Report in Crime No.118/2011 of

Attingal Police Station which has led to the institution of

C.C.No.298/2011 on the file of the Judicial First Class

Magistrate Court-I, Attingal and all further proceedings arising

therefrom.   Petitioners are the accused Nos.1 to 4 in the

aforementioned Annexure-1 Final Report/Charge Sheet in the

aforementioned Crime which has led to the pendency of

C.C.No.298/2011 on the file of the Judicial First Class

Magistrate Court-I, Attingal for offences punishable under

Sections 498A, 506(ii) & 34 IPC. The 2nd respondent is the

wife of the 1st petitioner and she filed the private criminal

complaint before the above said Magistrate Court against the

petitioners herein for the above said offences which was

forwarded for investigation under Section 156(3) Cr.P.C which

                                ::2::

Crl.M.C.No.6098 Of 2014

led to the registration of the instant crime. After investigation

police submitted impugned Annexure-1 Final Report/Charge

Sheet in the above said crime which led to institution of

C.C.No.298/2011 on the file of the Judicial First Class

Magistrate Court-I, Attingal.      The 2nd respondent has filed

O.P.No.264/2012 before the Family Court, Nedumangad for

realisation of money and recovery of the gold ornaments.

Thereafter she filed O.P.No.870/2014 before the Family Court

Nedumangadfor divorce on the ground of desertion and she

got a decree of divorce. Later, the relatives and friends of he

petitioners and 2nd respondent had intervened in the matter

and all the above cases are amicably settled between the

petitioners and the 2nd respondent which led to filing of

Annexure-2     compromise     petition   dated  10.10.2014     in

O.P.No.264/2012 before the Family Court, Nedumangad. It is

stated that as per the terms and conditions in the compromise

petition all transaction have been settled between the parties

and as per the terms, the 1st petitioner has withdrawn the

amount from his joint account at the Chembooru Service Co-

operative Bank and had given to the 2nd respondent as

                               ::3::

Crl.M.C.No.6098 Of 2014

evidenced    by    Annexure-3      receipt dated  15.10.2014.

Thereafter, as per the terms in the compromise petition, the 1st

petitioner paid an amount of Rs.6 Lakhs to the 2nd respondent

as per Annexure-A4 receipt dated 15.10.2014.       It is stated

that all the disputes have been settled and the proceedings

before the Family Court is also closed. The only pending case

is  the   above    said  impugned     criminal proceedings   in

C.C.No.298/2011 and it is stated that the 2nd respondent has

no grievance against the petitioners and that she is not

intending   to   prosecute   the    above   impugned   criminal

proceedings.     Notarized affidavit sworn to by the 2nd

respondent on 15.10.2014 is produced as Annexure-5 in this

Crl.M.C stating that the entire disputes between her and the 1st

petitioner are settled and that she does not have any

complaint against him and that she has no grievance against

him and she do not wish to continue the impugned criminal

proceedings which led to C.C.No.298/2011 etc.          The 2nd

respondent has sworn to an affidavit dated 15.10.2014

produced as Annexure-6 in this Crl.M.C stating the above said

facts and she does not have any grievance against the

                                ::4::

Crl.M.C.No.6098 Of 2014

petitioners and that she has no objection in termination of the

impugned criminal proceedings which led to C.C.No.298/2011

on the file of the Judicial First Class Magistrate Court-I,

Attingal. It is specifically agreed to in clause '4' of Annexure-2

compromise petition dated 10.10.2014 filed before the Family

Court, Nedumangad that the 2nd respondent herein agrees the

termination of the impugned criminal proceedings which led to

the registration of the offence under Section 498A before the

Judicial First Class Magistrate Court-I, Attingal in respect of all

the accused therein. It is further specifically undertaken by

the 2nd respondent in paragraph '1' of the affidavit dated

15.10.2014 that she does not have any complaint against the

1st petitioner, his parents and his sister. The 1st petitioner, his

parents and his sister are the accused in the above said

impugned criminal proceedings.       It is in the background of

these facts and circumstances, this Crl.M.C has been filed.

      2.    The Crl.M.C. has been admitted and Sri.S.U.Nazar has

taken notice for the 2nd respondent and the learned Public

Prosecutor has taken notice for the 1st respondent-State of

Kerala.

      3.    Heard   Sri.R.B.Rajesh,   learned   counsel   for  the

                                ::5::

Crl.M.C.No.6098 Of 2014

petitioners,   Sri.S.U.Nazar,   learned   counsel   for   the   2nd

respondent and the learned Public Prosecutor appearing for the

1st respondent-State of Kerala.

       4.   The learned counsel for the petitioners has submitted

that during the pendency of the aforementioned criminal

proceedings, the matter has been settled amicably between the

parties, and that the continuation of the proceedings in the above

case/crime will cause miscarriage of justice to both parties as the

real disputants to the controversy have arrived at an amicable

settlement and any further continuation of the criminal

proceedings will amount to sheer wastage of time and money

and would unnecessarily strain the judicial, administrative and

financial resources of the State.

       5.   Sri.S.U.Nazar, learned counsel appearing for the 2nd

respondent has submitted, on the basis of the specific

instructions furnished by the 2nd respondent, that the 2nd

respondent has amicably settled the disputes with the petitioners

as stated above and that she has no objection in the quashment

of    the  impugned     criminal    proceedings   and   that   the

complainant/victim/injured does not intend to proceed any

further against the petitioners as she has no grievance against

                               ::6::

Crl.M.C.No.6098 Of 2014

them and that she will not raise any dispute/complaint in future if

the prayer for quashing the impugned criminal proceedings is

allowed.

      6.   The learned Public Prosecutor also was heard, who

also has not raised any serious objections and submitted that the

court may consider the prayer in this case in the light of the law

well settled by the Apex Court in that regard.

      7.   After having carefully considered the submissions of

the parties and after having perused the pleadings as well as the

documents and materials placed in this matter, it can be seen

that the offences alleged are more or less personal in nature and

not much element of public interest is involved.      The crucial

aspect of the matter is that though such offences are involved,

the real disputants to the controversy, which has led to the

impugned criminal proceedings, have actually arrived at an

amicable settlement of the matter. From the submissions made

by the learned counsel for the 2nd respondent, it is clear to the

Court that the injured/victim/defacto complainant has no further

grievance against the petitioners/accused in the light of the

settlement arrived at by them. In this connection, it is relevant

to note the decision of the Apex Court in the case between Gian

                                   ::7::

Crl.M.C.No.6098 Of 2014

Singh v. State of Punjab reported in 2013 (1) SCC (Cri) 160,

para 61 = (2012) 10 SCC 303 = 2012(4) KLT 108(SC), wherein

the Supreme Court has held as follows in para 61 thereof [ See

SCC (Cri)]:

              "61. The position that emerges from the above
       discussion can be summarised thus: the power of the
       High Court in quashing a criminal proceeding or FIR or
       complaint in exercise of its inherent jurisdiction is
       distinct and different from the power given to a criminal
       court for compounding the offences under S.320 of the
       Code.     Inherent power is of wide plenitude with no
       statutory limitation but it has to be exercised in accord
       with the guideline engrafted in such power viz;(i) to
       secure the ends of justice or (ii) to prevent abuse of
       the process of any Court.        In what cases power to
       quash the criminal proceeding or complaint or F.I.R.
       may be exercised where the offender and victim have
       settled their dispute would depend on the facts and
       circumstances of each case and no category can be
       prescribed..

It is further held as follows:-

       "......... But the criminal cases having overwhelmingly
       and pre-dominatingly civil flavour stand on different
       footing for the purposes of quashing, particularly the
       offences arising from commercial, financial, mercantile,
       civil, partnership or such like transactions or the
       offences arising out of matrimony relating to dowry
       etc. or the family disputes where the wrong is basically
       private or personal in nature and the parties have
       resolved their entire dispute. In this category of cases,
       High Court may quash criminal proceedings if in its
       view, because of the compromise between the offender
       and victim, the possibility of conviction is remote and
       bleak and continuation of criminal case would put
       accused to great oppression and prejudice and
       extreme injustice would be caused to him by not
       quashing the criminal case despite full and complete

                                  ::8::

Crl.M.C.No.6098 Of 2014

      settlement and compromise with the victim........"

Further, in the case Jitendra Raghuvanshi and Others v.

Babita Raghuvanshi and another reported in (2013) 4 SCC

58 [see 2013 (1) KLD 817 (SC)], the Apex Court has held as

follows:-

            "8. It is not in dispute that matrimonial disputes
      have been on considerable increase in recent times
      resulting in filing of complaints under Sections 498A
      and 406 of I.P.C. not only against the husband but also
      against the relatives of the husband. The question is
      when such matters are resolved either by the wife
      agreeing to rejoin the matrimonial home or by mutual
      settlement of other pending disputes for which both
      the sides approached the High Court and jointly prayed
      for quashing of the criminal proceedings or the FIR or
      complaint by the wife under Sections 498A and 406 of
      I.P.C., whether the prayer can be declined on the sole
      ground that since the offences are non-compoundable
      under Section 320        of the Code, it would be
      impermissible for the court to quash the criminal
      proceedings or FIR or complaint.

            9. It is not in dispute that in the case on hand
      subsequent to the filing of the criminal complaint under
      Sections 498A and 406 of IPC and Sections 3 and 4 of
      the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961, with the help and
      intervention of family members, friends and well-
      wishers, the parties concerned have amicably settled
      their   differences   and   executed    a   compromise/
      settlement. Pursuant thereto, the appellants filed the
      said compromise before the Trial Court with a request
      to place the same on record and to drop the criminal
      proceedings against the appellants herein. It is also
      not in dispute that in additional to the mutual
      settlement arrived at by the parties, respondent/-wife
      has also filed an affidavit stating that she did not wish
      to pursue the criminal proceedings against the
      appellants and fully supported the contents of the

                                 ::9::

Crl.M.C.No.6098 Of 2014

      settlement deed. It is the grievance of the appellants
      that no only the Trial Court rejected such prayer of the
      parties but also the High Court failed toe exercise its
      jurisdiction under Section 482 of the Code only on the
      ground that the criminal proceedings relate to the
      offences punishable under Sections 498A and 406 of
      IPC which are non-compoundable in nature.
            15. In our view, it is the duty of the Courts to
      encourage     genuine    settlements   of   matrimonial
      disputes,   particularly, when    the   same    are   on
      considerable increase. Even if the offences are non-
      compoundable, if they relate to matrimonial disputes
      and the Court is satisfied that the parties have settled
      the same amicably and without any pressure, we hold
      that for the purpose of securing ends of justice,
      Section 320 of the Code would not be a bar to the
      exercise of power of quashing of FIR, complaint or the
      subsequent criminal proceedings.
            16. There has been an outburst of matrimonial
      disputes in recent times. The institution of marriage
      occupies an important place and it has an important
      role to play in the society.    Therefore, every effort
      should be made in the interest of the individuals in
      order to enable them to settle down in life and live
      peacefully.   If the parties ponder over their defaults
      and terminate their disputes amicably by mutual
      agreement instead of fighting it out in a Court of law,
      in order to do complete justice in the matrimonial
      matters, the Courts should be less hesitant in
      exercising its extraordinary jurisdiction. It is trite to
      state that the power under Section 482 should be
      exercised sparingly and with circumspection only when
      the Court is convinced, on the basis of material on
      record, that allowing the proceedings to continue
      would be an abuse of the process of the Court or that
      the ends of justice require that the proceedings ought
      to be quashed."

      8.    Considering the facts and circumstances of this case,

it is seen further that the impugned criminal proceedings have

arisen consequent to the matrimonial disputes between the

                                ::10::

Crl.M.C.No.6098 Of 2014

disputants and the disputes have been settled amicably between

the parties. Accordingly, this Court is inclined to hold that in the

light of the facts and circumstances involved in the present case

and particularly in view of the settlement arrived at between the

parties, the principles laid down in the aforementioned decisions

of the Apex Court will be squarely applicable in the present case.

Moreover, since the real disputants to the controversy have

amicably settled the disputes, which led to these impugned

criminal proceedings, it is also the duty of the court to promote

such settlement, instead of compelling the parties to go on with

the dispute. It is also pertinent to note that since the matter is

settled out of court, in the event of proceeding with the trial,

there may not be any fruitful prosecution and the chances of

conviction of the accused is rather negligible and therefore, the

net result of continuance of criminal proceedings would be sheer

waste of judicial time rather meaningless and therefore would

amount to abuse of the process of court proceedings in the larger

sense. Hence following decisions of the Apex Court cited supra,

this Court is inclined to hold that the Crl.M.C. can be allowed by

granting the prayers sought for.

      In the result, Crl.M.C is allowed and the impugned

                                ::11::

Crl.M.C.No.6098 Of 2014

Annexure-1 Final Report/Charge Sheet in Crime No.118/2011

of Attingal Police Station against all the accused persons

therein which led to the institution of C.C.No.298/2011 on the

file of the Judicial First Class Magistrate Court-I, Attingal and

all further proceedings arising therefrom stand quashed.

Petitioners shall produce certified copies of this order before

the Magistrate Court concerned as well as before the Station

House Officer concerned.




                                          ALEXANDER THOMAS,
                                                   Judge.

bkn/-



