
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                    PRESENT:

                    THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE K.RAMAKRISHNAN

             TUESDAY, THE 25TH DAY OF MARCH 2014/4TH CHAITHRA, 1936

                                        Crl.MC.No. 1693 of 2014 ()
                                              ---------------------------
                CRIME NO. 454/2014 OF MUVATTUPUZHA POLICE STATION.
                                                        .......

PETITIONER/ACCUSED:
-----------------------------------

           SAID MUHAMMED,
           S/O.MUHAMMAD HUSAIN,
           AGED 43 YEARS, THEMBILLIKUDIYIL HOUSE,
           EAST MARADI KARA, MARADI VILLAGE,
           MUVATTUPUZHA.

           BY ADV. SRI.GEORGE SEBASTIAN.

RESPONDENTS/DEFACTO COMPLAINANT AND STATE:
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

        1. FATHIMA, W/O.MUHAMMAD HUSAIN,
          AGED 65 YEARS, THEMBILLIKUDIYIL HOUSE,
           EAST MARADI KARA, MARADI VILLAGE,
           MUVATTUPUZHA- 686 661.

        2. STATE OF KERALA,
           REPRESENTED BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR,
           HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM.


           R1 BY ADV. SRI.BYJU KURIAKOSE.
           R2 BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SMT.SAREENA GEORGE P.


           THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE HAVING COME UP FOR ADMISSION
           ON 25-03-2014, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE
           FOLLOWING:

rs.

Crl.MC.No. 1693 of 2014


                                 APPENDIX

PETITIONER'S ANNEXURES:-


ANNEXURE A.         COPY OF THE FIR IN CRIME NO.454/2014 OF
                    MUVATTUPUZHA POLICE STATION.

ANNEXURE B.         AFFIDAVIT SWORN BY THE 1ST RESPONDENT
                    DATED 17.03.2014.


RESPONDENT'S ANNEXURES:-              NIL.




                                            //TRUE COPY//


                                            P.A. TO JUDGE

rs.


                           K. RAMAKRISHNAN, J.
                 --------------------------------------------------------------
                        Crl. M.C. No.1693 of 2014
          ---------------------------------------------------------------------
              Dated this the 25th day of March, 2014


                                     O R D E R




          This criminal miscellaneous case is field by the

sole accused in Crime No.454/2014 of Muvattupuzha Police

Station, to quash the proceedings on the basis of the

settlement under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal

Procedure (hereinafter called the 'Code').

          2.     It is alleged in the petition that, the

petitioner is the sole accused in Crime No.454/2014 of

Muvattupuzha Police Station, which was registered on the

basis of the statement given by the first respondent, who is

none other than the mother of the petitioner, originally

alleging offences under Section 294(b), 326 and 323 of the

Indian Penal Code and Annexure-A is the first information

report so registered. During the course of investigation,

the investigating officer filed a report deleting Section 323

Crl. M.C. No.1693 of 2014
                                    2

of the Indian Penal Code and added Section 308 of the

Indian Penal Code.          The incident occurred due to some

family dispute between the brothers. Now the matter has

been settled between the parties and that has restored

harmony between them. The first respondent mother is not

interested in prosecuting her son in respect of the incident,

in view of the settlement. No purpose will be served by

proceeding with the investigation or prolong the case as

well, in view of the settlement. Since, it is in the crime

stage and also some of the offences are non-compoundable

in nature, neither the police nor the court will drop the

proceedings, so the petitioner has no other remedy, except

to approach this court, seeking the following reliefs:

             i. This Hon'ble Court may be pleased to quash all
      further proceedings against the petitioner herein in
      Crime No.454/2014 of Muvattupuzha Police Station in
      pursuance of Annexure-A FIR, and

             ii. To grant such other reliefs as this Hon'ble Court
      deems fit in the peculiar facts and circumstances of this
      case.

            3.     The    first  respondent        appeared    through

Crl. M.C. No.1693 of 2014
                                3

counsel and submitted that, the mater has been settled and

in fact the incident occurred due to some mis-understanding

between the mother and the son and when the son took the

car, it happened to hit against the mother, which was not

intentional.      But it was misunderstood that, it was an

intentional act and on that mis-understanding the crime has

been registered. Now the entire family dispute has been

settled and harmony has been restored in the family. So

she has also filed an affidavit stating these facts.

            4.    The counsel for the petitioner also submitted

that, in view of the settlement, no purpose will be served by

allowing the investigation to continue or trial to be

proceeded with and he prayed for allowing the application.

            5.    Learned Public Prosecutor, on instructions,

as directed by this court, submitted that, except this case,

there is no other case against the petitioner and the

petitioner and the defacto-complainant are son and mother

respectively. But since it is in the preliminary stage and

Crl. M.C. No.1693 of 2014
                                 4

Section 308 of the Indian Penal Code is also added, opposed

the application for quashing it at this stage.

            6.    It is an admitted fact that, on the basis of the

statement given by the first respondent, who is none other

than the mother of the petitioner, Annexure-A first

information report was registered as Crime No.454/2014 of

Muvattupuzha Police Station, originally alleging offences

under Section 294(b), 326 and 323 of the Indian Penal

Code. Even in the first information statement itself, it was

mentioned that, there was some dispute regarding the

family property and on account of the same, there used to

be dispute between her children, including the present

petitioner and when she intervened, the incident happened.

Even going by the allegations in the statement, it appears

that it is not an intentional act, but it happened while he

had taken the vehicle suddenly, after the altercation

between the brother and the petitioner in respect of their

property dispute and in that process, the vehicle happened

Crl. M.C. No.1693 of 2014
                                5

to hit against his mother, who was coming along the road.

But however, earlier the crime registered only alleging

offences under Section 294(b), 326 and 323 of the Indian

Penal Code and later Section 323 of the Indian Penal Code

was deleted and added Section 308 of the Indian Penal

Code. It cannot be said to be an incident affecting the public

as such. But it is true that the mother sustained severe

injuries on account of the act of her own son. Now the

mother has prepared to forgive his son and does not want to

proceed with the prosecution. Further it is also mentioned

in the affidavit filed by the first respondent as Annexure-B

that, the entire family dispute in respect of the family

properties were also settled due to the intervention of

mediators, which was root cause for this incident and

cordial relationship between the brothers and the mother

has been restored and they are living happily now.

            7.    In the decision reported in Gian Singh v.

State of Punjab [2012(4) KLT 108 (SC)], it has been

Crl. M.C. No.1693 of 2014
                                       6

held that:

      "The position that emerges from the above discussion can be
      summarised thus: the power of the High Court in quashing a
      criminal proceedings or FIR or complaint in exercise of its
      inherent jurisdiction is distinct and different from the power
      given to a criminal court for compounding the offences under
      S.320 of the Code. Inherent power is of wide plenitude with
      no statutory limitation but has to be exercised in accord with
      the guideline engrafted in such power viz; (i) to secure the
      ends of justice or (ii) to prevent abuse of the process of any
      Court. In what cases power to quash the criminal proceeding
      or complaint or FIR may be exercised where the offender and
      victim have settled their dispute would depend on the facts
      and circumstances of each case an no category can be
      prescribed. However, before exercise of such power, the High
      Court must have due regard to the nature and gravity of the
      crime. Heinous and serious offences of mental depravity or
      offences like murder, rape, dacoity, etc., cannot be fittingly
      quashed even though the victim or victim's family and the
      offender have settled the dispute.       Such offences are not
      private in nature and have serious impact on society.
      Similarly, any compromise between the victim and offender in
      relation to the offences under special statutes like Prevention
      of Corruption Act or the offences committed by public servants
      while working in that capacity etc; cannot provide for any
      basis for quashing criminal proceedings involving such
      offences. But the criminal cases having overwhelmingly and
      pre-dominatingly civil flavour stand on different footing for the
      purposes of quashing, particularly the offences arising from
      commercial, financial mercantile, civil, partnership or such
      like transactions or the offences arising out of matrimony
      relating to dowry, etc., or the family disputes where the wrong
      is basically private or personal in nature and the parties have
      resolved their entire dispute. In this category of cases, High
      Court may quash criminal proceedings if in its view, because
      of the compromise between the offender and victim, the
      possibility of conviction is remote and bleak and continuation
      of criminal case would put accused to great oppression and
      prejudice and extreme injustice would be caused to him by not
      quashing the criminal case despite full and complete
      settlement and compromise with the victim. In other words,
      the High Court must consider whether it would be unfair or
      contrary to the interest of justice to continue with the criminal
      proceedings or continuation of the criminal proceedings would
      tantamount to abuse of process of law despite settlement and

Crl. M.C. No.1693 of 2014
                                      7

      compromise between the victim and wrongdoer and whether
      to secure the ends of justice, it is appropriate that criminal
      case is put to an end and if the answer to the above question
      (s) is in affirmative, the High Court shall be well within its
      jurisdiction to quash the criminal proceeding."


             8.     In view of the dictum laid down in the

decision cited (supra) and also considering the fact that, the

basic reason for the incident was the family dispute in

respect of division of property, which was now settled

between the parties and the mother has shown the

magnanimity of forgiving her son for the act committed by

him on her in order to promote the relationship between the

brothers and bring harmony in the family and also

considering the fact that, the matter has been settled

between the parties, no purpose will be served by allowing

the investigation to continue or even ultimately final report

is filed, chances of conviction is remote, as none of the

prosecution witnesses including the defacto-complainant

will support the prosecution and it will only be a wastage of

judicial time. So under the circumstances, this court feels

that, it is a fit case where the power under Section 482 of

Crl. M.C. No.1693 of 2014
                                  8

the 'Code' has to be invoked to quash the proceedings,

though the investigation is in the primitive stage and in

order to promote the harmony that has been restored in the

family and the pendency of the case should not be a hurdle

for the happy re-union of family members. So the

application is allowed and a further proceeding in Crime

No.454/2014 of Muvattupuzha Police Station, as against the

petitioner is quashed. Office is directed to communicate this

order to the Judicial First Class Magistrate Court,

Muvattupuzha,         so as   to   inform   the   same     to   the

Muvattupuzha Police Station for necessary further action in

this regard.




                                             Sd/-
                                      K. Ramakrishnan, Judge

                           // True Copy //


                                                    P.A. to Judge

ss



