
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                      PRESENT:

                     THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE ALEXANDER THOMAS

              TUESDAY, THE 28TH DAY OF OCTOBER 2014/6TH KARTHIKA, 1936

                                           Crl.MC.No. 6064 of 2014 ()
                                               ---------------------------
    PENDING AS CC. 1045/2014 OF JUDICIAL FIRST CLASS MAGISTRATE'S COURT-II
                                                      HOSDURG
                       CRIME NO. 179/2014 OF NILESWAR POLICE STATION,
                                             KASARGOD DISTRICT
                                                      --------------

PETITIONER/ACCUSED :
---------------------------------

            M.RAVEENDRAN, AGED 40 YEARS,
            S/O.DAMODHARAN NAIR, RESIDING AT MOOLACHERY HOUSE,
            NAGACHERY ROAD, PADINJATTAM KOZHUVAL,
            NILESHWARAM VILLAGE, KASARAGOD DISTRICT.

            BY ADV. SRI.T.MADHU

RESPONDENTS/STATE & DEFACTO COMPLAINANT :
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

        1. THE STATE OF KERALA
            THROUGH THE STATION HOUSE OFFICER,
            NILESHWAR POLICESTATION, KASARAGOD DISTRICT
            REPRESENTED BY THE PUBLIC PROSECUTOR,
            HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM 682 031.

        2. RAJANI, AGED 35 YEARS
            D/O.KUNHAMBU NAIR, RESIDING AT OYYANDAM HOUSE
            PERUMBALA, PERUMBALA VILLAGE, KASARAGOD TALUK,
            KASARAGOD DISTRICT,NOW RESIDING AT KOYITHATTA HOUSE,
            PUDUKAI, PUDUKAI VILLAGE, HOSDURG TALUK,
            KASARAGOD DISTRICT - 671 314.

            R1 BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR
            R2 BY ADV. SMT.BINDUMOL JOSEPH

            THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD
            ON 28-10-2014, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE
            FOLLOWING:


bp

Crl.MC.No. 6064 of 2014 ()
---------------------------

                                            APPENDIX

PETITIONER(S)' EXHIBITS
-------------------------------------

ANNEXURE-A1: THE TRUE CERTIFIED COPY OF THE C.M.P NO.1511/2014 ON THE
                        FILE THE LEARNED JUDICIAL FIRST CLASS MAGISTRATE'S
                        COURT-II, HOSDURG.

ANNEXURE-A2: THE TRUE COPY OF THE FIR IN CRIME NO.179/2014 OF NILESHWAR
                        POLICE STATION.

ANNEXURE-A3: THE TRUE CERTIFIED COPY OF THE FINAL REPORT IN CRIME
                        NO.179/2014 OF NILESHWAR POLICE STATION.

ANNEXURE-A4: THE AFFIDAVIT DATED 15.10.2014 SWORN IN BY THE 2ND
                        RESPONDENT

RESPONDENT(S)' EXHIBITS                    :    NIL.
---------------------------------------


                                                           //TRUE COPY//




                                                           P.A. TO JUDGE

bp


                     ALEXANDER THOMAS, J.
                     -----------------------------
                     Crl.M.C.No.6064 Of 2014
                   ---------------------------------
            Dated this the 28th day of October, 2014.

                              O R D E R


     The above captioned Criminal Miscellaneous Case (Crl.M.C),

invoking the inherent powers conferred on this Court under

Section 482 Cr.P.C, has been filed with the prayer to quash the

impugned Annexure-A3 Final Report/Charge Sheet in impugned

Annexure-A2 FIR in Crime No.179/2014 of Nileshwar Police

Station, Kasaragod District which has led to the institution of

C.C.No.1045/2014 on the file of the Judicial First Class Magistrate

Court-II, Hosdurg, and all further proceedings arising therefrom.

The 2nd respondent, who is the wife of the petitioner, submitted

Annexure-A1 private criminal complaint before the Judicial First

Class Magistrate Court-II, Hosdurg, which led to the registration

of impugned Annexure-A2 FIR in Crime No.179/2014 of

Nileshwar Police Station for offences registered under Section

498A r/w 34 of the Indian Penal Code.               The gist of the

prosecution is that the 1st accused, who is the husband of the

defacto complainant, had demanded more gold and money from

her and that the 1st accused (husband) 2nd accused (mother of

the 1st petitioner) have mentally and physically harassed her and

thereby committed the aforesaid offence.            The police after

                                  ::2::

Crl.M.C.No.6064 Of 2014

investigation   submitted     the   impugned    Annexure-A3    Final

Report/Charge Sheet in the above said crime which led to the

institution of C.C.No.1045/2014 on the file of the Judicial First

Class Magistrate Court-II, Hosdurg. After investigation, the 2nd

accused, mother of the 1st accused, has been deleted from the

array of the accused.       It is submitted that now the entire

disputes between the petitioner and 2nd respondent have been

settled between the parties due to the intervention of the friends

and well wishers of both parties and decided to separate and that

the 2nd respondent is now having no grievance against the

petitioner and the 2nd respondent has sworn to an affidavit dated

15.10.2014 produced as Annexure-A4 in this Crl.M.C stating the

above aspects and that the above criminal proceedings happened

to be initiated against the accused because of certain mistakes of

facts and that the entire disputes between the 2nd respondent

and the petitioner have been settled out of court at the instances

of the friends and well wishers on either side and that she has no

subsisting grievance against the petitioner and that she has no

objection in quashing the Final Report/Charge Sheet and all

further proceedings which is now pending as C.C.No.1045/2014

on the file of the Judicial First Class Magistrate Court-II, Hosdurg

                                ::3::

Crl.M.C.No.6064 Of 2014

etc. It is in the background of these facts and circumstances, the

above Crl.M.C has been filed.

      2.    The Crl.M.C. has been admitted and Smt.Bindumol

Joseph has taken notice for the 2nd respondent and the learned

Public Prosecutor has taken notice for the 1st respondent-State of

Kerala.

      3.    Heard Sri.T.Madhu, learned counsel for the petitioner,

Smt.Bindumol Joseph, learned counsel for the 2nd respondent and

the learned Public Prosecutor appearing for the 1st respondent-

State of Kerala.

      4.    The learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted

that during the pendency of the aforementioned criminal

proceedings, the matter has been settled amicably between the

parties, and that the continuation of the proceedings in the above

case/crime will cause miscarriage of justice to both parties as the

real disputants to the controversy have arrived at an amicable

settlement and any further continuation of the criminal

proceedings will amount to sheer wastage of time and money

and would unnecessarily strain the judicial, administrative and

financial resources of the State.

                               ::4::

Crl.M.C.No.6064 Of 2014

      5.   Smt.Bindumol Joseph, learned counsel appearing for

the 2nd respondent has submitted, on the basis of the specific

instructions furnished by the 2nd respondent, that the 2nd

respondent has amicably settled the disputes with the petitioner

as stated above and that she has no objection in the quashment

of   the   impugned    criminal    proceedings  and     that   the

complainant/victim/injured does not intend to proceed any

further against the petitioner as she has no grievance against

him and that she will not raise any dispute/complaint in future if

the prayer for quashing the impugned criminal proceedings is

allowed.

      6.   The learned Public Prosecutor also was heard, who

also has not raised any serious objections and submitted that the

court may consider the prayer in this case in the light of the law

well settled by the Apex Court in that regard.

      7.   After having carefully considered the submissions of

the parties and after having perused the pleadings as well as the

documents and materials placed in this matter, it can be seen

that the offences alleged are more or less personal in nature and

not much element of public interest is involved.      The crucial

aspect of the matter is that though such offences are involved,

                                   ::5::

Crl.M.C.No.6064 Of 2014

the real disputants to the controversy, which has led to the

impugned criminal proceedings, have actually arrived at an

amicable settlement of the matter. From the submissions made

by the learned counsel for the 2nd respondent, it is clear to the

Court that the injured/victim/defacto complainant has no further

grievance against the petitioner/accused in the light of the

settlement arrived at by them. In this connection, it is relevant

to note the decision of the Apex Court in the case between Gian

Singh v. State of Punjab reported in 2013 (1) SCC (Cri) 160,

para 61 = (2012) 10 SCC 303 = 2012(4) KLT 108(SC), wherein

the Supreme Court has held as follows in para 61 thereof [ See

SCC (Cri)]:

             "61. The position that emerges from the above
       discussion can be summarised thus: the power of the
       High Court in quashing a criminal proceeding or FIR or
       complaint in exercise of its inherent jurisdiction is
       distinct and different from the power given to a criminal
       court for compounding the offences under S.320 of the
       Code.    Inherent power is of wide plenitude with no
       statutory limitation but it has to be exercised in accord
       with the guideline engrafted in such power viz;(i) to
       secure the ends of justice or (ii) to prevent abuse of
       the process of any Court.        In what cases power to
       quash the criminal proceeding or complaint or F.I.R.
       may be exercised where the offender and victim have
       settled their dispute would depend on the facts and
       circumstances of each case and no category can be
       prescribed..

It is further held as follows:-

                                  ::6::

Crl.M.C.No.6064 Of 2014

      "......... But the criminal cases having overwhelmingly
      and pre-dominatingly civil flavour stand on different
      footing for the purposes of quashing, particularly the
      offences arising from commercial, financial, mercantile,
      civil, partnership or such like transactions or the
      offences arising out of matrimony relating to dowry
      etc. or the family disputes where the wrong is basically
      private or personal in nature and the parties have
      resolved their entire dispute. In this category of cases,
      High Court may quash criminal proceedings if in its
      view, because of the compromise between the offender
      and victim, the possibility of conviction is remote and
      bleak and continuation of criminal case would put
      accused to great oppression and prejudice and
      extreme injustice would be caused to him by not
      quashing the criminal case despite full and complete
      settlement and compromise with the victim........"

Further, in the case Jitendra Raghuvanshi and Others v.

Babita Raghuvanshi and another reported in (2013) 4 SCC

58 [see 2013 (1) KLD 817 (SC)], the Apex Court has held as

follows:-

             "8. It is not in dispute that matrimonial disputes
      have been on considerable increase in recent times
      resulting in filing of complaints under Sections 498A
      and 406 of I.P.C. not only against the husband but also
      against the relatives of the husband. The question is
      when such matters are resolved either by the wife
      agreeing to rejoin the matrimonial home or by mutual
      settlement of other pending disputes for which both
      the sides approached the High Court and jointly prayed
      for quashing of the criminal proceedings or the FIR or
      complaint by the wife under Sections 498A and 406 of
      I.P.C., whether the prayer can be declined on the sole
      ground that since the offences are non-compoundable
      under Section 320         of the Code, it would be
      impermissible for the court to quash the criminal
      proceedings or FIR or complaint.

                                  ::7::

Crl.M.C.No.6064 Of 2014

            9. It is not in dispute that in the case on hand
      subsequent to the filing of the criminal complaint under
      Sections 498A and 406 of IPC and Sections 3 and 4 of
      the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961, with the help and
      intervention of family members, friends and well-
      wishers, the parties concerned have amicably settled
      their   differences   and   executed    a   compromise/
      settlement. Pursuant thereto, the appellants filed the
      said compromise before the Trial Court with a request
      to place the same on record and to drop the criminal
      proceedings against the appellants herein. It is also
      not in dispute that in additional to the mutual
      settlement arrived at by the parties, respondent/-wife
      has also filed an affidavit stating that she did not wish
      to pursue the criminal proceedings against the
      appellants and fully supported the contents of the
      settlement deed. It is the grievance of the appellants
      that no only the Trial Court rejected such prayer of the
      parties but also the High Court failed toe exercise its
      jurisdiction under Section 482 of the Code only on the
      ground that the criminal proceedings relate to the
      offences punishable under Sections 498A and 406 of
      IPC which are non-compoundable in nature.
            15. In our view, it is the duty of the Courts to
      encourage     genuine    settlements    of   matrimonial
      disputes,   particularly,  when    the   same    are  on
      considerable increase. Even if the offences are non-
      compoundable, if they relate to matrimonial disputes
      and the Court is satisfied that the parties have settled
      the same amicably and without any pressure, we hold
      that for the purpose of securing ends of justice,
      Section 320 of the Code would not be a bar to the
      exercise of power of quashing of FIR, complaint or the
      subsequent criminal proceedings.
            16. There has been an outburst of matrimonial
      disputes in recent times. The institution of marriage
      occupies an important place and it has an important
      role to play in the society.     Therefore, every effort
      should be made in the interest of the individuals in
      order to enable them to settle down in life and live
      peacefully.   If the parties ponder over their defaults
      and terminate their disputes amicably by mutual
      agreement instead of fighting it out in a Court of law,
      in order to do complete justice in the matrimonial

                                ::8::

Crl.M.C.No.6064 Of 2014

      matters, the Courts should be less hesitant in
      exercising its extraordinary jurisdiction. It is trite to
      state that the power under Section 482 should be
      exercised sparingly and with circumspection only when
      the Court is convinced, on the basis of material on
      record, that allowing the proceedings to continue
      would be an abuse of the process of the Court or that
      the ends of justice require that the proceedings ought
      to be quashed."


      8.    Considering the facts and circumstances of this case,

it is seen further that the impugned criminal proceedings have

arisen consequent to the matrimonial disputes between the

disputants and the disputes have been settled amicably between

the parties. Accordingly, this Court is inclined to hold that in the

light of the facts and circumstances involved in the present case

and particularly in view of the settlement arrived at between the

parties, the principles laid down in the aforementioned decisions

of the Apex Court will be squarely applicable in the present case.

Moreover, since the real disputants to the controversy have

amicably settled the disputes, which led to these impugned

criminal proceedings, it is also the duty of the court to promote

such settlement, instead of compelling the parties to go on with

the dispute. It is also pertinent to note that since the matter is

settled out of court, in the event of proceeding with the trial,

there may not be any fruitful prosecution and the chances of

                                ::9::

Crl.M.C.No.6064 Of 2014

conviction of the accused is rather negligible and therefore, the

net result of continuance of criminal proceedings would be sheer

waste of judicial time rather meaningless and therefore would

amount to abuse of the process of court proceedings in the larger

sense. Hence following decisions of the Apex Court cited supra,

this Court is inclined to hold that the Crl.M.C. can be allowed by

granting the prayers sought for.

      In the result, Crl.M.C is allowed and the impugned

Annexure-A3 Final Report/Charge Sheet in the impugned

Annexure-A2 FIR in Crime No.179/2014 of Nileshwar Police

Station which has led to the institution of C.C.No.1045/2014 on

the file of the Judicial First Class Magistrate Court-II, Hosdurg

and    all further   proceedings     arising from   such   criminal

proceedings as against the petitioner stand quashed.          The

petitioner shall produce certified copies of this order to the

Magistrate Court concerned as well as before the Station House

Officer concerned.




                                            ALEXANDER THOMAS,
                                                    Judge.

bkn/-



