
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                        PRESENT:

                     THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE ALEXANDER THOMAS

           WEDNESDAY, THE 29TH DAY OF OCTOBER 2014/7TH KARTHIKA, 1936

                                         Bail Appl..No. 7728 of 2014 ()
                                              -------------------------------
     AGAINST THE ORDER IN CMP 1768/2014 of D.C. & SESIONS & MACT,KALPETTA
                                                 DATED 10-10-2014
             CRIME NO. 536/2014 OF MEENANGADI POLICE STATION , WAYANAD
                                               ....................................

PETITIONER(S)/ACCUSED :
-------------------------------------


                     K.A. VINCENT, AGED 47 YEARS,
                     S/O.ABRAHAM, KANJIRAMKOLATH HOUSE,
                     MEENANGADY POST,
                     WAYANAD DISTRICT.


                     BY ADV. SMT.CELINE JOSEPH


RESPONDENT(S)/COMPLAINANT :
------------------------------------------------


                     STATE OF KERALA,
                     STATION HOUSE OFFICER, MEENANGADY,
                     REPRESENTED BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR
                     HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM.


                     BY SMT.R.REMA, PUBLIC PROSECUTOR


                     THIS BAIL APPLICATION HAVING COME UP FOR ADMISSION ON
                     29-10-2014, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE FOLLOWING:




AMV


                      ALEXANDER THOMAS, J.
                      ---------------------------------------
                        B.A.NO.7728 of 2014
                    ---------------------------------------
            Dated this the 29th day of October, 2014


                                ORDER

       The petitioner is the sole accused in Crime No.536 of

2014 of Meenangayi Police Station registered for the offences

punishable under Sections 498A, 324 and 506(ii) of the Indian

Penal Code.

       2.     The de facto complainant is his wife, who was

assaulted by the petitioner with a coconut scrapper on

22.09.2014, as she questioned him on the issue of a suspected

illicit relationship between him and another lady. There are

also allegations regarding the demand of more dowry and

other allegations regarding inflicting mental and physical

cruelty. There is also allegation that the petitioner had utilised

the money given to her parents at the time of her marriage for

starting a shop.

       3.     Sri.Grashious Kuriakose, learned senior counsel

instructed by Smt.Celine Joseph learned counsel for the

petitioner would submit that petitioner is innocent of all the

allegations and that allegations are falsely made, due to

differences of opinion that existed in the matrimonial

B.A.NO.7728 of 2014
                                  2

relationship between him and his wife.       The learned senior

counsel for the petitioner would submits that the petitioner

undertakes that, he would comply with any conditions that may

be imposed by this Court while granting pre-arrest bail, so as to

protect the bonafide interest of the prosecution.

      4.    The learned Public Prosecutor would submit that the

allegation is that the petitioner had used a coconut scrapper for

assaulting the de facto complainant and that the wound

certificate shows contusions and swelling on the left and pain

on the back of the neck and contusion on the right shoulder

etc. and that the de facto complainant was admitted the

hospital on 22.09.2014 at about 5.30 p.m., after the incident

that is alleged to have occurred on the same day at 7.30 a.m.

and that she was later discharged from the hospital on

01.10.2014.

      5.    The learned Public Prosecutor would submit that the

investigation requires the presence of the petitioner for

effective questioning and also for recovery of the coconut

scrapper which is said to have been used for the commission of

the above said offence and that the prosecution is opposing the

grant of anticipatory bail in this case.

      6.    The learned senior counsel for the petitioner would

B.A.NO.7728 of 2014
                               3

submits that even going by the body note prepared by the

Police at the time of the registration of the First Information

Report, shows only that there was contusions on the left

forehead and complaint of pain on both shoulders and left side

chest and that the very fact that the de facto complainant was

admitted in the hospital only after about 10 hours, from the

time of the alleged incident shows that there were no major

injuries and that even the wound certificate would shows that

there were no injury or wound are suffered by the petitioner

except the aforementioned contusions and tenderness as

pointed out by the prosecutor. More importantly, the learned

senior counsel would submits that the petitioner is 47 years old

and the de facto complainant is 40 years and they have two

young daughters aged 20 and 18 years respectively and that

the remand of the petitioner would only create more strain and

disharmony in the family, which would affect not only the lives

of the petitioner and his wife but also that of their two young

daughters. Accordingly, the learned senior counsel would urge

that the plea of pre-arrest bail may be allowed with any

stringent conditions that may be imposed by this Court in the

interest of the prosecution. He further undertakes on behalf of

the petitioner that the petitioner is prepared to make himself

B.A.NO.7728 of 2014
                                  4

available    for   questioning   and   interrogation before     the

investigating officer so as to facilitate smooth conduct of the

investigation and also would co-operate with the investigation

so as to facilitate any recovery of the alleged weapon (coconut

scrapper).

      7.    Having considered the submissions of the learned

senior counsel for the petitioner and the learned Public

Prosecutor and taking into account the totality of the facts and

circumstances of the case, that there are no serious wounds

suffered by the de facto complainant and more importantly in

order to protect interest of the family, it may be fair and

interest of justice to partially allowed the plea of the petitioner.

However, the alleged weapon (coconut scrapper) is to be

recovered.

      8.    It is also to be noticed that even going by the

prosecution version, the alleged incident is said to have

occurred during repeated altercations between the petitioner

and his wife. At the same time it has been borne in mind that

the weapon alleged is to be recovered and the petitioner has to

be made available for questioning and interrogation by the

investigating officer.      Accordingly, this Court deems it

necessary in the interest of justice after balancing the interest

B.A.NO.7728 of 2014
                                  5

of the prosecution in the accused that the course of action

adopted in the order dated 15.07.2014 in B.A. No. 5030/2014

could be adopted, though, the facts of the matter is different,

instead of state away allowing the plea of pre-arrest bail.

Accordingly it is ordered that :

            1.     The petitioner shall surrender before the

      investigating officer in Crime No.536/2014 Meenangadi

      Police Station, Wayanad district on 12.11.2014 at about

      10 a.m. for interrogation.

            2.     In case interrogation is not completed that

      day, it is open to the investigating officer concerned to

      direct the presence of the petitioner on other day/days

      and time as prescribed in writing by the investigating

      officer concerned, which the petitioner shall strictly

      comply.

            3.      The petitioner shall fully co-operate with

      the investigation of the case and especially in the

      matter of steps required by the investigating officer for

      recovery of the alleged weapon.

            4.     After interrogation of the petitioner in its

      entirety    as  above   stated   is  completed,    if  the

      investigating officer records the arrest of the petitioner,

      then he shall be produced forthwith before the

B.A.NO.7728 of 2014
                                  6

      jurisdictional magistrate on the same day and the

      jurisdictional  magistrate   shall   consider  the   bail

      application of the petitioner on the same day itself and

      release the petitioner on bail on his executing a bond

      for Rs. 35,000/- (Rupees thirty five thousand only) with

      two sureties for the like sum each to the satisfaction of

      the jurisdictional magistrate and subject to any other

      terms and conditions that may be imposed by the

      jurisdictional magistrate.

            5.     In case after the completion of the

      interrogation process in its entirety as aforesaid and

      the investigating officer does not chose to record the

      arrest of the petitioner, then the petitioner shall

      forthwith on the same day or on the immediate next

      working day, shall appear and surrender before the

      jurisdictional magistrate concerned and apply for bail

      and the jurisdictional magistrate shall consider such

      bail application on the same day and grant bail on his

      executing bond for       `35,000/- (Rupees thirty five

      thousand only) with two sureties for the like sum each

      to the satisfaction of the jurisdictional magistrate and

      subject to any other terms and conditions that may be

      imposed by the jurisdictional magistrate as he deems

B.A.NO.7728 of 2014
                                    7


      fit to protect the interest of the prosecution.

      9.     The learned Public Prosecutor has also pointed out

that some deterrent remedial order may also be rendered by

this Court in order to ensure that the possibility of the

petitioner influencing or intimidating the de facto complainant

is abated, as the case involves offences under Sections 506(i)

and 324 of Indian Penal Code apart from 498A and it is evident

from the medical records that the de facto complainant (wife)

has suffered contusions and that a message should go by

ordering such directions which would protect the interest of the

de facto complainant. Accordingly, it is also ordered that the

petitioner shall not reside or live or enter into the limits of the

Taluk concerned within which the matrimonial home of the

parties is situated, for a period upto the submission of the final

report in this case or until 31.03.2015, whichever is later,

except for the purpose of compliance of the other conditions in

this order and for the purpose of attending to his business in

the shop that is conducted by him within the said area and for

attending the requirements of any other pending case within

that Taluk concerned.

      10. Sri.Grashious Kuriakose, the learned senior counsel

for the petitioner, fairly undertakes that the petitioner would

B.A.NO.7728 of 2014
                               8

accept and comply with this direction and further that the

petitioner would ensure that the de facto complainant and their

two daughters should reside in the matrimonial home and the

petitioner would give reasonable means of living to take care of

the needs of the de facto complainant (wife) and the two

daughters and that he would comply with all the conditions

ordered by this Court. It is further ordered that the petitioner

shall not in any way take recourse to any action for contacting

or visiting the de facto complainant in the matrimonial home

and he can contact his daughters in his shop in the area

concerned for the above stipulated period. However, if the de

facto complainant (wife) permits the petitioner to visit the

matrimonial home during the above said period, he is free to

visit the home. Further, the investigating officer concerned in

this crime shall, on a fortnight basis, until the above said

period, depute a woman Police Constable (not in uniform) to

visit the de facto complainant (wife) in her home and ascertain

as to whether she is facing any threat or any other disturbing

action from the petitioner herein and if the investigating officer

after due enquiry, is convinced about the correctness of any

such complaints so raised by the de facto complainant, then,

he shall file a appropriate report in that regard and shall file

B.A.NO.7728 of 2014
                                 9

application for the cancellation of the bail granted to the

petitioner in this proceeding. So also if the investigating officer

after assessing the situation based on the fortnight report of

the woman Police Constable mentioned above, is convinced

that the above said arrangement upto 31.03.2015 is to be

extended for a further period, he is at liberty to do so.

      With these observations, this bail application stands

disposed.




                                              sd/-
                                 ALEXANDER THOMAS,
                                        JUDGE.


AMV

                            /TRUE COPY/


                            P.A.TO JUDGE



