
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                      PRESENT:

                     THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE ALEXANDER THOMAS

           WEDNESDAY, THE 29TH DAY OF OCTOBER 2014/7TH KARTHIKA, 1936

                                           Crl.MC.No. 5140 of 2014 ()
                                                ---------------------------
             CMP 3407/2014 of JUDICIAL FIRST CLASS MAGISTRATE'S COURT-II,
                                                     PALAKKAD
                  FIR NO. 503/2014 OF KONGAD POLICE STATION, PALAKKAD
                                                   --------------------

PETITIONERS/ACCUSED 1, 2 & 3 :
---------------------------------------------

        1. ASIF ISMAIL, AGED 31 YEARS,
            S/O.ISMAIL, CHENNAI HOUSE, AKG NAGAR,
            NADAKAVU, AKATHETHARA PALAKKAD TALUK
           (NEAR HEMAMBIKA NAGAR POLICE STATION)PALAKKAD 678 001.

        2. ISMAIL, AGED 62 YEARS, H/O.SABIYA,
            CHENNAI HOUSE, AKG NAGAR NADAKAVU, AKATHETHARA
            PALAKKAD TALUK(NEAR HEMAMBIKA NAGAR POLICE
            STATION) PALAKKAD - 678 001.

        3. SABIYA, AGED 58 YEARS, W/O.ISMAIL,
            CHENNAI HOUSE, AKG NAGAR NADAKAVU,
            AKATHETHARA PALAKKAD TALUK
           (NEAR HEMAMBIKA NAGAR POLICE STATION) PALAKKAD 678 001.

            BY ADVS.SRI.U.BALAGANGADHARAN
                          SRI.G.GIREESH

RESPONDENTS/DE FACTO COMPLAINANT/STATE :
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

        1. FURSANA P.H., AGED 20 YEARS,
            W/O.ASIF ISMAIL, PEEDIYAKKAL HOUSE, VELIKKAD,
            (NEAR KONGADU POLICE STATION), PALAKKAD TALUK,
            PALAKKAD 678 592.

        2. STATE OF KERALA
            REPRESENED BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR,
            HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM 682 031.

            R1 BY ADV. SRI.M.H.HANIL KUMAR
            R2 BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SRI. R. GITHESH

            THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD
            ON 29-10-2014, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE
            FOLLOWING:
bp

Crl.MC.No. 5140 of 2014 ()
---------------------------

                                           APPENDIX

PETITIONER(S)' EXHIBITS
-------------------------------------

ANNEXURE A: COPY OF THE CMP NO.3407/2014 DATED 18/6/2014.

ANNEXURE B: COPY OF THE FIR NO.503 DATED 20/6/2014

ANNEXURE C: ORIGINAL CONTRACT EXECUTED BETWEEN THE IST PETITIONER
                      AND IST RESPONDENT ON 13/8/2014.

ANNEXURE D: COPY OF AFFIDAVIT IN ORIGINAL EXECUTED BY THE IST
                     RESPONDENT DATED 13/8/2014

RESPONDENT(S)' EXHIBITS :                      NIL.
---------------------------------------


                                                        //TRUE COPY//




                                                        P.A.TO JUDGE

bp


                    ALEXANDER THOMAS, J.
                    -----------------------------
                    Crl.M.C.No.5140 Of 2014
                  ---------------------------------
           Dated this the 29th day of October, 2014.

                             O R D E R




      The   above    captioned    Criminal    Miscellaneous Case

(Crl.M.C) invoking the inherent powers conferred on this Court

under Section 482 Cr.P.C has been filed with the prayer to

quash the impugned Annexure-B FIR in Crime No.503/2014 of

Kongad     Police Station and Anenxure-A proceedings in

C.M.P.No.3407/2014 dated 18.6.2014 on the file of the Judicial

First Class Magistrate Court-II, Palakkad and all further

proceedings arising therefrom.         The 1st petitioner is the

husband of the 1st respondent. Based on Annexure-A private

criminal complaint preferred by the 1st respondent the

jurisdictional Magistrate directed investigation under Section

156(3) Cr.P.C which led to thew registration of Annexure-B FIR

in Crime No.503/2014 of Kongad Police Station, Palakkad

District registered for offence under Section 498A r/w Section

34 IPC. The gist of the allegation is that the husband and the

relatives of the husband have caused mental and physical

harassment on her with an intention to extract more money

                                ::2::

Crl.M.C.No.5140 Of 2014

and jewellery from the 1st respondent etc and thereby

committed the aforementioned offences. It is averred that the

marriage between the 1st petitioner and 1st respondent did not

last long due to serious difference of opinion between them

and they started living separately and as a off suit of the

above, the 1st respondent lodged Annexure-A criminal

complaint before the Judicial First Class Magistrate Court-II,

Palakkad as C.M.P.No.3407/2014 against the accused persons

alleging offence under Section 498A r/w 34 IPC. It is further

stated that the matrimonial disputes between the 1st petitioner

and 1st respondent was mediated by the Mosque Mahal

Committee and it has been decided by the parties to terminate

the matrimonial disputes between them and the 1st petitioner

pronounced "Thalaq" thrice on 13.8.2014 in the presence of

diligent witnesses and they executed a contract to the effect

that the 1st petitioner is not liable to pay any money or gold

ornaments to the 1st respondent and that it was also agreed

that the 1st petitioner will give a sum of Rs.3,000/- per month

for a period of three months amounting to Rs.9,000/- being

the idad expenses and towards the fair provision for future

                                ::3::

Crl.M.C.No.5140 Of 2014

maintenance the 1st petitioner would give a sum of

Rs.3,91,000/- and the 1st respondent received and amount of

Rs.9,000/- being the idad expenses and Rs.3,91,000/- for

future maintenance which has been acknowledged while

executing Annexure-C contract on 13.8.2014. It was further

specifically agreed in Annexure-C that the 1st respondent will

not pursue and prosecute C.M.P.No.3407/2014 pending before

the Judicial First Class Magistrate Court-II Palakkad and further

proceedings arising out of impugned Annexure-B FIR in the

instant crime. In clause (10) of Annexure-C contract the 1st

respondent has specifically agreed that she will compromise all

impugned criminal proceedings arising out of Annexure-A

C.M.P.No.3407/2014 against all the accused persons therein

and that she agrees for termination of the above said

impugned criminal proceedings etc.      The 1st respondent has

also sworn to an affidavit dated 13.8.2014 produced as

Annexure-D in the Crl.M.C stating the above facts and further

stated that she has decided not to pursue the criminal

complaint pending before the Magistrate Court viz. Annexure-A

and the impugned Crime in the police station and that she has

                                ::4::

Crl.M.C.No.5140 Of 2014

no objection in quashing the impugned criminal proceedings.

It is in the background of these facts and circumstances this

Crl.M.C has been filed.

      2.    The Crl.M.C. has been admitted and Sri.M.H.Hanil

Kumar has taken notice for the 1st respondent and the learned

Public Prosecutor has taken notice for the 2nd respondent-State of

Kerala.

      3.    Heard Sri.U.Balagangadharan, learned counsel for the

petitioners, Sri.M.H.Hanil Kumar, learned counsel for the 1st

respondent and the learned Public Prosecutor appearing for the

2nd respondent-State of Kerala.

      4.    The learned counsel for the petitioners has submitted

that during the pendency of the aforementioned criminal

proceedings, the matter has been settled amicably between the

parties, and that the continuation of the proceedings in the above

case/crime will cause miscarriage of justice to both parties as the

real disputants to the controversy have arrived at an amicable

settlement and any further continuation of the criminal

proceedings will amount to sheer wastage of time and money

and would unnecessarily strain the judicial, administrative and

financial resources of the State.

                               ::5::

Crl.M.C.No.5140 Of 2014

      5.   Sri.M.H.Hanil Kumar, learned counsel appearing for

the 1st respondent has submitted, on the basis of the specific

instructions furnished by the 1st respondent, that the 1st

respondent has amicably settled the disputes with the petitioners

as stated above and that she has no objection in the quashment

of   the   impugned    criminal    proceedings  and     that   the

complainant/victim/injured does not intend to proceed any

further against the petitioners as she has no grievance against

them and that she will not raise any dispute/complaint in future if

the prayer for quashing the impugned criminal proceedings is

allowed.

      6.   The learned Public Prosecutor also was heard, who

also has not raised any serious objections and submitted that the

court may consider the prayer in this case in the light of the law

well settled by the Apex Court in that regard.

      7.   After having carefully considered the submissions of

the parties and after having perused the pleadings as well as the

documents and materials placed in this matter, it can be seen

that the offences alleged are more or less personal in nature and

not much element of public interest is involved.      The crucial

aspect of the matter is that though such offences are involved,

                                   ::6::

Crl.M.C.No.5140 Of 2014

the real disputants to the controversy, which has led to the

impugned criminal proceedings, have actually arrived at an

amicable settlement of the matter. From the submissions made

by the learned counsel for the 1st respondent, it is clear to the

Court that the injured/victim/defacto complainant has no further

grievance against the petitioners/accused in the light of the

settlement arrived at by them. In this connection, it is relevant

to note the decision of the Apex Court in the case between Gian

Singh v. State of Punjab reported in 2013 (1) SCC (Cri) 160,

para 61 = (2012) 10 SCC 303 = 2012(4) KLT 108(SC), wherein

the Supreme Court has held as follows in para 61 thereof [ See

SCC (Cri)]:

             "61. The position that emerges from the above
       discussion can be summarised thus: the power of the
       High Court in quashing a criminal proceeding or FIR or
       complaint in exercise of its inherent jurisdiction is
       distinct and different from the power given to a criminal
       court for compounding the offences under S.320 of the
       Code.    Inherent power is of wide plenitude with no
       statutory limitation but it has to be exercised in accord
       with the guideline engrafted in such power viz;(i) to
       secure the ends of justice or (ii) to prevent abuse of
       the process of any Court.        In what cases power to
       quash the criminal proceeding or complaint or F.I.R.
       may be exercised where the offender and victim have
       settled their dispute would depend on the facts and
       circumstances of each case and no category can be
       prescribed..

It is further held as follows:-

                                  ::7::

Crl.M.C.No.5140 Of 2014

      "......... But the criminal cases having overwhelmingly
      and pre-dominatingly civil flavour stand on different
      footing for the purposes of quashing, particularly the
      offences arising from commercial, financial, mercantile,
      civil, partnership or such like transactions or the
      offences arising out of matrimony relating to dowry
      etc. or the family disputes where the wrong is basically
      private or personal in nature and the parties have
      resolved their entire dispute. In this category of cases,
      High Court may quash criminal proceedings if in its
      view, because of the compromise between the offender
      and victim, the possibility of conviction is remote and
      bleak and continuation of criminal case would put
      accused to great oppression and prejudice and
      extreme injustice would be caused to him by not
      quashing the criminal case despite full and complete
      settlement and compromise with the victim........"

Further, in the case Jitendra Raghuvanshi and Others v.

Babita Raghuvanshi and another reported in (2013) 4 SCC

58 [see 2013 (1) KLD 817 (SC)], the Apex Court has held as

follows:-

             "8. It is not in dispute that matrimonial disputes
      have been on considerable increase in recent times
      resulting in filing of complaints under Sections 498A
      and 406 of I.P.C. not only against the husband but also
      against the relatives of the husband. The question is
      when such matters are resolved either by the wife
      agreeing to rejoin the matrimonial home or by mutual
      settlement of other pending disputes for which both
      the sides approached the High Court and jointly prayed
      for quashing of the criminal proceedings or the FIR or
      complaint by the wife under Sections 498A and 406 of
      I.P.C., whether the prayer can be declined on the sole
      ground that since the offences are non-compoundable
      under Section 320         of the Code, it would be
      impermissible for the court to quash the criminal
      proceedings or FIR or complaint.

                                  ::8::

Crl.M.C.No.5140 Of 2014

            9. It is not in dispute that in the case on hand
      subsequent to the filing of the criminal complaint under
      Sections 498A and 406 of IPC and Sections 3 and 4 of
      the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961, with the help and
      intervention of family members, friends and well-
      wishers, the parties concerned have amicably settled
      their   differences   and   executed    a   compromise/
      settlement. Pursuant thereto, the appellants filed the
      said compromise before the Trial Court with a request
      to place the same on record and to drop the criminal
      proceedings against the appellants herein. It is also
      not in dispute that in additional to the mutual
      settlement arrived at by the parties, respondent/-wife
      has also filed an affidavit stating that she did not wish
      to pursue the criminal proceedings against the
      appellants and fully supported the contents of the
      settlement deed. It is the grievance of the appellants
      that no only the Trial Court rejected such prayer of the
      parties but also the High Court failed toe exercise its
      jurisdiction under Section 482 of the Code only on the
      ground that the criminal proceedings relate to the
      offences punishable under Sections 498A and 406 of
      IPC which are non-compoundable in nature.
            15. In our view, it is the duty of the Courts
      to encourage genuine settlements of matrimonial
      disputes, particularly, when the same are on
      considerable increase.       Even if the offences are
      non-compoundable, if they relate to matrimonial
      disputes and the Court is satisfied that the parties
      have settled the same amicably and without any
      pressure, we hold that for the purpose of securing
      ends of justice, Section 320 of the Code would not
      be a bar to the exercise of power of quashing of
      FIR,    complaint    or    the   subsequent     criminal
      proceedings.
            16.      There has been an outburst of
      matrimonial disputes in recent times.                The
      institution of marriage occupies an important place
      and it has an important role to play in the society.
      Therefore, every effort should be made in the
      interest of the individuals in order to enable them
      to settle down in life and live peacefully. If the

                                ::9::

Crl.M.C.No.5140 Of 2014

      parties ponder over their defaults and terminate
      their disputes amicably by mutual agreement
      instead of fighting it out in a Court of law, in order
      to do complete justice in the matrimonial matters,
      the Courts should be less hesitant in exercising its
      extraordinary jurisdiction. It is trite to state that
      the power under Section 482 should be exercised
      sparingly and with circumspection only when the
      Court is convinced, on the basis of material on
      record, that allowing the proceedings to continue
      would be an abuse of the process of the Court or
      that   the   ends    of  justice  require   that   the
      proceedings ought to be quashed."

      8.    Considering the facts and circumstances of this case,

it is seen further that the impugned criminal proceedings have

arisen consequent to the matrimonial disputes between the

disputants and the disputes have been settled amicably between

the parties. Accordingly, this Court is inclined to hold that in the

light of the facts and circumstances involved in the present case

and particularly in view of the settlement arrived at between the

parties, the principles laid down in the aforementioned decisions

of the Apex Court will be squarely applicable in the present case.

Moreover, since the real disputants to the controversy have

amicably settled the disputes, which led to these impugned

criminal proceedings, it is also the duty of the court to promote

such settlement, instead of compelling the parties to go on with

the dispute. It is also pertinent to note that since the matter is

                                   ::10::

Crl.M.C.No.5140 Of 2014

settled out of court, in the event of proceeding with the trial,

there may not be any fruitful prosecution and the chances of

conviction of the accused is rather negligible and therefore, the

net result of continuance of criminal proceedings would be sheer

waste of judicial time rather meaningless and therefore would

amount to abuse of the process of court proceedings in the larger

sense. Hence following decisions of the Apex Court cited supra,

this Court is inclined to hold that the Crl.M.C. can be allowed by

granting the prayers sought for.

      In the result, Crl.M.C is allowed and the impugned Annexure-A

criminal complaint in C.M.P.No.3407/2014 on the file of the Judicial

Fist Class Magistrate Court-II, Palakkad which has led to the

registration of the impugned Annexure-B FIR in Crime No.503/2014

of Kongad Police Station as against all the accused therein and all

further proceedings arising therefrom stand quashed. Petitioners

shall produce certified copies of this order before the Magistrate

Court concerned as well as before the Station House Officer

concerned.




                                             ALEXANDER THOMAS,
                                                      Judge.

bkn/-



