
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                              PRESENT:

            THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE ALEXANDER THOMAS

     WEDNESDAY, THE 5TH DAY OF NOVEMBER 2014/14TH KARTHIKA, 1936

                     Crl.MC.No. 6181 of 2014 ()
                     ---------------------------

       CRIME NO. 983/2014 OF MATTANNUR POLICE STATION , KANNUR

PETITIONER(S)/ACCUSED 1 & 2:
----------------------------
    1.  ALI AGED 28 YEARS
       S/O.MUHAMMED, NADUVILAKKANDI HOUSE, CHAVASSERY
       MATTANNUR, P.R.NAGAR.P.O., PIN-670 702.

    2.  FATHAH K AGED 27 YEARS
       CHIMMETTIYIL HOUSE, NADUVILAKKANDI HOUSE, CHAVASSERY
       MATTANNUR, P.R.NAGAR.P.O., PIN-670 702.

       BY ADVS.SRI.SALIM V.S.
               SRI.SHANAVAS.S

RESPONDENT(S)/COMPLAINANTS:
---------------------------
     1. SAIBUNEESA K
       W/O.ASHRAFF, NAJA MANZIL, VELIYAMBRA
       NADUVILAKKANDI HOUSE, CHAVASSERY, MATTANNUR
       P.R.NAGAR.P.O., PIN-670 702.

     2. ASHRAFF
       NAJA MANZIL, VELIYAMBRA, NADUVILAKKANDI HOUSE
       CHAVASSERY, MATTANNUR, P.R.NAGAR.P.O.
       PIN-670 702.

     3. STATE OF KERALA
       REPRESENTED BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR
       HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM, PIN-682 031.

       R1,2  BY ADV. SRI.P.V.JEEVESH
             BY ADV. SRI.H.NUJUMUDEEN
       R3 BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SRI.R.GITHESH

       THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE  HAVING COME UP FOR ADMISSION  ON
05-11-2014, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE FOLLOWING:

Crl.MC.No. 6181 of 2014 ()
---------------------------

                              APPENDIX

PETITIONER(S)' EXHIBITS
------------------------

ANNEXURE A1- TRUE COPY OF THE F.I.R IN CRIME NO.983/14 OF MATTANNOOR
            POLICE STATION.

ANNEXURE A2- AFFIDAVIT DULY SIGNED BY 1ST AND 2ND RESPONDENTS.

RESPONDENT(S)' EXHIBITS           NIL
------------------------


                                                 //TRUE COPY//


                                                 P.A TO JUDGE

vdv


                   ALEXANDER THOMAS, J.
             =========================
                   Crl.M.C No.6181 of 2014
         ============================
         Dated this the 05th day of November, 2014

                             ORDER



      The petitioners herein are accused Nos.1 and 2 respectively

in Crime No.983 of 2014 of Mattannur Police Station, Kannur

district for offences alleged under Sections 452, 323, 354, 427,

294(b) and 506(ii) r/w Section 34 of Indian Penal Code.

      2.    The gist of the prosecution allegation is that on

12.10.2014 at 15:00 hrs, the petitioners herein had trespassed

into the house of the de facto complainant (1st respondent herein),

uttered abusive words at her and her husband (2nd respondent

herein) and assaulted them.         It is further alleged that the

petitioners destroyed the window glasses of their house and

caused loss of Rs.2,500/- to the 1st respondent/ de facto

complainant. Annexure A1 is the copy of the impugned FIR in

Crime No.983 of 2014 of Mattannur Police Station for the above

said offences alleged against the petitioners. It is further stated

that the petitioners and contesting respondents 1 and 2 have fully

and amicably settled the disputes as evident from Annexure A2

affidavit filed on behalf of 1st and 2nd respondents. It is stated that

Crl.M.C No.6181 of 2014          2



the petitioners and the contesting respondents 1 and 2 are

relatives and they are now in good terms and the continuance of

the impugned criminal proceedings would adversely affect their

good relationship and that the petitioners in the above said

circumstances seek to quash the impugned Annexure A1 FIR.

The contesting respondents 1 and 2 have sworn to affidavits

dated 16.10.2014 before this Court produced as Annexure A2 in

this Crl.M.C stating that the impugned criminal proceedings

arose out of misunderstandings and out of suspicious and that

the injury suffered by them are due to fall and that they had

given   statements     to the  police    in  this   crime   due    to

misunderstandings and that they have no complaint and

grievances against the petitioners and that accordingly the

impugned criminal proceedings may be terminated or quashed,

for which the petitioners are fully willing etc. It is in the light of

these facts and circumstances that the above said Crl.M.C has

been filed with the prayer to quash the impugned Annexure A1

FIR in Crime No.983 of 2014 of Mattannur Police Station,

Kannur district and all further proceedings arising therefrom in

the interest of justice.

Crl.M.C No.6181 of 2014           3



      3.    The Crl.M.C. has been admitted and Sri.P.V.Jeevesh

has taken notice for the 1st and 2nd respondents and the learned

Public Prosecutor has taken notice for the 3rd respondent-State

of Kerala.

      4.    Heard Sri.V.S Salim, the learned counsel appearing

for the petitioners, Sri.P.V.Jeevesh , learned counsel appearing

for 1st and 2nd respondents and the learned Public Prosecutor

appearing for the 3rd respondent-State of Kerala.

      5.    The learned counsel for the petitioners has submitted

that during the pendency of the aforementioned impugned

criminal proceedings, the matter has been settled amicably

between the parties, which is resulted in the subject matter of

the aforementioned crime/case and that the continuation of the

proceedings in the above case/crime will cause miscarriage of

justice to both parties as the real disputants to the case have

arrived at an amicable settlement and any further continuation

of the criminal proceedings will amount to sheer wastage of time

and money and would unnecessarily strain the financial,

administrative and financial resources of the State.

      6.    Sri.P.V.Jeevesh, the learned counsel appearing for the

1st and 2nd respondents, has submitted on the basis of the specific

Crl.M.C No.6181 of 2014          4



instructions furnished by the 1st and 2nd respondents that they

have amicably settled the disputes with the petitioners and that

they have no objection in the quashment of         the impugned

criminal proceedings and that the complainant/victim/injured

does not intend to proceed any further against the petitioners as

they have no grievance against them and that they will not raise

any dispute/compliant in future if the prayer for quashing the

impugned final report is allowed.

      7.    The learned Public Prosecutor also was heard, who

also has not raised any serious objections and submitted that this

court may consider the prayer in this case in the light of the law

well settled by the Apex Court in that regard.

      8.    After having carefully considered the submissions of

the parties and after having perused the pleadings as well as the

documents and materials placed in this matter, it can be seen

that the offences alleged are more or less personal in nature and

not much element of public interest is involved.     The crucial

aspect of the matter is that though such offences are involved,

the real disputants to the controversy which has led to the

impugned criminal proceedings, have actually arrived at an

amicable settlement of the matter. From the submissions made

Crl.M.C No.6181 of 2014                 5



by the learned counsel for the 1st and 2nd respondents, it is clear

to the court that the injured/victim/defacto complainant has no

further grievance against the petitioners/accused in the light of

the settlement arrived at by them. In this connection, it is

relevant to note the decision of the Apex Court in the case

between Gian Singh v. State of Punjab reported in 2013 (1)

SCC (Cri) 160, para 61 = (2012) 10 SCC 303 = 2012(4) KLT 108

(SC), wherein the Supreme Court has held as follows in para 61

thereof [See SCC (Cri)]:

                  "61. The position that emerges from the above
         discussion can be summarised thus: the power of the
         High Court in quashing a criminal proceeding or FIR
         or complaint in exercise of its inherent jurisdiction is
         distinct and different from the power given to a
         criminal court for compounding the offences under
         S.320 of the Code. Inherent power is of wide plenitude
         with no statutory limitation but it has to be exercised
         in accord with the guideline engrafted in such power
         viz;(i) to secure the ends of justice or (ii) to prevent
         abuse of the process of any Court.        In what cases
         power to quash the criminal proceeding or complaint
         or F.I.R. may be exercised where the offender and
         victim have settled their dispute would depend on the
         facts and circumstances of each case and no category
         can be prescribed..

It is further held as follows:-

          "......... But the criminal cases having overwhelmingly
          and pre-dominatingly civil flavour stand on different
          footing for the purposes of quashing, particularly the
          offences          arising       from        commercial,
          financial,mercantile, civil, partnership or such like
          transactions or the offences arising out of matrimony
          relating to dowry etc. or the family disputes where the
          wrong is basically private or personal in nature and
          the parties have resolved their entire dispute. In this

Crl.M.C No.6181 of 2014               6



          category of cases, High Court may quash criminal
          proceedings if in its view, because of the compromise
          between the offender and victim, the possibility of
          conviction is remote and bleak and continuation of
          criminal case would put accused to great oppression
          and prejudice and extreme injustice would be caused
          to him by not quashing the criminal case despite full
          and complete settlement and compromise with the
          victim........"

      In the decision reported in the case Yogendra Yadav & others

v. The State of Jharkhand & another reported in 2014 (8) Scale 634

= III (2014) Current Criminal Reports CCR 426 (SC), the Apex Court

has held as follows:

             "When the High Court is convinced that the offences are
      entirely personal in nature and, therefore, do not affect public
      peace or tranquility and where it feels that quashing of such
      proceedings on account of compromise would bring about peace
      and would secure ends of justice, it should not hesitate to quash
      them".

      The Apex Court in the above case was dealing with a case

involving offences under Sections 341, 323, 324, 504 & 307 r/w

Section 34 Indian Penal Code.

         9. Considering the facts and circumstances of this case,

it is seen further that the impugned criminal proceedings have

arisen consequent to the personal disputes between the

disputants and the disputes have been settled amicably between

the parties. Accordingly, this Court is inclined to hold that in the

light of the facts and circumstances involved in the present case

Crl.M.C No.6181 of 2014           7



and particularly in view of the settlement arrived at between the

parties, the principles laid down in the aforementioned decisions

of the Apex Court will be squarely applicable in the present case.

Moreover, since the real disputants to the controversy have

amicably settled the disputes, which led to these impugned

criminal proceedings, it is also the duty of the court to promote

such settlement, instead of compelling the parties to go on with

the dispute. It is also pertinent to note that since the matter is

settled out of court, in the event of proceeding with the trial,

there may not be any fruitful prosecution and the chances of

conviction of the accused is rather negligible and therefore, the

net result of continuance of criminal proceedings would be sheer

waste of judicial time rather meaningless and therefore would

amount to abuse of the process of court proceedings in the

larger sense. Hence following decisions of the Apex Court cited

supra, this Court is inclined to hold that the Crl.M.C. can be

allowed by granting the prayers sought for.



         In the result, the Crl.M.C. is allowed. In the interest of

justice, it is ordered that the impugned Annexure 1 FIR in Crime

No.983 of 2014 of Mattannur Police Station, Kannur, and all

Crl.M.C No.6181 of 2014            8



further proceedings arising therefrom on the file of the

jurisdictional Magistrate concerned stand quashed.             The

petitioners shall produce certified copies of this order before the

court below concerned as well as before the Station House

Officer, Mattannur Police Station, Kannur.




                                           Sd/-
                                 ALEXANDER THOMAS, JUDGE


vdv   //True Copy//     P.A to Judge



