
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                      PRESENT:

                     THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE ALEXANDER THOMAS

             THURSDAY, THE 30TH DAY OF OCTOBER 2014/8TH KARTHIKA, 1936

                                         Bail Appl..No. 7547 of 2014 ()
                                              -------------------------------
         CRIME NO. 823/2014 OF MANNANCHERRY POLICE STATION, ALAPPUZHA
                                                     ----------------

PETITIONER/1ST ACCUSED :
------------------------------------------

            RAJESH, AGED 34 YEARS
            S/O.PAVITHRAN, KODIVEETTIL HOUSE, THAIKKAL
            CHERTHALA

            BY ADV. SRI.RAJESH CHAKYAT

RESPONDENT/COMPLAINANT :
----------------------------------------------

           STATE OF KERALA
           THROUGH THE SUB INSPECTOR OF POLICE
            MANNANCHERRY, ALAPPUZHA DISTRICT
            REP. BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR
            HIGH COURT OF KERALA.

            BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SRI. DHANESH MATHEW MANJOORAN

            THIS BAIL APPLICATION HAVING COME UP FOR ADMISSION ON 30-10-2014,
            THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE FOLLOWING:


Mn


                    ALEXANDER THOMAS, J.
                    -----------------------------
                      B.A.No.7547 Of 2014
                  ---------------------------------
            Dated this the 30th day of October, 2014.

                             O R D E R

      Petitioner is the 1st accused in Crime No.823/2014 of

Mannancherry Police Station, Alappuzha District registered for

offences under Sections 494, 498A, 109 r/w 34 of the Indian

Penal Code. The gist of the allegation is that the petitioner

herein, who is the husband of the defacto complainant,

without getting the marriage between the above said spouses

dissolved, had contracted a second marriage with the 2nd

accused and that the accused Nos.2 to 4 who are the sister,

father and mother of the petitioner herein (A1)/husband had

mentally and physically inflicted cruelty on the defacto

complainant and demanded dowry etc.            Sri.Rajesh Chakyat,

learned counsel for the petitioner, would submit that the entire

allegations   have   been    falsely   foisted    by  the  defacto

complainant herein against the petitioner and other accused in

this crime.   It is submitted that the marriage between the

parties was held on 6.4.2009 and they are living separately

due to difference of opinion since 16.4.2010 and that the

petitioner herein had filed O.P.No.1479/2011 on 3.12.2011

                               ::2::

B.A.No.7547 Of 2014

before the Family Court, Alappuzha seeking divorce against the

defacto complainant on the ground of cruelty and for non-

disclosure of a serious    disease etc.   Though Annexure-A1

divorce proceedings were initiated by the petitioner as early as

on 3.12.2011, the defacto complainant had filed this private

criminal complaint presently alleging aforementioned offences

only now. It is further pointed out that by Annexure-A2 order

dated 10.10.2014 of the Sessions Court concerned has granted

bail to the accused Nos.2 to 4, who are the sister, father and

mother of the petitioner, but, refused the plea of anticipatory

bail to the petitioner mainly on the ground that he has

contracted a second marriage during the life time of the

defacto complainant. Sri.Rajesh Chakyath, learned counsel for

the petitioner, would submit that the offence under Section

494 is bailable one and that even the learned Magistrate has

no case in Annexure-2 order that he is prima facie satisfied of

the seriousness of the allegations relating to the offence under

Section 498A or that the petitioner is likely tamper with the

evidence or witnesses in relation to offence under Section 498A.

He would further submit that the only non-bailable offence

alleged against the petitioner is one under Section 498A.

                                ::3::

B.A.No.7547 Of 2014

It is prayed that this Court may allow the plea of pre-arrest

bail in this application otherwise his arrest and detention would

have a devastating affect on him.

      2.    Learned Public Prosecutor would submit that in case

this Court is inclined to grant the plea of pre-arrest bail to the

petitioner, the same should be conditioned with necessary

safeguards to protect the bonafide interest of the prosecution.

      3.    Having considered the submissions of the learned

counsel for the petitioner and learned Public Prosecutor and on

an evaluation of the totality of the facts and circumstances of

this case, this Court is inclined to allow the plea of pre-arrest

bail to the petitioner in this case subject to sufficient

safeguards so as to protect the bonafide interest of the

prosecution. Accordingly, it is ordered that in the event of the

petitioner    being    arrested   in   connection     with  Crime

No.823/2014 of Mannancherry Police Station, then he shall be

released on bail on his executing a bond for ` 35,000/-

(Rupees Thirty Five Thousand only) with two solvent sureties

each for the like sum to the satisfaction of the investigating

officer concerned and subject to the following conditions:-

                                 ::4::

B.A.No.7547 Of 2014

           (i) The petitioner shall surrender his passport,
     if any, before the court below concerned          within
     three days from the execution of the bail bond
     before the investigating officer concerned and if he is
     not a passport holder, he shall file affidavit to that
     effect in the said court. If the petitioner requires his
     passport in connection with his travel abroad, he is
     free to approach the court concerned for the release
     of the same and for necessary permission in that
     regard. In case if such an application is filed, the
     court below concerned is free to consider the same
     on merits and to pass appropriate orders thereon,
     taking necessary guidance from the principles laid
     down in the decision of this Court in the case Asok
     Kumar v. State of Kerala, reported in 2009 (2)
     KLT     712,  notwithstanding      the    aforementioned
     conditions imposed by this Court.
           (iii) The petitioner shall not involve in any
     criminal offence of similar or graver nature.
           (iv)  The petitioner shall co-operate with the
     investigation and report before the investigating officer
     as and when required.
           (v)   The petitioner shall not attempt to influence
     the witnesses or shall not tamper or tamper evidence in
     any manner whatsoever.

If the petitioner fails to comply with any of the conditions as

ordered above, the bail granted to him are liable to be

cancelled.

     Accordingly, the bail application stands finally disposed

of.



                                            ALEXANDER THOMAS,
                                                    Judge.

bkn/-



