
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                      PRESENT:

                       THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE K.RAMAKRISHNAN

             WEDNESDAY, THE 7TH DAY OF JANUARY 2015/17TH POUSHA, 1936

                                       Crl.Rev.Pet.No. 2553 of 2003 (A)
                                             ---------------------------------
     AGAINST THE JUDGMENT IN CRL.A 117/2002 OF SESSIONS COURT, MANJERI
                                           ------------------------------------
  AGAINST THE JUDGMENT IN CC 3367/1997 of JUDICIAL FIRST CLASS MAGSITRATE
                                            COURT, MALAPPURAM
                                          ---------------------------------------

REVISION PETITIONER(S)/APPELLANT/ACCUSED:
---------------------------------------------------------------------

          KUTTY HASSAN, S/O.VEERANKUTTY
          KODIAN HOUSE, PUTHOOR AMSOM, KOLATHUPARAMBA,
          P.O.OTHUKKUNGAL, MALAPPURAM DISTRICT

            BY ADV. SRI.BABU S. NAIR

RESPONDENT(S)/RESPONDENT(S)/STATE:
------------------------------------------------------------

          THE STATE OF KERALA REPRRESENTED BY
          THE CIRCLE INSPECTOR OF POLICE, TIRUR-THROUGH
          THE PUBLIC PROSECUTOR, HIGH COURT OF KERALA,
           ERNAKULAM, KOCHI-31.


             BY ADV. SRI.M.MADHUBHAN, PUBLIC PROSECUTOR

             THIS CRIMINAL REVISION PETITION HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD ON
07-01-2015, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE FOLLOWING:




R.AV


                    K.RAMAKRISHNAN, J
                     ------------------------
                  Crl.R.P.No.2553 OF 2003
                    --------------------------
           Dated this the 7th day of January, 2015

                           O R D E R
                           -----------




      First accused in CC.367/1997 on the file of the Judicial

First Class Magistrate Court, Malappuram is the revision

petitioner herein.

      2.     The revision petitioner along with two others were

charge sheeted by the Circle Inspector of Police, Tirur in Crime

No.38/1997 of Kottakkal police station under section 498A read

with section 34 of the Indian Penal Code.

      3.    The case of the prosecution in nutshell was that the

first accused married the defacto complainant and thereafter,

they were living together as husband and wife and while so,

there were insistenses demand for money for meeting the

purpose of the first accused which was met by the parents of

the defacto complainant and on one occasion when amount was

demanded, when it was not paid she had to leave the

matrimonial house and she filed application for maintenance

and that was settled after payment of Rs.10,000/- and

thereafter she conceived again and in connection with the

marriage of sister of the first accused, they wanted 10

sovereigns of gold ornaments and Rs.10,000/- to be given by

Crl.R.P.No.2553 OF 2003           2

the defacto complainant and she had given her 10 sovereigns of

gold ornaments and when she refused to pay Rs.10,000/-

demanded, she was ill-treated and sent out of the house on

02.08.1995 and thereafter she delivered the child and she was

not taken back and he married again and while she was residing

with them they ill-treated her to meet their illegal demand both

physically and mentally harassing her and thereby all of them

have committed the offence punishable under section 498A r/w

section 34 of the Indian Penal Code.

       4.    The case was taken on file on the basis of Ext.P1

private complaint filed by the defacto complainant on

14.03.1997, alleging commission of the aforesaid offence

against three accused persons including the revision petitioner

before the Judicial First Class Magistrate Court, Malappuram

which was forwarded to the police for investigation under

section 156(3) of the Code of criminal Procedure. On receipt of

the complaint, PW7 registered Ext.P3 First Information Report,

as Crime No.38/1997 of Kottakkal police station against the

accused persons under section 498A r/w section 34 of the

Indian Penal Code and thereafter, the investigation was

conducted by him. He questioned the witnesses and recorded

their statement. The further investigation was conducted by

Circle Inspector of Police. He seized Ext.P5 marriage certificate

Crl.R.P.No.2553 OF 2003             3

as per Ext.P2 mahazar in the presence of PW6 and another. The

investigation was completed by the Circle Inspector of Police

and he laid the final report in the case.

       5.    When the accused appeared before the court below,

charge under section 498A r/w section 34 of the Indian Penal

Code was framed and the same was read over and explained to

them and they pleaded not guilty. During the course of the trial,

second accused died and charge against him was abated. In

order to prove the case of the prosecution, PWs 1 to 7 were

examined and Exts.P1 to P4 were marked on their side. After

closure of the prosecution evidence, the accused were

questioned under section 313 of the Code of Criminal Procedure

and they denied all the incriminating circumstances brought

against them in the prosecution evidence. First accused had

stated that he had not committed any offence and he is

innocent of the same and PW1 had left the house voluntarily

and she wanted him to come and reside in their house for which

he was not amenable and she told that she will not come and

reside with him. So, later he remarried and on account of that

enmity, she had filed a false complaint. Third accused also

submitted that she had not committed any offence and she has

been falsely implicated in the case. After considering the

evidence on record, court below found that third accused had

Crl.R.P.No.2553 OF 2003            4

not committed any offence and she was acquitted of the charge

levelled against her but court below found the revision

petitioner guilty under section 498A Indian Penal Code and

convicted him thereunder and sentenced him to undergo

rigorous imprisonment for two years and also to pay a fine of

Rs.5000/- in default to undergo simple imprisonment for one

month. Aggrieved by the same, he filed Crl.Appeal 117/2002

before the Sessions Court, Manjeri. The learned Sessions Judge

allowed the appeal in part confirming the order of conviction but

modified the sentence to simple imprisonment for three months

and also to pay a compensation of Rs.10,000/- to PW1 in

default to undergo simple imprisonment for three months more

under section 357(3) of the Code of Criminal Procedure.

Aggrieved by the same, the present revision has been filed by

the revision petitioner-first accused before the court below.

       6.    Heard the counsel for the revision petitioner and the

learned Public Prosecutor.

       7.    The counsel for the revision petitioner submitted

that there was inordinate delay of more than 1 year and seven

months after she left the house in filing the complaint and the

delay has not been explained. Even going by the evidence of

PW1, it cannot be said that there was any unlawful demand for

any money or property made but in order to purchase some

Crl.R.P.No.2553 OF 2003           5

vehicles to improve their living condition, help was asked for

and that was given and that cannot be treated as unlawful

demand for money etc. Further, on going through the evidence

of PWs 1,2 and 3, it would be seen that there was no physical

assault as claimed by the defacto complainant and the amounts

were paid without any demur. Further, there is no evidence to

show that she had suffered any bodily injury. Further her

evidence will go to show that she was taken to her house and

left there. There is no case that at the time of living there, she

was asked to come with the money and then only she would be

taken to the house. So, all these things will go to show that the

cruelty as required under section 498A has not been made out

and at most it can be only said to be petty quarrel in the family

which cannot be treated sufficient to attract an offence under

section 498A and the courts below have not properly

appreciated the evidence and the conviction entered         is not

proper and the same is liable to be set aside.

       8.    On the other hand, the learned Public Prosecutor

submitted that the narration of the incident made by PW1, PW2

and independent witnesses PW4 will go to show that the

harassment met by the defacto complainant which will squarely

fall under the explanation given under section 498A regarding

definition   of  cruelty. The   courts   below    have   properly

Crl.R.P.No.2553 OF 2003            6

appreciated the evidence and in matrimonial offence, it is

difficult to get direct evidence and the courts below will have to

appreciate the evidence and the circumstances to arrive at a

conclusion regarding the commission of the offence. Since, the

courts below have concurrently found on evidence, that

prosecution case has been proved the case and found him guilty

of the offence the revisional court is not excepted to interfere

with the concurrent findings of the court of guilt unless the

court feels that the finding is perverse.

       9.    It is an admitted that the marriage between the

revision petitioner and the defacto complainant was solemnised

on 27.11.1986.       Even according to PW1, they were living

happily for six and half years without any quarrel and three

children were born to them in that wedlock. According to the

prosecution, it was thereafter that he had started demanding

money and started treating her cruelly.        A reading of the

evidence of PW1 will go to show that the revision petitioner

was asking money not for his personal purposes but for the

purpose of purchasing autorickshaw or tourist taxi for the

purpose of improving their living conditions. It is also in away

brought out in evidence that on earlier occasion when

Rs.10,000/- was demanded, there was some quarrel occurred

between the defacto complainant (PW1) and the revision

Crl.R.P.No.2553 OF 2003             7

petitioner and she left the matrimonial house and thereafter she

filed maintenance application as M.C.No.63/1994 and that was

settled due to the intervention of PW4 and at that time

Rs.10,000/- was paid and thereafter they resided together for

nearly eight months and during that time, she became pregnant

again the fourth child.

       10.   It is thereafter, the case of the prosecution was that

the marriage of the sister of the first accused was decided to be

conducted for which they had agreed to give 40 sovereigns of

gold ornaments and Rs.40,000/- cash out of which they wanted

the defacto complainant to give 10 sovereigns of gold

ornaments and Rs.10,000/- cash and though she had earlier

refused to pay the same, later she gave her 10 sovereigns of

gold ornaments and since she could not pay Rs.10,000/- there

was some quarrel occurred in which according to the

prosecution accused Nos. 2 and 3 had pushed her and beaten

her and told that she was brought back to the house from court

not for the purpose of keeping her there and he would get

better alliance and thereafter she was taken to her house and

left there and thereafter he did not come and take her back.

But at the time, she was examined before the court, she had no

complaint against accused Nos. 2 and 3 and she had

categorically stated that second accused did not do anything as

Crl.R.P.No.2553 OF 2003             8

well and court below had disbelieved the evidence of PW1

regarding the allegations made against third accused and she

was acquitted. Further, it was brought out in evidence of PW1

that after she was left in her parental house during August

1995, a complaint was filed before the police for getting back

the child which was alleged to have been forcefully taken by the

revision petitioner. But it will be seen from the evidence of PW1

and PW2 the father of the defacto complainant that at that time

according to him the relationship was not so strained and they

did not make any complaint regarding any ill-treatment alleged

to have been met by her at the hands of the revision petitioner

and no complaint of any unlawful demand for dowry or money

were made at that time. They got back the child through police

and it is long after that that the present Ext.P1 complaint was

filed alleging cruelty under section 498A of Indian Penal Code.

       11.   The evidence of PWs 2 and 3 is not helpful to prove

the ill-treatment said to have been met by her in the

matrimonial home. They have only hear say knowledge about

what PW1 had stated about the ill-treatment. But PW2 stated

that whenever demands were made, that were met by him.

He had no case that he had interfered in those matters and

refused to pay any amount as well. So, that will go to show that

even if there was any monetary transactions had taken place

Crl.R.P.No.2553 OF 2003            9

earlier, that has been done considering the relationship

between the parties in a cardinal manner and it was not

obtained under any pressure as claimed by PW1. Further, the

evidence of PW4 will only go to show that it was he who had

interfered in the matter and thereafter after paying Rs.10,000/-

for the purpose of purchasing a taxi, she was taken back and

they were living happily. Later, he came to know that she was

sent back from the matrimonial house. He had no case that

thereafter he had interfered in the matter also. Anything that

has happened prior to the settlement cannot be taken as an act

of cruelty under section 498A if those aspects were condoned

and they decided to reside together.

       12.   Then, the only question is after they started living

together after settlement, anything happened so as to attract

the offence under section 498A as claimed by the prosecution.

To prove this fact prosecution relies on the evidence of PW1 and

PW5. According to PW5, one day when he was going along the

road, he heard some sound and cry of a lady and after some

time he saw PW1 coming out of the house and told him that she

was scolded by her husband. She had told that they wanted

gold ornaments and Rs.10,000/- to be paid and wanted to tell

the same to her parents. According to him, he went there and

told the same to PW2. But in Ext.P1 the case of PW1 was that

Crl.R.P.No.2553 OF 2003           10

the gold ornaments were given after the marriage of the

revision petitioner's sister. But she had a different case when

she was examined before the court. PW2 had no knowledge

about the ornaments giving of ornaments as claimed by PW1 as

well. Further, it is brought out in evidence of PW1 that the

revision petitioner had taken her to her house and left there.

Thereafter he did not come. She had not deposed before the

court that when she was left at her house, the revision

petitioner had told her to come with the money and only if she

came with the money she would be taken back. Neither PW2

nor PW3 had such a case as well. So, under the circumstances,

even assuming that there was some quarrel occurred between

PW1 and the defacto complainant regarding the amount

payable in connection with the marriage of revision petitioner's

sister, that cannot be taken as cruelty as defined under the

explanation to section 498A of Indian Penal Code. Further, the

delay in filing the complaint also looms large in this case. So,

under the circumstances, courts below were not justified in

appreciating the evidence in the right perspective so as to come

to the conclusion that the prosecution has proved beyond

reasonable doubt that the revision petitioner had ill-treated the

defacto complainant making unlawful demand as defined in the

explanation to section 498A of Indian Penal Code so as to

Crl.R.P.No.2553 OF 2003           11

convict the revision petitioner for the offence under section

498A and the finding of the courts below on that aspect is liable

to be set aside, especially when the delay in filing the complaint

has not been explained either in the complaint or at the time

when she was examined before the court as PW1 as well. The

fact that they did not make any complaint regarding ill-

treatment when they said to have been filed the complaint for

getting back the child also will go to show that the allegation of

cruelty on the basis of illegal demand for money or gold

ornaments has been projected as an afterthought when the

revision petitioner had married another lady for harass him and

his family members and that possibility cannot be ruled out and

that benefit must be given to the revision petitioner. Further, if

two view are possible on the basis of the evidence, then the

view in favour of the accused has to be taken and that principle

has not been applied in this case by the courts below. In view of

the discussions made above, the finding of the court below that

the prosecution has proved beyond reasonable doubt that the

revision petitioner had committed the offence punishable under

section 498A of Indian Penal Code and conviction entered

thereon are unsustainable in law and the same is liable to be

set aside. The revision petitioner is entitled to get acquittal of

the charge levelled against him giving him the benefit of doubt.

Crl.R.P.No.2553 OF 2003            12

       13.   In view of the finding that the revision petitioner is

entitled to get acquittal of the charge, levelled against him the

sentence imposed is also not proper and the same is also liable

to be set aside.

       In the result, the revision petitioner succeeds and the

revision is allowed. The order of conviction and sentence passed

by the court below and modified by the appellate court          in

CC.No.367/1997 of Judicial First Class Magistrate Court,

Malappuram and Crl.Appeal No.117/2002 of Sessions Court,

Manjeri are set aside and the revision petitioner is acquitted of

the charge levelled against him giving him the benefit of doubt.

He is set at liberty and the bail bond if any executed by the

revision petitioner will stand cancelled.

       Office is directed to communicate this order to the

concerned court immediately.




                                                   Sd/-
                                   K.RAMAKRISHNAN, JUDGE




R.AV

                                     //True Copy//




                                     PA to Judge



