
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                      PRESENT:

                       THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE K.RAMAKRISHNAN

                 FRIDAY, THE 6TH DAY OF MARCH 2015/15TH PHALGUNA, 1936

                                        Crl.Rev.Pet.No. 556 of 2004 ( )
                                             --------------------------------
     AGAINST THE JUDGMENT IN CRL.A 174/2003 OF SESSIONS COURT, MANJERI
                                                DATED 24-01-2004
                                           ------------------------------------
                          AGAINST THE JUDGMENT IN CC.NO. 38/1998 OF
                                CHIEF JUDICIAL MAGISTRATE, MANJERI
                                             --------------------------------

REVISION PETITIONER(S)/APPELLANT/ACCUSED:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

            K.P.RAMESH BABU S/O. K.P.RAMAN,
            PALATHODI HOUSE, VADAKKUMURI, IRUMBUZHI 676 531
            MALAPPURAM DISTRICT.

            BY ADV. SRI.S.RAJEEV

RESPONDENT(S)/RESPONDENTS/COMPLAINANT/STATE:
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

        1. THE CIRCLE INSPECTOR OF POLICE,
            MANJERI, MALAPPURAM DISTRICT.

        2. THE STATE OF KERALA, REPRESENTED BY THE
            PUBLIC PROSECUTOR, HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM
            COCHIN-682 031

            BY ADV. SRI.RAJESH VIJAYAN, PUBLIC PROSECUTOR

            THIS CRIMINAL REVISION PETITION HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD ON
06-03-2015, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE FOLLOWING:




R.AV


                     K.RAMAKRISHNAN, J
                 --------------------------------
                  CRL.R.P.NO.556 OF 2004
               ------------------------------------
            Dated this the 6th day of March, 2015


                           O R D E R
                           -----------


      First accused in CC.No.38/1998 on the file of the Chief

Judicial Magistrate Court, Manjeri, is the revision petitioner

herein.

      2.    The revision petitioner along with his mother were

charge sheeted by the Circle Inspector of Police, Manjeri in

Crime No.221/1998 of Manjeri police station under section 498A

read with section 34 of the Indian Penal Code.

      3.    The case of the prosecution in nutshell was that the

revision  petitioner  married    the  defacto    complainant  on

30.12.1990, and thereafter they were living together as

husband and wife and after the birth of the first child, both the

accused ill-treated her by demanding more dowry and harassed

her both physically and mentally and on several occasions she

had to leave the house on account of that harassment and due

to mediation she had to come back during the first week of April

1998 and even thereafter, ill-treatment continued and first

accused    demanded    certain   money    for   the purpose    of

construction of the house to be brought from the house of the

defacto complainant, which she refused and at that time she

was beaten by him and again on 10.04.1998, the same thing

CRL.R.P.NO.556 OF 2004             2

continued and when she refused, she was beaten and thrown

out of the house and she wanted the children, she was beaten

with stone by PW1 and kicked her and this was supported by

the second accused, the mother of the first accused and

thereby both of them have committed the offence punishable

under section 498A read with section 34 of the Indian Penal

Code. After investigation, final report was filed and it was taken

on file as C.C.No.38/1998 on the file of the Chief Judicial

Magistrate Court, Manjeri.

      4.    When the revision petitioner and his mother

appeared before the court below, after hearing both sides,

charge under section 498A read with section 34 of the Indian

Penal Code was framed and the same was read over and

explained to them and they pleaded not guilty. In order to

prove the case of the prosecution, PWs 1 to 11 were examined

and Exts.P1 to P7 were marked on the side of the prosecution.

After closure of the prosecution's evidence, the accused were

questioned under section 313 of the Code of Criminal Procedure

(herein after called the Code) and they denied all the

incriminating circumstances brought against them in the

prosecution's evidence. They have further stated that they have

not committed any offence and they are innocent of the same.

After considering the evidence on record, the learned Chief

CRL.R.P.NO.556 OF 2004             3

Judicial Magistrate found the second accused not guilty and

acquitted her of the charge levelled against her, but found the

revision petitioner guilty under section 498A read with section

34 of the Indian Penal Code and convicted him thereunder and

sentenced him to undergo rigorous imprisonment for one year.

Though, the revision petitioner filed Crl.Appeal No.174/2003

before the Sessions Court, Manjeri, the learned Sessions Judge

by the impugned judgment dismissed the appeal confirming the

order of conviction and sentence passed. Aggrieved by the

same, the present revision has been filed by the revision

petitioner- first accused before the court below.

      5.    Heard both sides and pursued the case diary file.

      6.    The counsel for the revision petitioner submitted

that except the interested testimony of PW1, which contains

embellishments and improvements, there is no other evidence

to prove the alleged demand or ill-treatment. Further, she had

not stated anything about the ill-treatment on the previous day

either in Ext.P1 or before the police and that was an

improvement made by her. The way in which the incident

narrated by PW1 is not believable and the case of the defence

that she had gone to the house since the first accused was not

amenable for her demand to have an independent residence

leaving his mother and in order to pressurise for the same, a

CRL.R.P.NO.556 OF 2004            4

false complaint has been filed is more probable and it was not

mentioned in the First Information Statement that the revision

petitioner had pressed her neck when she was thrown out.

Further, the evidence of PW1 will go to show that no criminal

force was used to send her out of the house. Further, even

assuming that the entire things spoken by PW1 is believable, it

will not come under the definition of cruelty as defined under

section 498A and he is entitled to get acquittal. He had relied

on the decisions reported in Appa Saheb Vs State of

Maharashtra [2007(4) KLT 463] and Vipin Gaiswal Vs

State of Andhra Pradesh [2013(3) SCC 684].

      7.    The   learned   Public  Prosecutor   supported the

concurrent findings of the courts below on this aspect.

      8.    The case of the prosecution as emerged from the

prosecution witnesses was as follows:-

      The marriage between the defacto complainant and the

revision petitioner was solemnised on 30.12.1990 and for two

years, they were living happily and after the birth of the first

child, both the accused that is, mother and son started ill-

treating her stating that he would have got more amount if he

had married somebody else and started ill-treating her and on

account of the ill-treatment, she had left the house and due to

the intervention of the mediators, she came back, considering

CRL.R.P.NO.556 OF 2004           5

the welfare of the children. During the first week of April 1998,

the first accused asked her to bring money for construction of

the house and when she refused, she was beaten and again on

10.04.1998, the same thing continued and when she refused,

she was thrown out of the house and when she insisted for the

children, she was beaten with stone and first accused pressed

her neck and when she fell down she was kicked and beaten

and on seeing this, when the neighbours came, they went

inside the house and thereafter as requested by PWs 2 and 3

the neighbours she went to her parental house and PW4 her

father took her to hospital from where she was seen by PW5

doctor, who issued Ext.P2 wound certificate.

      9.    On getting intimation regarding her admission,

PW10 the head constable attached to the Manjeri police station

went to hospital and recorded Ext.P1 First Information

Statement of PW1 and came back to police station and

entrusted the same to HC.1714 who registered Ext.P7 First

Information Report against the revision petitioner and his

mother as Crime No.221/1998 under section 498A read with

section 34 of the Indian Penal Code and investigation was

conducted by PW11 the Circle Inspector of Police, he went to

the hospital and requested PW1 to show the place of occurrence

and accordingly as directed by him, she came to the place of

CRL.R.P.NO.556 OF 2004             6

occurrence as pointed by her Ext.P5 scene mahazar was

prepared in the presence of PW8. He questioned the witnesses

and recorded their statement. He seized Exts.P2 and P3,

photograph and the marriage invitation as produced by PW1 as

per Ext.P6 mahazar in the presence of PWs 8 and 9.            He

completed the investigation and submitted final report.

       10.   PWs 2 and 3, the neighbours of the revision

petitioner, who were examined as eye witnesses to the incident

did not support the case of the prosecution. So they were

declared hostile by the prosecution. PW1 is the victim and the

wife of the revision petitioner. The factum of marriage and birth

of two children are admitted. According to PW1, after two years

of the marriage the ill-treatment started demanding money and

gold and also they have started stating that the revision

petitioner would have got some other lady who would have

brought good amount and better employed and on account of

the ill-treatment according to her she used to leave the house

several times. But due to the intervention of the mediators

namely, the relatives of the accused, she came back and and

started living in the house. During the first week of April 1998,

there was some quarrel occurred on account of not meeting the

request of the revision petitioner to go to her house and bring

money in connection with the construction of the house and

CRL.R.P.NO.556 OF 2004            7

again on 10.04.1998 the same thing continued. It was on that

day that she was driven out of the house after manhandling

her.

      11.   It is true that in the cross-examination he had

stated that certain things mentioned at the time of examination

was not mentioned in Ext.P1. It is true that in Ext.P1 it was not

mentioned that revision petitioner had assaulted her by

pressing her neck. But according to her, she had stated that

she had nothing to say if it was not recorded by the police.

Further, she had stated that no criminal force was used for

sending her out. But when the same question as to how she

was driven out of the house of repeated she had stated as

follows:-

      "dID_5Z                                          
             .                                  Ix_\o  
                                                          
        ".

      12.   So, it is clear from this, that some force was used

to drive her out of the house. It was spoken to by PW4, the

father of PW1 that she came to house in an auto rickshaw at

about 3.30 p.m on 10.04.1998 and immediately on seeing the

injuries, he had taken her to hospital and she was admitted in

the hospital. Ext.P2 wound certificate will go to show that she

was examined by PW5 doctor, on 10.04.1998 at 4.10 p.m the

cause of injury was given as:-

CRL.R.P.NO.556 OF 2004              8

      "               2.30
                                                    
                                                           
          "

      13.    The following injuries were noted:-

       (1)   lacerated wound 2= x = x 1cm, vertical with
       rugged margin on the temporal area on the left side of
       scalp.
       (2)   Pain front of neck with 4 small discrete area of
       echimosis to the front of neck on the left side.
       (3)     Echimosis around left eye with congestion of
       conjunctiva one day old.



      14.    It is true that the echimosis around eyes was stated

as one day old. But PW1 had given evidence that on the

previous day, she was beaten by the revision petitioner. It is

true that it was not mentioned in Ext.P1 or at the time of

further examination by the Circle Inspector the investigating

officer. But that alone is not sufficient to come to the conclusion

that the case of PW1 is not believable. Further, the accused had

no explanation as to how PW1 had sustained injuries and why

she went to hospital on 10.04.1998, when he was questioned

under section 313 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. Though a

vague suggestion was given to PW1 that she left the house

voluntarily and met with some accident in which she sustained

minor injuries using that a false case has been foisted, it is

quite unbelievable or unprovable. Further, the fact that she left

the house on previous occasions and due to mediation she was

brought to home was not challenged in cross-examination as

CRL.R.P.NO.556 OF 2004           9

well.

      15.   It is true that what is the specific amount

demanded has not been spoken to by witnesses. But it was

spoken to by PW1 that the amounts were demanded for the

purpose of construction of the house and she was told to go

and bring the money and if she is not able to bring the money

she need not come back. Mere asking of money and having

quarrel for domestic purpose is different from telling that she

need not come back to home without money and driving her

from the house by manhandling her and this was what had

happened in this case.

      16.   The dictum down in the decisions reported in Appa

Saheb Vs State of Maharashtra [2007(4) KLT 463] and

Vipin Gaiswal Vs State of Andhra Pradesh [2013(3) SCC

684] are not applicable to the facts of this case. There was no

evidence in those cases except making some demand for

making the domestic purposes and making quarrel there is no

case of causing any bodily injury to the victim and it is not

known as to what was the nature of injuries sustained also

from those decisions. Further, in those cases it was observed

that merely because some amounts were demanded for making

the domestic purpose after marriage will not amount to

demand dowry as provided under the provisions of Dowry

CRL.R.P.NO.556 OF 2004                 10

Prohibition Act and as such it cannot be said to be harassment

met for meeting the demand for dowry.

      17.     Explanation to Section 498A of the Indian Penal

Code defines the cruelty which reads as follows:-

      Section 498A. Husband or relative of husband of a
      woman subjecting her to cruelty- Whoever, being the
      husband or the relative of the husband of a woman,
      subjects such woman to cruelty shall be punished with
      imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years
      and shall also be liable to fine.

      Explanation.- For the purpose of this section, "cruelty"
      means-
              (a)   any wilful conduct which is of such a nature as
      is likely to drive the woman to commit suicide or to cause
      grave injury or danger to life, limb or health (whether
      mental or physical) of the woman; or
              (b)   harassment      of the woman      where   such
      harassment is with a view to coercing her or any person
      related to her to meet any unlawful demand for any
      property or valuable security or is on account of failure by
      her or any person related to her to meet such demand.

      18.     There are two limbs of that explanation: (1) conduct

of the husband causing harassment both physical and mental

making her to drive to commit suicide and second limb deals

with    harassment in connection with demand for valuable

security or other articles if injuries were caused and making the

living of the wife not possible in the house and that ill-treatment

continued resulted in driving her from the house will come

under the first limb of the explanation cruelty mentioned under

section 498A of the Indian Penal Code and that has what had

happened in this case. Merely because there were some

embellishments in the evidence of PW1 regarding the manner

CRL.R.P.NO.556 OF 2004            11

in which the incident occurred is not a ground for disbelieving

her evidence in toto in the absence of any other evidence

adduced on the side of the accused to prove the circumstances

under which she sustained injuries and she was treated in the

hospital.

      19.   Further, on the date of incident itself the cause of

injury was given to the doctor by the victim.        There is no

possibility of making any embellishment at the time when the

statement was given by the victim to the          doctor, though,

certain omissions were made by her at the the time when she

gave Ext.P1 statement regarding the incident, that was not

material in nature.   So, under the circumstances, the courts

below were perfectly justified in coming to the conclusion that

she was subjected to cruelty both physical and mental making

her living in the house impossible and thereby he had

committed the offence punishable under section 498A of the

Indian Penal Code and the concurrent findings of the courts

below on this aspect do not call for any interference.

      20.   As regards the sentence is concerned, the revision

petitioner was sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for

one year by the trial court which was confirmed by the

appellate court. It may be mentioned here that the incident

occurred in the year 1998 and they were living separately

CRL.R.P.NO.556 OF 2004            12

thereafter. Further, the first accused is now aged more than 60

years. It is true that harassment on the ground of demand for

some unlawful money of the wife by the husband has to be

viewed seriously. But considering the peculiar circumstances of

the case, this court feels that instead of sending him to jail

imposing fine and making the injured compensated will be

sufficient and meet the ends of justice as far as both the parties

are concerned. So, the sentence of imprisonment is set aside

and the same is modified as follows:-

       The revision petitioner is sentenced to pay a fine of

Rs.20,000/- in default to undergo simple imprisonment for

three months. If the fine amount is realised, the same be paid

to PW1 as compensation under section 357(1) (b) of the Code

of Criminal Procedure. Two months time is granted to the

revision petitioner to pay the amount. Till then the execution

of sentence is directed to be kept in abeyance.

       With the above modification of the sentence alone, the

revision petition is allowed in part and disposed of accordingly.

Office is directed to communicate this order to the concerned

court immediately.

                                                 Sd/-
                                  K.RAMAKRISHNAN, JUDGE

R.AV                                //True Copy//




                                    PA to Judge



