
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                             PRESENT:

                     THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE ALEXANDER THOMAS

              FRIDAY, THE 18TH DAY OF SEPTEMBER 2015/27TH BHADRA, 1937

                                   OP(Crl.).No. 165 of 2015 (Q)
                                      -----------------------------
    SC.NO. 165/2014 OF ADDL. DISTRICT SESSIONS COURT (ADHOC)-1, KALPETTA
                                           -------------------


PETITIONER:
------------------------

            M.J.BABY, S/O.JOSEPH, AGED 48 YEARS,
            MUKALAYIL HOUSE, THIRUVAMPADY,
            PULLURAMPARA.P.O.,KOZHIKODE DISTRICT.

            BY ADV. SRI.SUNNY MATHEW

RESPONDENTS:
----------------------------

        1. THE DEPUTY SUPERINTENDENT OF POLICE,
            KALPETTA, OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF POLICE,
            KALPETTA.PIN-673 001

        2. ADDL.DIRECTOR GENERAL OF POLICE, NORTH ZONE,
            OFFICE OF THE ADDL.DIRECTOR GENERAL OF POLICE,
            NORTH ZONE, KOZHIKODE-673 001

        3. SUPERINTENDENT OF POLICE,
            WAYANAD OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF POLICE,
            WAYANAD-673 001

        4. DIRECTOR GENERAL OF POLICE,
            OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR GENERAL OF POLICE,
            TRIVANDRUM. PIN-695 001

        5. SUPERINTENDENT OF POLICE, CBCID WAYANAD
            OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF POLICE, CBCID,
            WAYANAD-673 001

        6. STATE OF KERALA,
            REPRESENTED BY CHIEF SECRETARY, GOVT. OF KERALA,
            SECRETARIAT, THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.PIN-695 001

          *ADDL.R7 TO R9 IMPLEADED

          *ADDL.R7: P.S.JOSEPH, AGED 66 YEARS, S/O.P.J.STEPHEN,
                          PALATTY HOUSE, CHUNDALE.P.O., ACHOORANAM VILLAGE,
                          VYTHIRI TALUK, WAYANAD-673 123.
sts                                                                        2/-

                                      -2-

OP(CRL.)NO.165/2015


     *ADDL.R8: THRESSIA JOSEPH, AGED 64 YEARS,
                 W/O.P.S.JOSEPH, PALATTY HOUSE, CHUNDALE.P.O.,
                 ACHOORANAM VILLAGE, VYTHIRI TALUK,
                 WAYANAD-673 123.

     *ADDL.R9: ANOOP JOSEPH, AGED 31 YEARS,
                S/O.P.S.JOSEPH, PALATTY HOUSE, CHUNDALE.P.O.,
                ACHOORANAM VILLAGE, VYTHIRI TALUK,
                WAYANAD-673 123.

     *ADDL.R7 TO R9 ARE IMPLEADED AS PER ORDER DATED 18/9/2015 IN
      I.A.NO.7631/2015

       R1 TO R6 BY STATE ATTORNEY SRI.P.VIJAYARAGHAVAN
       ADDL.R7 TO R9 BY ADV. SRI.MATHEW KURIAKOSE


      THIS OP (CRIMINAL) HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD
       ON 18-09-2015, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY DELIVERED
       THE FOLLOWING:




sts

OP(Crl.).No. 165 of 2015 (Q)
----------------------------------------

                                            APPENDIX

PETITIONER(S)' EXHIBITS
-------------------------------------

EXT.P1               TRUE COPY OF THE PETITION DATED 30.12.2013

EXT.P2               TRUE COPY OF THE RECEIPT ISSUED BY THE POSTAL DEPARTMENT
                     FOR SENDING EXT.P1 TO VARIOUS OFFICES

EXT.P3               TRUE COPY OF THE FINAL REPORT IN CRIME NO.531/2013

EXT.P4               TRUE COPY OF THE PETITION DATED 24.4.2015.


RESPONDENT(S)' EXHIBITS
----------------------------------------

EXT.R7(A)            COPY OF THE ORDER DATED 29/01/2014 IN BA.NO.8679 OF 2013 OF
                     THE HON'BLE HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM

EXT.R7(B)            COPY OF THE VAKALATH DATED 20/05/2014 FILED ON BEHALF OF THE
                     ORIGINAL PETITIONER HEREIN BEFORE THE CHIEF JUDICIAL
                     MAGISTRATE COURT, KALPETTA, IN C.P.NO.16 OF 2014

EXT.R7(C)            COPY OF THE APPLICATION NO.296 OF 2014 DATED 20/05/2014 FILED
                     ON BEHALF OF THE ORIGINAL PETITIONER HEREIN BEFORE THE
                     CHIEF JUDICIAL MAGISTRATE COURT, KALPETTA, IN C.P.NO.16 OF
                     2014

EXT.R7(D)            COPY OF THE MEDICAL REPORT DATED 04/06/2015 ISSUED BY
                     DR.A.KRISHNADAS OF GOOD SHEPHERD HOSPITAL, VYTHIRI IN
                     RESPECT OF PETITIONER NO.1

EXT.R7(E)            COPY OF THE MEDICAL REPORT DATED 04/06/2015 ISSUED BY
                     DR.A.KRISHNADAS OF GOOD SHEPHERD HOSPITAL, VYTHIRI IN
                     RESPECT OF PETITIONER NO.2

EXT.R7(F)            COPY OF THE MEDICAL REPORT DATED 04/06/2015 ISSUED BY
                     DR.K.S.CHANDRAKANTH OF MALABAR EYE HOSPITAL & RESEARCH
                     CENTRE PVT. LTD., CALICUT IN RESPECT OF PETITIONER NO.1


                                                     /TRUE COPY/


                                                     P.A.TO JUDGE


sts


                         ALEXANDER THOMAS, J.
                     ==================
                       O.P(Crl.)No. 165 of 2015
                     ==================
            Dated this the 18th day of September, 2015
                            J U D G M E N T

      It is averred that the petitioner's daughter allegedly committed

suicide in her matrimonial home on 14.12.2013 and that before her

death, she had, on many occasions, complained that she is being

harassed and ill-treated by her husband and parents in-laws,

demanding more dowry. That consequent to her death, Crime No.

531/2013 of Vythiri Police Station was registered and later, the

Police completed the investigation and submitted the final report/

charge sheet in the above said crime alleging commission of

offences punishable under Sec.306, 498A read with Sec.34 of the

I.P.C. That the death of the petitioner's daughter occurred within

seven years of her marriage and that there were allegations of

demand for more dowry and ornaments and that the petitioner even

suspects that his daughter was murdered by forcibly administering

poison by her husband and in-laws. The main case of the petitioner

is that the investigation has been misdirected insofar as the serious

O.P(Crl).165/15                   - : 2 :-

offence under Sec.304B has not been included in the final report/

charge sheet. It is averred that the petitioner had filed complaints

before the superior Police officers as early as in the year 2013.

Accordingly, it is prayed that this Court may consider the plea for

direction for entrustment of further investigation to a different

agency like the Crime Branch so as to conduct effective investigation

on the aspects relating to the offence under Sec.304B of the I.P.C. It

is also stated that the trial in the case has already commenced and

that this Court may ensure in the interest of justice that effective

directions in the manner stated above may be granted in this case,

etc.

      2.     It is contended by the petitioner that the investigation by

the Police in this case has been misdirected. That immediately after

the death of the petitioner's daughter, the petitioner had filed

Ext.P-1 petition before the Superintendent of Police, Wayanad with

copies to the Additional Director of North Zone and the Director

General of Police pointing out that his statement was not properly

recorded by the Sub Inspector of Police, Vythiri Police Station, who

conducted the investigation and that statements of his wife and

younger daughter were also not properly recorded so as to help the

O.P(Crl).165/15                   - : 3 :-

accused. That the petitioner's daughter was found dead on

14.12.2013 and as early as on 30.12.2013, the petitioner had filed

Ext.P-1 before the higher Police officers as he was not convinced

that he will not get any justice at the hands of the Sub Inspector of

Police concerned, etc.

      3.     Heard Sri.Sunny Mathew, learned counsel appearing for

the   petitioner,   Sri.P.Vijayaraghavan,   learned  State  Attorney

appearing for the official respondents 1 to 6 and Sri.Mathew

Kuriakose, learned counsel appearing for additional respondents 7

to 9.

      4.     As directed by this Court, the 1st respondent, (Deputy

Superintendent of Police, Kalpetta, Wayanad district) has filed a

statement dated 15.6.2015 in this case, in which, it is stated that

immediately after the registration of the crime, Crime No.531/2013

of Vythiri Police Station, under Sec.174 of Code of Criminal

Procedure on 15.12.2013 at 8.10 hrs., crime inquest was conducted

by the Tahsildar, Vythiri Taluk, since the death occurred within

seven years of the date of the deceased's marriage. That as per the

opinion of the Panchayathdars, the deceased Anju had committed

suicide by consuming poison due to mental agony and anguish.

O.P(Crl).165/15                        - : 4 :-

That the investigation was taken over by one Sri.S.Prabhakaran,

Deputy Superintendent of Police, Kalpetta on 16.12.2013. The

details of the questioning of the petitioner herein (CW-9) and his

wife, Sheela (CW-10) are given in paragraphs 3 and 4 of the said

statement, which read as follows:

             "3.    It is submitted that the Investigation Officer questioned
      the petitioner herein (CW9) on 18.12.13 and he had stated that
      deceased Anju was the elder daughter and had completed a general
      nursing course and was in love with one Mr.Anoop (A1), a native of
      Vythiry and thereafter both the families jointly arranged their
      marriage on 2010 Mary 22nd. At the time of marriage the above
      named Anoop was working as dental technical at Kozhikode. After
      marriage they lived together as husband and wife at Kozhikode in a
      rented house for 10 months and there after a female child was borne
      out the wedlock. In the meantime Anoop was transferred to Kannur
      and Anju shifted residence to her matrimonial house and began to
      reside with her in-laws. After the birth of child, Anoop began to
      harass and ill-treat the deceased. Moreover, there was serious
      difference of opinion and they were leading and unhappy married
      life. The above named Anoop did not even attend the marriage
      function of Smt.Ambili, the younger sister of the deceased. However,
      in the statement given before the police, the complainant had never
      raised the allegation that there was demand for more dowry from the
      husband or his parent.
             4.     It is submitted that the Investigation Officer questioned
      Sheela (CW-10), who is the mother of the deceased on 18.12.13 and
      recorded her statement. Moreover she had disclosed before the
      Investigating Officer that Anoop was a sexual pervert and
      homosexual and not interested in sexual relationship with his wife
      Anju. Because of these strange habits, there was always altercation
      between Anoop and her wife. The above named Sheela had also
      stated that when Anju shifted to the matrimonial house, the parents
      of Anoop (A2 and A3) terminated the service of the housemaid and
      Anju was forced to do all the house hold work alone. Anoop as well
      as the in-laws had ill-treated her and she was being mentally
      tortured. When she could not tolerate the harassment and torture
      from the side of her husband and in-laws anymore, she had no other
      option but to commit suicide. The Investigating Officer had
      questioned the younger sisters of the deceased Smt.Ambily (CW11)
      and Smt.Anjana (CW-12) and recorded their statement. They had also
      given statement corroborating and supporting the statement given
      by the mother of the deceased (CW 10).

O.P(Crl).165/15                   - : 5 :-

      5.     It is further pointed out that as per the inquest report

prepared by the Tahsildar, Vythiri Taluk, as also the statement of

one Dr.Krishnakumar, Assistant Professor and Police Surgeon,

Medical College Hospital, Kozhikode, who conducted the autopsy,

the cause of death was consistent with death due to consumption

of insecticide and there was no sign of poisoning the victim

forcefully. That the mobile phone call details of the 1st accused and

deceased Anju were collected and examined by the investigating

officer and it is revealed that on 14.12.2013, the location of Anoop

was shown at Kannur and he contacted Anju for eight times till

22.32 hrs and that it is evident that at the time of death of Anju,

Anoop, the 1st accused, was not present at the time of occurrence.

That altogether 48 witnesses were questioned including the parents,

relatives and neighbours residing near the matrimonial house and

all of them had stated that Anju had committed suicide because of

mental torture and ill-treatment meted out to her from her husband

and his parents. That at the same time, none had stated that the

accused persons demanded more dowry from Anju or her parents.

That in the course of the investigation, Sections in the FIR were

altered and offences under Secs.306 and 498A read with Sec.34

O.P(Crl).165/15                   - : 6 :-

were included. That the medical evidence and other evidence

collected during the course of the investigation has revealed that

there is no evidence regarding forceful administration of poison to

the deceased as now alleged by the petitioner. It is thus after

conducting a comprehensive and exhaustive investigation, that the

investigating officer had submitted the final report/charge sheet in

this crime for offences under Secs.306 and 498A read with Sec.34 of

the I.P.C. against A-1, (Anoop) A-2, Joseph (father-law-of the

deceased) and A-3, Thressya (mother in law of the deceased). That

was on 19.2.2014 and now the case is under trial as S.C.No.165/

2014 on the file of the Addl. Sessions Court (Adhoc)-I, Kalpetta.

      6.     Very crucially it is stated in paragraph 10 of the said

statement that the allegation of the petitioner that the petitioner, his

wife, his younger daughter had given statements before the Police

that the the accused persons demanded dowry is actually incorrect

and that they had never given any such statement before the

investigating officer. That the investigation has also clearly revealed

that there was no demand whatsoever made either by the husband

or his parents for more dowry and so the offence under Sec.304B

was not attracted. It is further stated that a just, fair and impartial

O.P(Crl).165/15                  - : 7 :-

investigation has been conducted in this case and the allegations to

the contrary, are false and have been denied, etc.

      7.     It can be seen that though Ext.P-1 is seen to have

submitted by the petitioner before the District Collector, Wayanad,

on 30.12.2013, the petitioner has not been able to produce any

material to show that the petitioner had thereafter taken any follow

up on the same. The final report in this case was filed on 8.3.2014

and the committal proceedings were initiated on 10.6.2014 and the

case was later committed to the Sessions Court concerned and it is

thereafter that after the commencement of the trial, that the

petitioner has filed Ext.P-4 application dated 24.4.2015 praying

before the Sessions Court concerned that the examination of the

witnesses may be stopped and the case may be adjourned, etc. The

petitioner has chosen to approach this Court by filing this O.P(Crl.)

only on 21.5.2015.

      8.     As directed by this Court, the Sessions Court concerned

has also furnished a report before this Court in this matter. It is

pointed out that that the case records in this case were made over

to that Additional Sessions Court and the case records were received

on 24.7.2014 and that though the accused persons appeared before

O.P(Crl).165/15                  - : 8 :-

the said court on 25.9.2015, trial could not be started as the report

from the Forensic Science Laboratory was not received. That on

receipt of the FSL report, charge was framed by the court on

10.3.2015 and the case was scheduled for evidence of the

prosecution witnesses to be started on 22.4.2015 and the matter

was posted in such a manner that the prosecution evidence could be

completed by 28.4.2015. That out of the 39 witnesses summoned,

only the presence of 16 witnesses could secured by that day. That it

was only after the examination of the two prosecution witnesses

and when the case stood posted for examination of some other

witnesses, the petitioner had filed Ext.P-4 application (Crl.M.P.No.

756/2015) before the Sessions Court. That the petitioner has no

case in his Ext.P-4 petition that he has taken any steps to get the

case further investigated and his only case is that he is intending to

take steps for the purpose, etc.

      9.     Having regard to the conspectus of the facts and

circumstances of this case, this Court is constrained to take the view

that the petitioner has not been able to establish any serious

grounds so as to hold that the investigation was faulty or

misdirected. The petitioner has not been able to establish as to what

O.P(Crl).165/15                  - : 9 :-

prevented him from seeking appropriate remedies in the matter

before completion of the investigation or at least immediately after

the submission of the final report. Moreover, the case has been

investigated by a superior officer of the rank of Deputy

Superintendent of Police and it is clearly stated in the statement that

no-one has stated before the investigating officer that accused

persons demanded more dowry from the deceased Anju or her

parents and that therefore the offence under Sec.304B of the I.P.C.

was not attracted in the facts and circumstances of this case. The

trial had already commenced.

      10.    It is also to be noted that the instant petition is one

solely filed under Art.227 of the Constitution of India, which in sum

and substance, is a power of superintendence over all the courts by

the High Court and Art.227(1) thereof, expressly states that every

High Court shall have superintendence over all courts and tribunals

throughout the territory in relation to which, it exercises

jurisdiction. Here essentially the petitioner challenges not the

legality or propriety of an order or action taken by the criminal

court, but the petitioner's only case is that the investigation done by

the Police agency is faulty and wrong and that it warrants further

O.P(Crl).165/15                  - : 10 :-

investigation. Therefore, it is amply clear that it is not right or

correct to exercise powers under Art.227 Constitution of India for

examining and reviewing the legality and propriety of the Police

investigation in the instant case. True that after the commencement

of the sessions trial, the petitioner had submitted Ext.P-4

application dated 24.4.2015 praying for temporarily stopping the

examination of the witnesses and the adducing of the evidence in

the case. This, the petitioner states, is to facilitate a further

investigation in the crime. It is discernible from the report of the

Sessions Court, that petition was dismissed by that court and the

said order of rejection is not seen challenged in these proceedings.

Moreover, the petitioner has no case that he had duly approached

the competent criminal court concerned pointing out the

deficiencies in the investigation and praying for its proper

monitoring and for conduct of proper further investigation, etc.,

either before the filing of the final report or after that. It appears

that the petitioner has for the first time approached the court below

by filing Ext.P-4 application dated 24.4.2015 and that too, after the

commencement of the examination of the witnesses. Therefore, it

cannot be said that in substance there is any challenge against the

O.P(Crl).165/15                   - : 11 :-

order or decision making process of any subordinate criminal court

concerned in this case. In pith and substance, the grievance of the

petitioner is that the investigation conducted by the Police was

faulty and wrong and that therefore it requires conduct of a further

investigation at this belated stage. Therefore, it is seriously open to

doubt whether the jurisdiction available under Art.227 of the

Constitution of India, which invests powers of superintendence over

subordinate courts, could be invoked to redress the grievances

highlighted in the facts of this case. As this cardinal aspect of the

matter was not highlighted by the respondents, this Court has only

proceeded to make a prima facie examination of the merits of the

matter and the discussion in the previous paragraphs is only limited

to that aspect.

      11.    It is further made clear that the discussion on the merits

of the rival contentions raised in this case has been made in this

judgment only for consideration of the limited question as to the

issue raised by the petitioner in this petition regarding the prayer

for further investigation in this case.         This Court has been

constrained to go into this aspect only because of the issues raised

by the petitioner in the background of the prayer made in the

O.P(Crl).165/15                  - : 12 :-

petition. Therefore, the observations and findings in this judgment

shall not in any way trammel or influence the trial in this case and it

is ordered that the Sessions Court concerned shall proceed with the

trial in independent exercise of its discretion and in accordance with

law and uninfluenced and untrammeled by any of the observations

and findings in this judgment. It is made clear that the findings and

observations in this judgment in the aforesaid limited context shall

not in any way hamper or trammel the rights of all the parties

concerned with the trial, viz., the prosecution, defacto complainant

and the accused, in raising any relevant contentions, in accordance

with law, which has to be independently decided by the Sessions

Court totally uninfluenced by the findings and observations in this

judgment. Needless to say, this is without prejudice to the

contentions that are available to the petitioner and other parties

concerned, which are to be raised in accordance with law.

       12.   In view of these aspects, this Court is of the considered

opinion that the petitioner has not made out a case for interference

in the matter. At any rate, this Court is of the considered opinion

that interference at this late stage after the commencement of the

trial, is not called for.

O.P(Crl).165/15              - : 13 :-

      In view of these aspects, this Original Petition stands

dismissed.

                                                 Sd/-
sdk+                                  ALEXANDER THOMAS, JUDGE
          ///True copy///



                          P.S. to Judge

O.P(Crl).165/15                   - : 14 :-




      Having     regard   to  the     conspectus   of   the  facts   and

circumstances of this case, this Court is constrained to take the view

that the petitioner has not been able to establish any serious

grounds so as to hold that the investigation was faulty or

misdirected.



      Needless to say, this is without prejudice to the contentions

that are available to the petitioner and other parties concerned,

which are to be raised in accordance with law.




      It is also to be noted that the instant petition is one filed under

O.P(Crl).165/15                  - : 15 :-

Art.227 of the Constitution of India, which in sum and substance, is

a power of superintendence over all the courts by the High Court

and Art.227(1) thereof, expressly states that every High Court shall

have superintendence over all courts and tribunals throughout the

territory in relation to which, it exercises jurisdiction. Here

essentially the petitioner challenges not the legality or propriety of

an order or action taken by the criminal court, but the petitioner's

only case is that the investigation done by the Police agency is faulty

and wrong and that it warrants further investigation. Therefore, it is

amply clear that it is not right or correct to exercise powers under

Art.227 Constitution of India       for examining and reviewing the

legality and propriety of the Police investigation in the instant case.

As this cardinal aspect of the matter was not highlighted by the

respondents, this Court has only proceeded to make a prima facie

examination of the merits of the matter and the discussion in the

previous paragraphs is only limited to that aspect.




      It is further made clear that the discussion on the merits of the

rival contentions raised in this case has been made in this judgment

O.P(Crl).165/15                  - : 16 :-

only for consideration of the limited question as to the issue raised

by the petitioner in this petition regarding the prayer for further

investigation in this case. This Court has been constrained to go

into this aspect only because of the issues raised by the petitioner in

the background of the prayer made in the petition. Therefore, the

observations and findings in this judgment shall not in any way

trammel or influence the trial in this case and it is ordered that the

Sessions Court concerned shall proceed with the trial in

independent exercise of its discretion and in accordance with law

and uninfluenced and untrammeled by any of the observations and

findings in this judgment. It is made clear that the findings and

observations in this judgment in the aforesaid limited context shall

not in any way hamper or trammel the rights of all the parties

concerned with the trial, viz., the prosecution, defacto complainant

and the accused, in raising any relevant contentions, in accordance

with law, which has to be independently decided by the Sessions

Court totally uninfluenced by the findings and observations in this

judgment.



