
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                       PRESENT:

                                THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE K.HARILAL

                FRIDAY, THE 27TH DAY OF FEBRUARY 2015/8TH PHALGUNA, 1936

                                             RPFC.No. 351 of 2010 ( )
                                                 -------------------------


                               MC 380/2009 of FAMILY COURT,KOZHIKODE
                                                            ....


REVISION PETITIONER(S)/PETITIONER:
------------------------------------------------------------------

           AJIDAS N.A., S/O.APPUKUTTAN, 33 YEARS,
           16/602, 'VALIYAVEEDU', KUNNATHOORMEDU AMSOM DESOM
           P.O.KUNNATHOORMEDU, PALAKKAD DISTRICT
           PALAKKAD-678013.

           BY ADVS.SRI.VINOD SINGH CHERIYAN
                      SRI.R.SUDHISH

RESPONDENT(S)/RESPONDENT:
--------------------------------------------------

      1. N.K.SUBITHA, D/O.SREENIVASAN N.,
           AGED 27 YEARS, 38/130 B, RESIDING AT LAVANYA
           ATHANIKKAL EAST, PUTHIYANGADI AMSOM, EDAKKAD
           DESOM, P.O.WEST HILL, KOZHIKODE-673005.

      2. SAKTHI SWAROOPA, AGED 2 YEARS (MINOR)
           MINOR 2ND RESPONDENT REPRESENTED BY GUARDIAN
           MOTHER 1ST RESPONDENT.

            BY ADV. SRI.S.SANTHOSH KUMAR (BALARAMAPURAM)

           THIS REV.PETITION(FAMILYCOURT) HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD ON 27-02-
2015, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE FOLLOWING:



OKB


                           K.HARILAL, J.

                    _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _

                     R.P(FC). No.351 of 2010
                    _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _

           Dated this the 27th day of February, 2015




                              O R D E R



           The petitioner is the respondent in M.C. No.380 of 2009

on the files of the Family Court, Kozhikode. The above M.C. was

filed by the respondent herein, who is the wife of the petitioner,

claiming maintenance allowance under Section 125 of the Code of

Criminal Procedure.     According to the respondent, she is the

legally wedded wife of the petitioner and their marriage was

solemnised on 30/5/2007. The 2nd respondent is the child born out

of the said wedlock. At the time of marriage the 1st respondent

was given 120 sovereigns of gold ornaments. But the petitioner

sold the gold ornaments and misused the amount realised from the

said sale. At the time of marriage she was working as a Lecturer

in Vedavyasa Arts and Science College, Kozhikode. At the instance

of the petitioner, she was constrained to resign the said job on his

assurance that he had arranged another job for her in a college at

Coimbatore. But she did not get that job as the petitioner had not

taken any effort for the same. From the very beginning of the

R.P(FC).351/10                     :2:



marriage itself the petitioner had ill-treated her with cruelty both

physical and mental. On demand of more dowry the petitioner

used to harass her and at last she was driven out from her marital

home. Though earlier she had filed an M.C., No.45/2009, before

the court below claiming maintenance allowance, the same was

compromised on the assurance of the petitioner that she would

not be ill-treated after the reunion.     Unfortunately they lived

together for a short period and eventually they fell apart due to

irreconcilable marital discordancy. Apprehending danger to her

life she left away from the company of the petitioner. Thereafter,

she filed a criminal case alleging offence punishable under Section

498A of the Indian Penal Code against the petitioner and the same

is still pending. She has no job or income and she is unable to

maintain herself whereas the petitioner is earning a monthly

income of Rs.15,000/-. He is working as an agent of a private

insurance company and conducting an establishment, namely

'Alacrity Dimension' at Palakkad. According to the respondent,

the petitioner has not paid any amount towards maintenance

allowance after 2/12/2009 and thereafter the petitioner never

cared to look after even the child.      She claimed maintenance

allowance @ Rs.5,000/- to the 1st respondent and Rs.2,000/- to the

2nd respondent, per month.

R.P(FC).351/10                   :3:



      2.   The petitioner filed a counter statement in the M.C.

admitting the marital status of the 1st respondent as wife and the

paternity of the 2nd respondent as the child born in that wedlock.

He denied all the allegations levelled against him in that petition.

According to him, he was not given so much of gold ornaments as

alleged by the 1st respondent.        According to him, the 1st

respondent voluntarily resigned her job.        According to the

petitioner, neither he nor his family members have harassed the

1st respondent, either mentally or physically, as alleged in the

petition. The allegation of dowry demand and harassment is only

a cooked up story. It is also contended that the 1st respondent is

able enough to maintain herself and the child, as she is well

qualified and working at Bajaj Alliance as Business Officer and

earning Rs.8,100/- per month. Besides, she is working as an agent

of HDFC-IRGO General Insurance and earning Rs.5,000/- per

month in that account.       According to the petitioner, the 1st

respondent used to pick up quarrel with the petitioner and his

family members on flimsy reasons. She insisted him to shift their

habitation to another house. He denied the allegation that he is

earning Rs.50,000/- per month and he is working as an agent of a

private insurance company and conducting an establishment,

namely Alacrity Dimension.

R.P(FC).351/10                   :4:



      3. On the above pleadings the petitioner was examined as

P.W.1.     Exts.A1 to A4 were marked.        The respondent was

examined as R.W.1 and Exts.B1 and B2 were marked.

      4.    Heard the learned counsel for the petitioner, who

advanced arguments challenging the findings of the court below

whereby the court below directed the petitioner to pay monthly

maintenance allowance to the respondents at the rates referred

above. According to the petitioner, the court below miserably

failed to evaluate the evidence on record in its correct

perspective. The court below ought to have found that she is

residing separately without sufficient reasons and thereby she is

not entitled to get maintenance allowance from the petitioner.

The quantum of amount fixed by the court below is also

disproportionate with the income of the petitioner.

      5.   In view of the rival contentions, the question to be

considered is whether there is any illegality or impropriety in any

of the findings whereby the court below directed the petitioner to

pay maintenance allowance as referred above.

      6. Going by the impugned order it could be seen that the

court below has at first considered the point whether the

respondents are entitled to get maintenance allowance from the

petitioner.   Going by the sequence of events occurred in the

R.P(FC).351/10                    :5:



marital life from 2007 to 2009, as narrated in detail, it could be

seen that the marital discordancy started from the very beginning

of their married life and gradually that culminated into the first

M.C. seeking maintenance allowance. Though the said M.C. was

settled by compromise and they started to live together, again

they fell apart and started to reside separately due to

irreconcilable discordancy in marital life.        Thereafter, the

discordancy is seen aggravated by filing a criminal complaint

alleging offence under Section 498A of the IPC. The court below

elaborately analysed each and every incident occurred in their

marital life and arrived at a finding that the 1st respondent is

justified in living separately without forfeiting her right to claim

maintenance allowance. I do not find any kind of perversity in the

appreciation of evidence from which those findings have been

arrived at.

      7.   What remains to be considered is whether the court

below can be justified in the determination of quantum of

maintenance allowance.      According to the 1st respondent, the

petitioner is earning a monthly income of Rs.50,000/- by

conducting an establishment, namely Alacrity Dimension, and also

from his properties, whereas she has no job or income and she is

unable to maintain herself. Though the petitioner contended that

R.P(FC).351/10                     :6:



the 1st respondent is well qualified and working at Bajaj Alliance as

Business Officer and earning Rs.8,100/- per month besides

working as an agent of HDFC-IRGO General Insurance and

earning Rs.5,000/- per month, no evidence had been adduced to

substantiate the said contention. Similarly, though he contended

that he is working as an agent of Aviva Life Insurance and earning

a meagre salary of Rs.3,000/-, no evidence had been adduced to

substantiate the said contention also.       The petitioner himself

admitted that he has passed Mechanical Engineering course, but

further asserted that he is an agent of Aviva Life Insurance

Company and he did not obtain any job after his graduation.

Though he contended that his daily average income is Rs.100/-

only, it cannot be believed at any stretch of imagination that a

B.Tech. Engineer gets only Rs.100/- per day, when a manual

labourer gets Rs.600/- per day. The petitioner has no case that he

is unhealthy or physically disabled or incapacitated to do work so

as to earn for the livelihood for his family. An able-bodied man is

presumed to be having sufficient earning capacity to maintain his

family. If that be so, a B.Tech. Engineer can very well maintain his

family by the earnings from his job, whatever it be. As regards

income, the contention raised by the petitioner cannot be believed

in any view of the matter.

R.P(FC).351/10                     :7:



     8. The respondents, as the wife and the child of a B.Tech.

Engineer, have the right to live with the standard at par with that

of the petitioner. He is liable to pay maintenance allowance to the

respondents in accordance with the family status and their day-to-

day living expenses. In the above view, I am of the opinion that

the quantum of maintenance allowance fixed at the rate of

Rs.1,500/- and Rs.750/- respectively to the respondents 1 and 2, is

just and proper. I do not find any reason to interfere with the

impugned order under challenge.

     This R.P(FC) is dismissed accordingly.




                                                       Sd/-
                                              (K.HARILAL, JUDGE)

okb.



