
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                            PRESENT:

             THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE V.K.MOHANAN
                               &
        THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE RAJA VIJAYARAGHAVAN V

      MONDAY, THE 8TH DAY OF JUNE 2015/18TH JYAISHTA, 1937

                    CRL.A.No. 832 of 2010
                   --------------------------
 AGAINST JUDGMENT IN SC 66/2008 of ADDITIONAL SESSIONS COURT-I,
               THIRUVANANTHAPURAM DATED 25-03-2010


APPELLANT(S):
---------------

       FRANCIS,C.NO.4917,
       CENTRAL PRISON, THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

       BY ADVS.SRI.SAJEEV.T.P.
                        SMT.K.RAJANI
                        SRI.R.V.SUJIT KUMAR

RESPONDENT(S):
-----------------

       STATE OF KERALA, REPRESENTED BY
       PUBLIC PROSECUTOR, HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM.

       BY SMT.PRAICY JOSEPH, SPL. PUBLIC PROSECUTOR

       THIS CRIMINAL APPEAL  HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD  ON  08-
     06-2015, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY DELIVERED THE FOLLOWING:


  V.K.MOHANAN & RAJA VIJAYARAGHAVAN.V, JJ
                 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                   Crl.Appeal.832 of 2010
                     - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                     Dated 8th June, 2015
              - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

                           JUDGMENT



Raja Vijayaraghavan.J.



1. The appellant is the accused in S.C.No.66 of 2008 on

the file of the Court of Additional Sessions Judge-I,

Thiruvananthapuram. He stands convicted under Section

302 of the IPC and has been sentenced to undergo

rigorous imprisonment for life.



2. Before adverting to the contentions raised by the

appellant, the case of the prosecution can be briefly

stated as follows:



2(i). The deceased Santha is the daughter of PW1, Mary.

Santha had fallen in love with the appellant and they

Crl.A.832/10
                             2

were living together without entering into any form of

marriage. Out of the said wedlock, two girls were born to

the couple, the eldest being Salini who was residing in a

poor home at Cheruvarakonam near Parassala and the

younger one being Malini who was staying with Santha.



2(ii). The appellant was a Cable layer by profession and

was an infrequent visitor to the house. He is an alcoholic

and there used to be frequent fights with Santha when

she refused to part with money which he required for

satisfying his drinking habits. While so, on 21.07.2006,

when PW2-Malini had come back from School, she had

occasion to see the appellant and the deceased Santha

quarreling with each other. Malini went for tuition and

when she came back, she found her mother crying. Malini

had her supper and went to bed. She had fallen asleep

and was woken up by the screams of her mother. She

found her mother standing in the kitchen engulfed in fire.

Santha was seen pouring water on her body. The accused

was also present in the kitchen and he rushed out through

Crl.A.832/10
                             3

the front door and fled towards Pampukala. Aghast at

seeing her mother in flames, PW2 rushed to the house of

her grandmother, Mary, who was residing nearby. She,

along with Mary, returned back to the home and on their

way, they saw the deceased Santha running towards

them and falling down near the electric post in front of the

house of Appu Nadar. The clothes of the deceased were

burnt and her hair was charred. There was smell of

kerosene emanating from her body.



2(iii). A car was summoned and the deceased was taken

to the Taluk hospital, Neyyattinkara, where she was

examined by PW8, the Casualty Medical Officer. The

deceased Santha was referred to the Medical College

Hospital,     Thiruvananthapuram.    While     undergoing

treatment at the Medical College Hospital, Santha

succumbed to her injuries on 20.08.2006 at 10.10 am.

Thereafter, PW1 went to the Kanjiramkulam police station

and gave a statement to PW14, the Sub Inspector of

Police, at 5.30 pm on 20.08.2006 based on which Ext.P1

Crl.A.832/10
                               4

(a) FIR was registered. The same Officer proceeded to the

Medical College Hospital mortuary and prepared Ext.P2

inquest over the dead body of the deceased Santha. The

clothes worn by the deceased were seized. He obtained

the treatment certificate of Santha from the Medical

College hospital and thereafter, gave Ext.P15 report

incorporating Section 302 of the IPC.



2(iv). Later investigation was taken over by PW13, the

Circle Inspector of Police, Poovar police station, on

23.08.2006. He went to the scene of occurrence and

prepared Ext.P9 scene mahazar and seized MO1 can

containing kerosene found in the kitchen of the house. He

arrested the accused on 30.08.2006 at 9.15 pm. The

accused was produced before the Judicial        First Class

Magistrate Court-III, Neyyattinkara and he was remanded

to judicial custody. Later investigation was handed over to

PW15 , the Circle Inspector of Police, Poovar, who, on

completion of Investigation, laid the final report before

Court.

Crl.A.832/10
                             5




3. The learned Magistrate before whom the final report

was laid initiated committal proceedings as CP number

50/07 and committed the case to the Court of Sessions

Thiruvanthapuram. The learned Additional Sessions Judge,

after hearing the prosecution and the accused, framed

charge against the accused for the offense punishable

under section 302 of the IPC. When the charge was read

over to the accused he pleaded not guilty and hence trial

was proceeded with.



4. In order to prove the case of the prosecution, PWs 1 to

15 were examined and Exts.P1 to P15 were marked. MOs

were produced and identified as MO1 to 4. After the close

of prosecution evidence the incriminating circumstances

arising out of the evidence were put to the accused under

Section 313 of the Code. The accused, after denying all

incriminating circumstances, filed a statement in which he

stated as follows:-

Crl.A.832/10
                              6

4(i). He had fallen in love with the deceased Santha and

they were living together. He was employed as a Cable

layer and had to work in far off places. He used to visit his

family only once in a month and as and when he came, he

used to bring money in excess of Rs.5,000/-. He became

an alcoholic after the death of his wife and he is not an

inveterate drinker. On the day on which Santha had

sustained burn injuries, he and Santha had a fight over

the habit of Santha in sending their children to live in the

house of relatives and the Church. This fight occurred at

about 6.00 pm. Thereafter, the accused left the house

saying that he would never return. At that time, PW1-

Mary , and Nalini had come and they took Santha to the

house of PW1. At about 7.10 pm, he received information

that Santha had sustained burn injuries and he rushed

back home. The relatives of Santha behaved aggressively

towards him and he was driven off. According to the

appellant, after 6.00 pm on 21.07.2006, there was

nobody in the house where Santha was residing with the

appellant. According to him, Santha had not sustained

Crl.A.832/10
                             7

any burn injuries while she was in the house. He further

stated that Santha had attempted to commit suicide while

she was in some other place.



5. On the side of the defense, the case diary

contradictions brought out when PW 1 and 2 were

examined were marked as Exts.D1 and D2. The librarian

of the Neyyattinkara Taluk hospital was summoned and

he was examined as DW1 through whom Exts.X1, X1(a),

X2, and X2(a) were marked.



6. The learned Sessions Judge, after appreciating the

evidence let in and the various circumstances relied on by

the prosecution, came to the conclusion that the

prosecution was able to successfully prove the guilt of the

accused. On that basis the accused was convicted and

sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for life

under Section 302 IPC.



7. We have heard the learned counsel for the appellant

Crl.A.832/10
                              8

Sri.Sajeev T. Prabhakaran and Smt. Praicy Joseph, the

learned Special Government Pleader appearing for the

State.



8. The learned counsel for the appellant Sri. Sajeev

T.Prabhakaran argued that indisputably the case against

the appellant rests on circumstantial evidence. The

learned Counsel attacked the judgment of the learned

Sessions judge on the ground that the learned Judge has

ignored this vital aspect and the principles of law relating

to appreciation of circumstantial evidence were not

adverted to. The learned Counsel argued that the

prosecution failed to establish the circumstances from

which the conclusion of guilt was to be drawn and further

contended that the facts that have been established by

the prosecution is totally inconsistent with the hypothesis

of the guilt of the accused. It was pointed out that the

witnesses examined are all related witnesses and their

evidence did not inspire confidence. He took us through

the evidence of PW1 and also P1 statement to

Crl.A.832/10
                             9

substantiate his contention that the role attributed to the

appellant was not there when the First Information

Statement was lodged, that too at a belated stage, on the

30th day of the occurrence .The learned counsel

submitted that the child witness was tutored and the

dying declaration is the handiwork of the investigating

officer and no reliance could be placed on the same. He

finally closed his arguments and prayed that the appellant

be acquitted of all charges.



9. Per contra, the learned Special Government Pleader

appearing for the State would contend that the evidence

of PW1, PW2, PW5, PW11, PW12, would conclusively

establish the circumstances linking the accused with the

crime. She would also argue that Ext.P6 and P6(a)

clinches the issue as the deceased had stated before the

doctor who had examined her at 9.30 pm on 21.06.2006

that she had sustained injuries at the hands of her

husband. The learned public prosecutor would further

submit that the last seen theory would apply on all fours

Crl.A.832/10
                             10

in this case connecting the accused with the crime. It was

finally submitted that there was no reason to disbelieve

the case of the prosecution and the judgment, conviction

and sentence passed by the learned Sessions Judge ,

passed      after proper  analysis  of  the   facts    and

circumstances, is only to be confirmed.



10. We have been taken through the evidence, materials

on record and also gone through the judgment of the

Court below. We have heard the respective counsels in

extenso.



11. Admittedly, there is no eye witness to the occurrence

and the prosecution case is based on circumstantial

evidence. After hearing the parties and after going

through the judgment of the Court below it appears that

the following are the circumstances with the aid of which

the prosecution sought to establish that it was the

accused and the accused alone who had committed the

crime.

Crl.A.832/10
                               11




CIRCUMSTANCES

             (i). The deceased had sustained 40%
             burns in the kitchen of her house
             where    she   was   living with  the
             appellant and PW2.

             (ii).  There   were   constant  fights
             between     the  deceased    and  the
             accused

             (iii). The presence of the accused in
             the house proximately at the time
             when the deceased sustained burn
             injuries.

             (iv). The conduct of the accused in
             fleeing from the scene when the
             deceased was sustaining burns

             (v). Oral dying declarations made by
             the deceased to PW5, PW8, PW11
             and      PW12     relating   to   the
             circumstances    of   the  transaction
             resulting in her death.

             (vi).   Subsequent conduct of     the
             accused.

             (vii). Motive.



12. We deem it        appropriate to evaluate the evidence

afresh before adverting to the various circumstances.

Crl.A.832/10
                             12




13. PW1- Mary, is the mother of deceased Santha. PW1

had set the law in motion on 20.08.2006 , which

incidentally is the 30th day of the occurrence. At the time

of incident, PW1 was residing about three houses away

from where Santha was residing. Santha was living with

the accused and her younger daughter Malini (PW2).

Santha's elder daughter Salini was living in a poor home

at Cheruvarakonam. The incident had occurred on

21.07.2006. She was at her home on that day. Malini had

come to her house and told that there is a fire. Malini and

PW1 went rushing towards the house of Santha. They

found Santha lying in front of the electric post near the

house of PW 5 Appu. She along with others lifted Santha

and made her to lie in the courtyard of the house of Appu.

Her clothes were changed and one Thankamani (CW6)

summoned a car. The deceased was taken to the

Neyyattinkara taluk hospital and from there, she was

referred to the Medical college hospital. The deceased

had sustained extensive burns all over the body and her

Crl.A.832/10
                            13

hair was charred. Her clothes had all burnt off. There was

a smell of kerosene on her body. She underwent

treatment at the Medical college for one month and while

undergoing treatment she succumbed to her injuries.



14. She had given Exhibit P1 statement before the

Kanjiramkulam police station on 20.08.2006 at 5.30 pm.

In her statement, she had stated that she suspected the

involvement of Francis in the death of her daughter. In

cross examination she stated that it was after the funeral

of her daughter that she had given statement before the

police. The defense had brought out Exhibit D1

contradiction in cross examination with reference to her

earlier statement that on 21.07.2006 at 6.00 pm it was

one of her neighbors, one Nalini, who had informed her

about some ruckus happening in the house of her

daughter. She admitted that she had given such a

statement to the police. According to her, she was not

present when the doctor attached to the Neyyattinkara

Taluk Hospital had examined her daughter. She asserted

Crl.A.832/10
                            14

that, after the incident Santha had talked to her only

once and that was on the next day. She stated that she

had stated to the police all that she knew about the

incident when she had given Ext.P1 statement. The

learned Sessions Judge also put questions under Section

165 of the Evidence Act to the said witness as to whether

she knew where Francis was after her daughter had

sustained burn injuries. PW2 stated unequivocally that

she was unaware as to where Francis was at that time.



15.     PW2 is the younger daughter of the deceased and

the appellant and she was aged nine years when the

occurrence had taken place. When evidence was tendered

she was 13 years old. The capability of the witness to give

rational answers was inquired into by the learned

Sessions Judge. PW2 gave evidence that she was residing

with her father and mother and her elder sister Salini was

staying elsewhere. She deposed that, on 21.07.2006 she

had gone to the school. After returning back from school

she went for tuition and when she returned had seen her

Crl.A.832/10
                            15

mother sitting in the kitchen and she was crying. Her

house comprises of two rooms, one being the kitchen and

the other being the place where they sleep and study.

They take food sitting in the kitchen.  Her father is a

coolie and mother is a vegetable vendor. Her father does

not come home often. Fight occurs between her mother

and father when her mother refuses to part with her gold

ornaments as demanded by her father. He demands these

ornaments for consuming alcohol. After having dinner,

she went to bed. She woke up hearing the cry of her

mother. She saw her mother engulfed in fire. She could

see her mother pouring water over her body to douse the

fire. She saw her father coming out from the kitchen to

her room and running out through the door towards

Pambukala. She saw her mother in flames standing in the

kitchen. Immediately she rushed towards the house of her

grandmother and informed her about the incident. She

along with her grandmother, and mother's sister Manju

came running towards the house of Santha. On their way

they saw Santha lying near to the house of PW5 Appu

Crl.A.832/10
                             16

Nadar. PW1 and Manju lifted the deceased up and laid her

in the courtyard of the house of Appu Nadar. Clothes were

all burnt and therefore she was made to wear some other

dress. Her mother was taken to the hospital and PW1

went with her. Her mother died on 20.08.2006. While her

mother was in the hospital, she stayed in the house of her

mother's sister one Mini and went to school from that

house. She was questioned by the police and according

to her, the police seized MO1 can containing kerosene

from the kitchen of her house. When the witness was

cross examined it was brought out that the kitchen had a

door towards the west and that it was possible to go out

of the kitchen through the door as well. She admitted in

cross examination that neither the roof nor the plastic

partition in the kitchen caught fire and the kerosene can

also was not damaged. Ext.D2 contradiction was brought

out in cross examination to the effect that she had seen

her mother crying when she had come from school.



16.      PW3, is the ward member of the Karikulam

Crl.A.832/10
                               17

Panchayat, Ward No.5 and he was examined to prove

Ext.P2 inquest. According to him. MO2 to 4 , clothes worn

by the deceased were seized during the inquest.



17. PW4, was the peon attached to the Medical College

hospital, Thiruvananthapuram . He was examined to

prove Ext.P3 inventory which was prepared by PW 14 ,

the Sub Inspector after perusing the case records of the

deceased Santha.



18. PW5 is one Appu Nadar, who is a near relative of

deceased Santha. He deposed that he had seen Santha's

daughter Malini crying and on hearing the cry, he came

out of his house. Santha was crying and stood near the

electric post in front of his house and requested for help.

He asked Santha as to what happened. Then Santha

responded by saying that her husband poured kerosene

and set her on fire and that her husband had ran off.

Several persons had assembled in the place. He stated

that her clothes had burnt off and therefore he took

Crl.A.832/10
                             18

clothes from his house and put the same on the body of

the deceased Santha. She was taken to the hospital and

after one month, she succumbed to the injuries. In cross

examination, he stated that when Santha had told him

that it was her husband who had set her on fire after

pouring kerosene on her body, no one was present there.

It was thereafter that 10-50 persons had assembled.

When a question was put as to whether Santha had told

the assembled persons as to the complicity of her

husband, he answered in the affirmative. On a pointed

question as to why he had not intimated the police about

the fact of incident, he stated that he was not aware of

the legal formalities . According to him prior to the death

of Santha no police man had come to record the

statement. He also stated in cross examination that there

used to be fights between Santha and her husband on a

daily basis.



19. PW6 is the account section Junior Superintendent

attached to the Medical College Hospital and he was

Crl.A.832/10
                                19

examined to prove Ext.P4 medical records relating to

Santha.



20. PW7 is the Associate Professor of Forensic Medicine,

Medical College, Thiruvananthapuram.          She would say

that on 21.8.2006 she was working as Associate Professor

of forensic medicine, medical college, Trivandrum. She

deposed that on 11.05 AM she had conducted the post-

mortem examination on the body of Santha aged about

35 years involved in the case and issued exhibit P5 post-

mortem certificate. She further deposed that -



             "Body was that of a poorly nourished
             adult female of height 143 cm and
             weight 46 kg. Singeing of scalp hair was
             noted along the hairline of front at its
             middle. Conjunctivae were pale, cornea
             hazy. Ears and lips were affected by
             burns. Hymen was absent. Vaginal
             orifice admitted two fingers. Finger nails
             were    pale.  Rigor mortis was      fully
             established and retained all over the
             body. Postmortem staining was faint on
             the   back,   not   fixed. No    sign  of
             decomposition.    Body was kept in old
             room.
                         Injuries (Antemortem)
                   (i). Infected burns, muscle deep,

Crl.A.832/10
                                 20

             involving right side of face, slough and
             the periphery hypo pigmented with
             spotty    hyper   pigmentation.  Healing
             burns was present along the rim of left
             ear lobe, left side of face. Nose, lips,
             inner aspect of middle of left arm (7x4
             cm) back of middle three fingers of left
             hand, inner quadrant of left breast
             (8x6cm) and front of abdomen in the
             middle (11x6 cm).
                   (ii).  Infected  surgical  drainage
             wound on the front of left ankle.
                   Brain     was     congested    and
             oedematous.       Air   passages     were
             congested and lined by pus. Lungs were
             congested and oedematous .Stomach
             contained a few soft rice in mucoid fluid
             having no unusual smell. Mucosa pale.
             Spleen was friable, kidneys were pale
             and        flabby     with      indistinct
             corticomedullary demarcation and with
             cortical haemorrhages. Urinary bladder
             was empty. Uterus was normal in size.
             Cavity empty, endometrium congested,
             fallop rings were present on both sides.
             All   other     internal  organs     were
             congested, otherwise normal. Opinion as
             to cause of death - Death was due to
             infected burns affecting approximately
             40% of body surface.


21. She stated that the injuries noted in the body could be

caused by lighting the body after pouring kerosene. She

also deposed that even without the infection the injuries

are sufficient enough to cause death in the ordinary

course of nature.

Crl.A.832/10
                              21




22. PW8 was working as Casualty Medical Officer at

Neyyattinkara Taluk hospital. On 21.07.2006 She had

examined the deceased Santha at 9.20 pm. According to

the said witness, Santha was brought by Mary, the mother

of the injured. The injured was fully conscious and

oriented and according to her on her inquiry the injured

had stated to her that her husband had poured kerosene

over her body and had set her on fire at 6.00 pm at

Pambukala. The wound certificate prepared by the

Medical Officer was marked as Ext.P6. The alleged cause

of injury as stated by the injured, was separately marked

as Ext.P6(a). According to PW8 the injured had burns

involving whole face, whole neck, right arm, right fore-

arm, left arm, whole abdomen,right thigh, right leg, left

thigh, left leg, vulva and anterior chest (whole) and upper

chest. Her hair was charred. In cross examination she had

stated specifically that no intimation was given to the

police by the doctor with respect to the above reported

case.

Crl.A.832/10
                              22




23. PW9 was working as Scientific Assistant, Forensic

Science      Laboratory,   Thiruvananthapuram      during

24.10.2006. She issued Ext.P7 certificate after examining

the liquid contained in MO1 can and she has deposed that

the liquid was found to be kerosene.



24. PW10 was the Village Officer of the Karimkulam

Village and according to him, he had gone to the scene

occurrence and prepared scene plan which was marked

as Ext.P8 series.



25. PW11 is the husband of the sister of deceased Santha.

He is residing at Nellimoottil. On 21.07.2006 he received

information   that Santha     had   been  taken   to  the

Neyyattinkara Taluk Hospital. Thereafter he received

information that she had been taken to the Medical

College hospital. He went and met Santha at Medical

College hospital and she was unconscious. On the next

day when she regained her consciousness, Santha

Crl.A.832/10
                             23

divulged that her husband had poured kerosene over her

body and had set her on fire.



26. In cross examination he stated that he did not inform

the police about the incident because he was under the

impression that the police will be intimated from the

hospital. He also stated that Santha was in a conscious

stage for about ten minutes on the next day of the

occurrence and it was during that period that Santha had

disclosed to him that her husband is the perpetrator of

the heinous act. He also stated in cross examination that

he had gone to the police station and he received

information that no crime had been registered in respect

of the incident, but did not give any statement. He had

come back from the police station at noon and it was

thereafter that PW1 had gone to the station and gave the

statement. Ext.P9 scene mahazar was marked through

the witness and he also identified MO1 can which

contained kerosene.

Crl.A.832/10
                            24

27. PW12 is the    younger brother of PW11.      He also

resides at Nellimoottil. According to him, PW1 came to

his house on their way to Neyyattinkara Taluk Hospital

and Santha was brought by PW1 and two others in a

White Ambassador car. His brother Madhu was not at

home. The said witness along with his mother had gone

along with PW1 to the Neyyattinkara Taluk Hospital and

he had taken Santha to the examination room of the

doctor. According to him, PW1 had come with him to the

room. He stated further that the doctor had asked Santha

as to how the incident had taken place and Santha stated

that her husband had poured kerosene over her body and

set her on fire. Thereafter according to the witness, the

doctor asked PW1 and PW12 to get out of the room for

the purpose of examining Santha. Thereafter Santha was

taken to the Medical College hospital. PW12 called his

brother over phone and informed him about the incident.

In cross examination he admitted that Santha had told

him that she sustained fire burns while at her home. The

statement was given by Santha to her while she was

Crl.A.832/10
                            25

admitted in the hospital.



28. PW13, is the CI of police, Poovar police station. He

took over investigation of the case on 23.08.2006. He

prepared Ext.P9 scene mahazar and MO1 can containing

200 ml kerosene was seized by him as per Ext.P11

property list. He obtained Ext.P6 wound certificate from

the Neyyattinkara Taluk hospital. It was on 30.08.2006

that the accused was arrested at 9.15 pm from a place

called Kavadi and Ext.P12 series inspection memo,

intimation memo and arrest memo were marked through

him. According to him, he produced the accused before

Court as per Ext.P13 remand report and the accused was

remanded by the learned Magistrate. The kerosene found

in MO1 was sent to the Forensic Science Lab. In cross

examination, the said witness has stated that there are

discrepancies in the version of the incident as revealed

from Exhibit P 1 and the witness notes. He admitted in

cross examination that PW1 had not given the name of

the accused as having any positive role to play in the

Crl.A.832/10
                            26

incident when she had given the FI statement after a

month after the date of occurrence. He also stated that he

had not questioned the doctor who had prepared Ext.P6

wound certificate. He further stated that he did not find

any remnants of fire anywhere in the kitchen area. A

suggestive question was put in cross examination that

Ext.P6 wound certificate was prepared at his instance

which he promptly denied.



29. PW14 was the Sub Inspector of police Kanjiramkulam

police station. On 20.08.2006 at 5.30 pm he had recorded

the statement of PW1 and registered Ext.P1(a) FIR under

S 174 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. Thereafter on

21.08.2006 he had gone to the Medical College hospital

mortuary and had prepared Ext.P2 inquest report of the

deceased Santha. MO2 to 4 which are lungi, towel and

white dhothi worn by Santha was also seized as per

Ext.P14 property list. Ext.P3 inventory was prepared in

respect of the case sheet of the deceased. Later Ext.P15

report was submitted before Court adding Section 302 of

Crl.A.832/10
                               27

IPC. It is stated that further investigation was conducted

by PW13, the CI of police, Poovar.



30. PW15 was the CI of Police, Poovar police station and

he deposed before Court that he had forwarded Ext.P7 re-

port and Ext.P8 series scene plan to the Court and also

laid final report on completion of investigation. The Librar-

ian attached to Neyyattinkara Taluk Hospital was sum-

moned by the defense and examined , through whom,

wound certificate of the deceased Santha and the intima-

tion register was produced and the same was marked as

Exts.X1 and X2 respectively.



31. It is not in dispute that the case against the appellant

rests on circumstantial evidence and therefore, before

adverting to the cogent circumstances against the

appellant it would be advantages to recall the law relating

to appreciation of evidence in a case based on

circumstantial evidence.

Crl.A.832/10
                                 28

32. The law relating to the appreciation of evidence in a

case based on Circumstantial evidence was lucidly stated

by the Apex Court is in Hanumant v. State of Madhya

Pradesh (AIR 1952 SC 343) where the principle was

laid down as follows:



             It is well to remember that in cases where
             the evidence is of a circumstantial nature,
             the    circumstances     from    which  the
             conclusion of guilt is to be drawn should in
             the first instance be fully established and
             all the facts so established should be
             consistent only with the hypothesis of the
             guilt of the accused. All the circumstances
             should be of a conclusive nature and
             tendency and they should be such as to
             exclude every hypothesis but the one
             proposed to be proved. In other words,
             there must be a chain of evidence so far
             complete as not to leave any reasonable
             ground for a conclusion consistent with
             the innocence of the accused and it must
             be such as to show that within all human
             probability the act must have been done
             by the accused.




33. This decision was followed in Tufail v. State of

Uttar Pradesh (1969 3 SCC 198) and in Ramgopal v.

State of Maharashtra (AIR 1972 SC 656). Analysing

the decisions, a later Bench of the Apex Court in Sharad

Crl.A.832/10
                                 29

Birdhichand Sarda v. State of Maharashtra (AIR

1984 SC 1622) has laid down the golden principles in a

case based on circumstantial evidence as follows:



            "(1).The circumstances from which the
            conclusion of guilt is to be drawn should
            be fully established. It may be noted here
            that   this  Court   indicated  that   the
            circumstances concerned 'must or should'
            and not 'may be' established.     There is
            only only a grammatical but a legal
            distinction between may be proved and
            must be or should be proved as was held
            by   this  Court  in   Shivaji Sahebrao
            Bobade      v. State of Maharashtra,
            (1973) 2 SCC, 793);        (AIR 1973 SC
            2622) where the following observations
            were made: certainly, it is a primary
            principle that the accused must be and
            not merely may be guilty before a Court
            can convict and the mental        distance
            between 'may be' and 'must be' is long
            and divides vague conjectures from sure
            conclusions".

            (2). the facts so established should be
            consistent only with the hypothesis of the
            guilt of the accused, that is to say, they
            should not be explainable on any other
            bypothesis except that the accused is
            guilty.

            (3). the circumstances should be of a
            conclusive nature and tendency.

            (4). there must be a chain of evidence so
            complete as not to leave any reasonable
            ground for that conclusion consistent with

Crl.A.832/10
                               30

            the innocence of the accused and must
            show that in all human probability the act
            must have been done by the accused.

            (5). there must be a chain of evidence so
            complete as not to leave any reasonable
            ground for that conclusion consistent with
            the innocence of the accused and must
            show that in all human probability the act
            must have been done by the accused.




34. Therefore, if appellant is to be convicted basing on the

circumstantial evidence, the circumstances from which

the conclusion of guilt is to be drawn should be fully

established and the facts so established should be

consistent only with the hypothesis of the guilt of the

accused and the circumstances should be of a conclusive

nature and tendency and should exclude every possible

hypothesis except the one to be proved and the chain of

evidence must be so complete as not to leave any

reasonable ground for the conclusion consistent with the

innocence      of the accused and must show that in all

human probability the act must have been done by the

accused. Therefore the circumstantial evidence must be

Crl.A.832/10
                                31

of such a character that it is wholly inconsistent with the

innocence of the accused and is consistent only with his

guilt. If the circumstances proved in the case are

consistent either with the innocence of the accused or

with his guilt, then an accused is entitiled to benefit of

doubt.



35. The Apex Court in State of U.P v. Ashok Kumar

Srivastava (AIR 1992 SC 840) has cautioned the courts

regarding application of circumstantial evidence as

follows:



             This Court has, time out of number,
             observed     that   while   appreciating
             circumstantial evidence the Court must
             adopt a very cautious approach and
             should record a conviction only if all the
             links in the chain are complete pointing
             to the guilt of the accused and every
             hypothesis of innocence is capable of
             being negatived on evidence. Great care
             must     be    taken    in    evaluating
             circumstantial  evidence   and    if   the
             evidence relied on is reasonably capable
             of two inferences, the one in favour of
             the accused     must be accepted. The
             circumstance relied upon must be found
             to have been fully established and the
             cumulative effect of all the facts      so

Crl.A.832/10
                                32

             established must be consistent only with
             the hypothesis of guilt. But this is not to
             say that the prosecution must meet any
             and every hypothesis put forwarded by
             the accused, however, far fetched and
             fanciful it might be. Nor does it mean
             that  prosecution   evidence    must    be
             rejected on the slightest doubt because
             the law permits rejection if the doubt is
             reasonable   and   not     otherwise.The
             circumstances ought to justify the
             inference     of   guilt     from      the
             incriminating facts and circumstances
             which are incompatible with the
             innocence of the accused or guilt of
             any other person."



36. Having noticed the principles governing the case

based on circumstantial evidence we propose to consider

the circumstances relied on by the prosecution.



37. The first circumstance relied on by the prosecution is

that deceased Santha had died as a result of the burn

injury sustained by her. It is not disputed by either side

that Santha had died consequent to the burn injuries sus-

tained by her but the question is whether it is a case of

homicide as alleged by the prosecution or a case of

suicide as contended by the appellant. It has come out

Crl.A.832/10
                             33

from exhibit P5 autopsy report prepared by PW 7 that the

cause of death was due to infected burns affecting

approximately 40% of body surface. According to the doc-

tor all the injuries noted in the body can be caused by

lighting the body after pouring kerosene. The evidence of

PW 7 together with that of PW 1 and PW 2 would unmis-

takably prove that it was Santha who died of burns. There

cannot be any dispute with regard to the said fact.



38. The second , third and fourth circumstances relied on

by the prosecution are sought to be proved primarily

through PW2 , the minor child of the deceased. These

three circumstances hinges on the sanctity that can be

attached to the evidence tendered by the child witness.

The age of the witness at the time of occurrence was nine

years and when she gave evidence before court she was

13 years of age.



39. The Indian evidence act, 1872, does not prescribe any

particular age as a determinative factor to treat a witness

Crl.A.832/10
                               34

to be a competent one. On the contrary, section 118 of

the evidence act envisages that all persons shall be

competent to testify unless the court considers that they

are prevented from understanding the questions put to

them or from giving a rational answers to these questions

because of tender years, extreme old age, deceased -

whether of mind or any other cause of the same kind. It is

also settled that a child of tender age can be allowed to

testify if he/she has intellectual capacity to understand

questions and to give rational answers thereto. It has

been held that the evidence of a child witness is not

required to be rejected per se, but the court as a rule of

prudence considers such evidence with close scrutiny and

only on being convinced about the quality thereof and

reliability can record conviction, based thereon



40. In the decision reported in K. Venkateshwarlu v.

State of Andhra Pradesh, 2012 (8) SCC 73, it was

held as follows:

Crl.A.832/10
                                 35

             "The evidence of a child witness has to
             be subjected to closest scrutiny and can
             be accepted only if the court comes to
             the conclusion that the child under-
             stands the question put to him and he is
             capable of giving rational answers (see
             S.118 of the Evidence Act). A child wit-
             ness, by reason of his tender age, is a
             pliable witness. He can be tutored easily
             either by threat, coercion or induce-
             ment. Therefore, the court must be sat-
             isfied that the attendant circumstances
             do not show that the child was acting
             under the influence of someone or was
             under a threat or coercion. Evidence of a
             child witness can be relied upon if the
             court, with its expertise and ability to
             evaluate the evidence, comes to the
             conclusion that the child is not tutored
             and his evidence has a ring of truth. It is
             safe and prudent to look for corrobora-
             tion for the evidence of a child witness
             from the other evidence on record, be-
             cause while giving evidence a child may
             give scope to his imagination and exag-
             gerate his version or may develop cold
             feet and not tell the truth or may repeat
             what he has been asked to say not
             knowing the consequences of his depo-
             sition in the court. Careful evaluation of
             the evidence of a child witness in the
             background and context of other evi-
             dence on record is a must before the
             court decides to rely upon it."


41. The Apex Court in State of Madhya Pradesh v.

Ramesh and Another, 2011 (4) SCC 786, after consid-

Crl.A.832/10
                               36

ering a large number of its judgments came to the conclu-

sion as under:



             "In view of the above, the law on the is-
             sue can be summarized to the effect
             that the deposition of a child witness
             may require corroboration, but in case
             his deposition inspires the confidence of
             the Court and there is no embellish-
             ment or improvement therein, the Court
             may rely upon his evidence. The evi-
             dence of a child witness must be evalu-
             ated more carefully with greater cir-
             cumspection because he is susceptible
             to tutoring. Only in case there is evi-
             dence on record to show that a child
             has been tutored, the Court can reject
             his statement partly or fully. However,
             an inference as to whether child has
             been tutored or not, can be drawn from
             the contents of his deposition."




42. We have minutely and intensely scanned the evidence

tendered by PW2. We also looked around for corrobora-

tion in material particulars of the evidence tendered by

PW 2. The evidence of PW 1 will have to be simultaneous-

ly analyzed to assess the quality of the evidence tendered

by the witness .The fate of her father hinges on whether

we believe her in toto or discard her evidence as tutored.

Crl.A.832/10
                             37

Insofar as the facts of the instant case is concerned, ac-

cording to PW 2 she was sleeping inside her house when

she heard a loud cry and when she woke up she could see

her mother standing in the kitchen engulfed in fire and

pouring water over herself to douse it. She would also

state that her father was seen running away through the

front door. According to the witness she immediately went

to the house of her grandmother and intimated her about

the fact that her mother was immersed in fire. At this

juncture one cannot ignore Exhibit P1 first information

statement lodged after a month of the occurrence in

which PW1, the mother of the deceased does not mention

about this particular fact. On the contrary , according to

her, it was one Nalini who had come to her house and told

her about some noise in the house of the deceased. PW 1

even at the stage of evidence does not state that PW 2

had told her that the appellant was present inside the

house, or that there occurred a fight between the appel-

lant and the deceased, or that PW2 had seen the appel-

lant after she had seen her mother on fire, or that the

Crl.A.832/10
                                38

child had seen the appellant fleeing from the scene imme-

diately thereafter .



43. This very material aspect of this case cannot be ig-

nored. In Sujit Biswas v. State of Assam (AIR 2013

SC 3817), the Honourable Apex Court had held as fol-

lows:



             "Undoubtedly, the FIR lodged has dis-
             closed the previous statement of the in-
             formant which can only be used to oth-
             er corroborate or contradict the maker
             of such statement. However, in the
             event that the informant is a person
             who claims to know the facts, and is
             also closely related to the victim, it is
             expected that he would have certainly
             mentioned in the FIR, all such relevant
             facts. The omission of important facts
             affecting the probability of the case is a
             relevant factor under Section 11 of the
             Evidence Act to judge the veracity of
             the case of the prosecution.

             In Ram Kumar Pandey v. State of
            Madhya Pradesh (AIR 1975 SC
            1026) which was relied on in Sujit
            (supra) it was held thus :

                   No doubt an F.I.R. is a previous
             statement which can, strictly speaking,
             be   only   used   to   corroborate    or
             contradict the maker of it. But, in this

Crl.A.832/10
                                39

             case, it had been made by the father of
             the murdered boy to whom all the
             important facts of the occurrence, so
             far as they were known up to 9.15 p.m.
             on 23-3-1970, were bound to have
             been communicated. If his daughters
             had seen the appellant inflicting a blow
             on Harbinder Singh, the father would
             certainly have mentioned it in the F.I.R.
             We think that      omissions of such
             important     facts,   affecting     the
             probabilities of the case, are relevant
             under S.11 of the Evidence Act in
             judging the veracity of the prosecution
             case.




44. The evidence given by PW1 on oath before court con-

futes the evidence tendered by PW2. If in fact the child

had seen the appellant present there and playing a part in

the unfortunate death of her mother she would definitely

have shared this story with her grandmother either imme-

diately or later when she had visited her mother at the

Medical College Hospital as admitted by her. PW1 was

with the deceased from the moment she had come out

from the house seeped in fire till she had succumbed to

the injury after a month. It was after that Exhibit P1 was

lodged on 20.8.2006 .The improvement made by PW 2 at

Crl.A.832/10
                             40

the stage of evidence juxtaposed with the clean chit given

to the appellant by PW1 in Exhibit P 1 statement as well

as in evidence persuades us to hold that the evidence of

PW 2 cannot be placed reliance upon to fix the culpability

on the accused.



45. Delving deeper into the evidence tendered by PW2 ,

we notice that she has admitted , and as revealed from

Exhibit P9 plan that the house where she was residing

with the deceased consisted of two rooms. On the north-

ern side was the kitchen and the southern side doubled as

the bedroom. The roof was thatched and partitions were

made of plastic sacks inside the kitchen. There is a door

on the Western side of the kitchen providing ingress and

egress. In the ordinary course it would be far fetched to

believe that the accused after committing the heinous act

instead of going out through the Western door decided to

go through the front door after revealing his identity to his

minor daughter, if he was indeed the perpetrator of the

act. Moreover a perusal of exhibit P9 mahazer reveals

Crl.A.832/10
                              41

that there was no indication of any recent fire inside the

kitchen area either in the thatched roof or on the parti-

tions though nobody had set foot in the house after the in-

cident. There was no indication anywhere on the floor as

well and no damage was caused to the can containing

kerosene which was seen inside the kitchen.



46. The evidence tendered by PW 2 does not have the

ring of truth and cannot be termed as untutored as held

by the learned Sessions Judge .We deem it unsafe to rely

on the evidence without proper corroboration .We have

grave doubt about the truthfulness of her version and

cannot rule out the possibility of tutoring as she admitted-

ly was residing with the younger sister of her deceased

mother .



47. If the evidence tendered by PW2 is not relied on to

prove the presence of the accused in the house of the de-

ceased at the time when the incident had taken place,

there is no other evidence to fix the accused other than

Crl.A.832/10
                                   42

the oral dying declarations made by the deceased to PW5,

PW8, PW11 and PW12.



48. The fifth circumstance relied on by the prosecution to

connect the accused to the crime are the oral dying decla-

rations made by the deceased to PW5, PW8, PW11, and

PW12 relating to the circumstances of the transaction re-

sulting in her death. The legal position with regard to the

admissibility of Dying Declaration is no more Res Integra .



49. The Apex Court in Atbir v. Government of NCT of

Delhi, (2010 (9) SCC 1) relying on several earlier

precedents have laid down the law as follows :-



            1. Dying declaration can be the sole basis
            of conviction if it inspires full confidence of
            the Court.
            2. The Court should be satisfied that the
            deceased was in a fit state of mind at the
            time of making the statement and that it
            was not the result of tutoring, prompting
            or imagination.
            3. Where the Court is satisfied that the
            declaration is true and voluntary, it can
            base its conviction without any further
            corroboration.

Crl.A.832/10
                                   43

            4. It cannot be laid down as an absolute
            rule of law that the dying declaration
            cannot form the sole basis of conviction
            unless   it   is   corroborative.   The    rule
            requiring corroboration is merely a rule of
            prudence.
            5.   Where      the   dying   declaration     is
            suspicious, it should not be acted upon
            without corroborative evidence.
            6. A dying declaration which suffers from
            infirmities, such as the deceased was
            unconscious and could never make any
            statement cannot form the basis of
            conviction.
            7. Merely because a dying declaration
            does not contain all the details as to the
            occurrence, it is not to be rejected.
            8. Even if it is a brief statement, it is not to
            be discarded.
            9. When the eye - witness affirms that the
            deceased was not in a fit and conscious
            state to make the dying declaration,
            medical opinion cannot prevail.
            10. If after careful scrutiny the Court is
            satisfied that it is free from any effort to
            induce the deceased to make a false
            statement and if it is coherent and
            consistent,    there    shall be    no    legal
            impediment to make it basis of conviction,
            even if there is no corroboration.


50. In the light of the above legal position, we shall

analyse the evidence of this case. PW5 is the father's el-

der brother of the deceased. PW11 is the brother-in-law of

the deceased and PW 12 is the brother of PW11. PW5

states that on the date of occurrence he had heard the

Crl.A.832/10
                              44

cries of PW 2 and when he came out he saw the de-

ceased running towards his house. Santa was crying loud-

ly. According to him she came and stood near the electric

post and pleaded with him to save her. He went near to

her and inquired as to what happened and then Santha

told him that her husband had poured kerosene over her

body and had set her on fire. According to him PW5 fur-

ther stated that her husband had fled the scene after that.

He further stated that several persons had assembled

there and it was he who had supplied the deceased with

clothes. He unequivocally says in cross-examination that

when Santha had told about the incident nobody was

present at the scene and only after some time that about

10-50 persons had assembled. Remarkably, in his evi-

dence, he does not mention about the presence of PW 1

or PW 2 . PW 1 on the other hand does not even mention

about the presence of PW 5 at any point of time. On the

other hand what PW1 stated before court was that she

saw Santha running towards her and when she reached

the electric post near to the house of Appu Nadar she had

Crl.A.832/10
                              45

fallen down. It was then that PW 1 had lifted her up and

took her to the courtyard of the house of PW 5.



51. When PW1 does not have a case in her evidence that

the deceased had stated anything implicating the ac-

cused, it would be far-fetched to believe the version of

PW5. The evidence of PW5 becomes even more suspect

considering the fact that even after hearing about the

complicity of the appellant he did not care to set the law

in motion by informing the police, being a near relative.



52. Similar is the case with PW11 and PW 12 who are

brothers. According to PW 11 on hearing about the injury

sustained by Santha he had gone to the medical college

hospital on the same day itself but Santha was uncon-

scious. He went and met Santha on the next day and ac-

cording to him she was conscious for 10 minutes. At that

time, according to the witness, Santha told them that her

husband had poured kerosene over her body and set her

on fire. This evidence cannot be believed since PW 1 does

Crl.A.832/10
                              46

not support this version .She was with the deceased all

through and when her evidence is silent about any such

disclosure it would be far fetched to place reliance on the

evidence of PW 11. Moreover he was a responsible mem-

ber of the family and he was expected, if such a disclo-

sure was made by Santha, to inform the police and to get

a crime registered as against the appellant. Absence of

any such effort on the part of the witness will reveal that

his intention is to introduce something to connect the ac-

cused with the crime.



53. PW 12 is the brother of PW 11 who is stated to have

accompanied PW1 to take Santha to the Taluk Hospital

Neyyattinkara. According to the said witness he along

with PW 1 had taken Santha to the hospital and when the

doctor asked Santha as to what had happened Santha

had responded and said that husband had poured

kerosene over her body and set her on fire. In fact it is ad-

mitted by PW 11 that PW1 was standing beside him all

the time. If that be the case, omission on the part of PW 1

Crl.A.832/10
                             47

to state this particular aspect either in exhibit P1 state-

ment or while tendering evidence before court will render

the evidence tendered by PW 2 suspect. It can only be

held that the so called dying declarations are brought into

existence at a later stage.



54. PW 8 is the Medical officer attached to the Taluk Hos-

pital Neyyattinkara who examined deceased Santa and is-

sued exhibit P6 wound certificate. She stated that she had

examined the deceased on 21.7. 2006 at 9:20 PM and the

patient was fully conscious and oriented. She further stat-

ed that the patient had told that her husband had poured

kerosene over her body and set her on fire at 6 PM at

Pambukala. Exhibit P 6 (a) is the relevant portion. In cross

examination the said witness has stated that she did not

give any intimation to the police with respect to the above

reported case. We have gone through exhibit P6 because

an argument was raised by the counsel for the accused

that exhibit P6 certificate was brought into existence at a

later time by the investigating officer to cook up a false

Crl.A.832/10
                             48

case as against the accused. To substantiate this particu-

lar aspect it was pointed out that there is no endorsement

in exhibit P6 as to when the said certificate was received

in the Magistrate Court. The original records would reveal

that the said certificate was not forwarded to the learned

Magistrate as the initials of the magistrate is absent. S

253 of the Criminal Rules of Practice mandates that when

any document is to be filed in court by the prosecution or

the accused, the particulars of every such document shall

be included in a list in Judicial Form No 15. The original

and copy of form No 15 is tagged along with Exhibit P 6

and there is no endorsement in the said exhibit thus mak-

ing it obvious that the same was never forwarded. This

would probabilise the argument of the appellant that the

said exhibit was brought into existence at a later stage .In

all the other contemporaneous records produced before

court there is an endorsement by the learned magistrate

as to when the same was received in court. It was also

brought out in cross-examination that the said witness

was not questioned either by PW 13 or 14 at the stage of

Crl.A.832/10
                              49

investigation. Our doubts about the authenticity of Exhibit

P 6 (a) is aggravated by the fact that PW1 , the mother of

Santha, who took the injured to the Hospital and was with

the injured when the doctor had seen her has no such

case in her evidence . This leaves us with no other go but

to arrive at the conclusion that a conviction cannot be

sustained exclusively on Exhibit P 6 and Exhibit P 6 (a) as

there are glitches here and there in respect of the credi-

bility of the same .Exhibit P 6 (a), if was found to be free

of blemish, would have been a strong circumstance

against the accused.



55. There is yet another matter which persuades us to

view Ext.P6 with caution. It has come out that the de-

ceased was admitted in the Medical College hospital for a

month. Neither the mother nor the near relatives had

given any statement till her death implicating the accused

as the perpetrator of the crime. If the deceased was in a

fit state of mind, there was no reason why the matter was

reported and her dying declaration was recorded with

Crl.A.832/10
                                 50

proper certification from the treating doctor. The dying

declaration in the instant matter which is canvassed by

the Pubic Prosecutor with much eloquence will have to be

viewed with suspicion. The absence of corroboration from

the mother renders the evidence of PW5, PW11, PW12

and PW8 suspect. If the evidence of the relatives are be-

lieved, it would be opposed to the basic tenets of law. In

this context, a decision rendered by a 'Three Judge' Bench

of the Apex Court in Papparambaka Rosamma                 v.

State of A.P (1999 (7) SCC 695) is quite relevant.



             "It is true that the Medical Officer K.Vsh-
             nupriya Devi (PW10) at the end of the dy-
             ing declaration     had certified in open
             Court. Patient is conscious while recording
             the statement. It has come on record that
             the injured Smt.Venkata Ramana had sus-
             tained extensive injuries. Dr.P.Kottara-
             mana Rao (PW9) who performed the post-
             mortem, stated that the injured had sus-
             tained 90% born injuries. In this case as
             stated earlier, the prosecution case solely
             rested on the dying declaration.    It was
             therefore, necessary for the prosecution to
             prove that the dying declaration as being
             genuine, true and free from all doubts and
             it was recorded that when the injured was
             in a fit state of mind. In our opinion, the
             certificate appended to the dying declara-

Crl.A.832/10
                                51

             tion at the end by Dr.K.Vishnupriya Devi
             (PW10) did not comply with the require-
             ment in as much as she has failed to certi-
             fy that the injured was in a fit state of
             mind at the time of recording the dying
             declaration. The certificate of the said ex-
             pert at the end only says that the patient
             is conscious while recording the state-
             ment. In view of these material omission,
             it would not be safe to accept the dying
             declaration as true and genuine and has
             been made when the injured was in a fit
             state of mind. From the judgments of the
             Courts below, it appears that this aspect
             was not kept in mind and resultantly, they
             erred in accepting the said dying declara-
             tion as true, genuine and has made when
             the injured was in a fit state of mind. In
             medical science, two stages, namely con-
             scious and fit state of mind are distinct
             and not synonymous. One may be con-
             scious but not necessarily in a fit state of
             mind. This distinction was overlooked by
             the Courts below. This was considered and
             accepted by the Apex Court in Aravind
            Singh v. State of Bihar (2001(3) BLJR
            1728).




56. In Ext.P6 also, there is no endorsement of PW8 that

the injured was in a fit state of mind. The prosecution has

not recorded the dying declaration at any point of time

during the whole span of one month with certification

from the treating doctor of the Medical College hospital

where she was undergoing treatment. According to us,

Crl.A.832/10
                              52

failure on these aspects coupled with the silence of PW 1

will make Ext.P6 suspect and not free from doubt. We

are not satisfied that the dying declarations sought to be

relied on by the prosecution is true and they can be con-

sidered as sufficient to base the conviction even without

any further corroboration.



57. The next circumstance relied on by the prosecution is

the conduct of the accused after the occurrence in not at-

tending to his wife .The appellant had specifically stated

in his statement that on hearing about the fact that his

wife had sustained burn injuries he had come to visit his

wife but the relatives of his wife had threatened them and

had driven him away. In the said circumstances there is

no reason to suspect the conduct of the accused and we

do not think that the said circumstance would link the ac-

cused with the offense.



58. The learned Sessions Judge has held that the failure of

the accused to give a probable and reasonable explana-

Crl.A.832/10
                               53

tion in respect of the circumstances under which his wife

sustained injury is yet another incriminating circumstance

pointing towards the guilt of the accused. The statement

given by the accused at the stage of 313 statement has

been extracted by us earlier. The appellant has totally de-

nied his presence in the home of the deceased. This is

probabilised according to us, by Ext.P1 and also the evi-

dence of PW1. In the said circumstances, the learned Ses-

sions Judge ought not to have held that the appellant has

not furnished a probable and reasonable explanation as to

how his wife had sustained the injury. The fact of silence

of the accused may, with all the other circumstances of

the case, be taken into account in a proper case to fix

him only if it is clearly born in the mind that an accused

person always has a right to remain silent if he wishes.

The silence of the accused and lack of proper explanation

must never be allowed by any person to become substi-

tute for the proof by the prosecution of its case. No pre-

sumption against the accused arises ipso facto from his

silence.

Crl.A.832/10
                                54




59. Further in Nagaraj V State represented by the SI

of Police, Salem , Tamil Nadu, ( 2015 (3) SCALE 396

) the Apex Court has held as follows :



             In the context of this aspect of the law it
             is been held by this Court in Parsuram
             Pandey v. State of Bihar, 2004 KHC
             1937 that Section 313 Cr.P.C is impera-
             tive to enable an accused to explain
             away any incriminating circumstances
             proved by the prosecution. It is intend-
             ed to benefit the accused, its corollary
             being to benefit the Court in reaching
             its final conclusion; its intention is not to
             nail the accused, but to comply with the
             most salutary and fundamental principle
             of natural justice i.e. audi alteram
             partem, as explained in Arsaf Ali v.
             State of Assam, (2008 KHC 5081).
             In Sher Singh v. State of Haryana,
             (2010 KHC 5010) this Court has re-
             cently clarified that because of the lan-
             guage employed in Section 304B of the
             IPC, which deals with dowry death, the
             burden of proving innocence shifts to
             the accused which is in stark contrast
             and dissonance to a person's right not
             to incriminate himself. It is only in the
             backdrop of Section 304B that an ac-
             cused must furnish credible evidence
             which is indicative of his innocence, ei-
             ther under Section 313 Cr PC or by ex-
             amining himself in the witness box or
             through defense witnesses, as he may
             be best advised. Having made this clari-
             fication, refusal to answer any question

Crl.A.832/10
                                55

             put to the accused by the Court in rela-
             tion to any evidence that may have
             been presented against him by the
             prosecution or the accused giving an
             evasive or unsatisfactory answer, would
             not justify the Court to return a finding
             of guilt on this score. Even if it is as-
             sumed that his statements do not in-
             spire acceptance, it must not be lost
             sight of that the burden is cast on the
             prosecution to prove its case beyond
             reasonable doubt. Once this burden is
             met, the Statements under Section 313
             assume significance to the extent that
             the accused may cast some incredulity
             on the prosecution version. It is not the
             other way around; in our legal system
             the accused is not required to establish
             his innocence. We say this because we
             are unable to subscribe to the conclu-
             sion of the High Court that the sub-
             stance of his examination under Section
             313 was indicative of his guilt. If no ex-
             planation is forthcoming, or is unsatis-
             factory in quality, the effect will be that
             the conclusion that may reasonably be
             arrived at would not be dislodged, and
             would, therefore, subject to the quality
             of the defense evidence, seal his guilt.
             Article 20(3) of the Constitution de-
             clares that no person accused of any of-
             fense shall be compelled to be a wit-
             ness against himself. In the case in
             hand, the High Court was not correct in
             drawing an adverse inference against
             the Accused because of what he has
             stated or what he has failed to state in
             his examination under Section 313
             Cr.PC.

Crl.A.832/10
                              56

60. An adverse inference can be drawn against the ac-

cused only and only if the incriminating material stands

fully established and the accused is not able to furnish

any explanation for the same. Further, the accused has

the right to remain silent as he cannot be forced to be-

come a witness against himself. Analyzing the evidence

in the proper perspective, we find that the evidence of

PW2 is unbelievable. The so called dying declarations al-

leged to have been made by the victim to PW5, PW8,

PW11 and PW12 as discussed earlier, does not inspire our

confidence. The last seen theory cannot be applied to the

facts of the case as we are not prepared to place implicit

reliance on the evidence of PW2 holding her as a truthful

witness. We feel that there is no acceptable evidence to

conclusively hold that the death of Santha was a case of

homicide and not a suicide.




61.    For   establishing the    guilt  on   the   basis  of

circumstantial evidence, it is also to be taken into account

that the chain of circumstantial evidence must be

Crl.A.832/10
                                 57

completed. It appears from the facts that the said chain of

circumstantial evidence cannot be concluded in the

manner sought to be done by the prosecution. The

circumstances must be conclusive in nature. In the instant

case, after analysing the facts, it appears to us that there

is a gap between the circumstances tried to be relied

upon to hold the appellant as guilty.



62. In Dhyan Raj @ Chand V State of Haryana (2014

(6 ) SCC) the Apex Court held thus .



                  Thus, we find many loopholes in the
            case of the prosecution and grounds on which
            the High Court has convicted the accused
            appellants. We would refer to the decision of
            this Court in Munish Mubar v. State of
            Haryana (2012 KHC 4560) : (2012 (10)
            SCC 464) : (2013 CriLJ 56) : (AIR 2013 SC
            912) wherein Dr. Justice Chauhan has very
            aptly and succinctly stated the following:

                  "The circumstantial evidence is a close
            companion of factual matrix, creating a fine
            network through which there can be no
            escape for the accused, primarily because the
            said facts, when taken as a whole, do not
            permit us to arrive at any other inference but
            one indicating the guilt of the accused."

Crl.A.832/10
                              58




63. A Court has to examine the entire evidence in its

entirety especially in case of circumstantial evidence and

ensure that the only inference drawn from the evidence is

the guilt of the accused. If more than one inference can

be drawn then the accused must have the benefit of

doubt as it is not the Court's job to assume and only

when guilt beyond reasonable doubt is proved then it is

fair to record conviction.




64. Therefore, we have no hesitation to hold that the

prosecution has failed to establish that the appellant has

caused the death of Santha by pouring kerosene over her

body and setting her on fire. Consequently, we set aside

the conviction and sentence passed by the learned Addi-

tional Sessions Judge-I, Thiruvananthapuram.



65. The Appeal is allowed. Conviction and sentence

passed       by  the     Additional   Sessions     Judge-I,

Crl.A.832/10
                             59

Thiruvananthapuram, in S.C.66 of 2008 is set aside. The

appellant/accused is found not guilty of the offences

charged. He is acquitted and set at liberty. He shall be

released from prison forthwith, if not wanted in any other

case.

                                       Sd/-

                                 V.K.MOHANAN
                                      Judge



                                      Sd/-
                         RAJA VIJAYARAGHAVAN. V
                                      Judge

Mrcs

                    //True Copy//


                    P.S.ToJudge



