
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                      PRESENT:

                  THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE RAJA VIJAYARAGHAVAN V

             MONDAY,THE 7TH DAY OF SEPTEMBER 2015/16TH BHADRA, 1937

                                         Crl.Rev.Pet.No. 3108 of 2006
                                             ---------------------------------
AGAINST THE JUDGMENT IN CRL.A. 52/2000 of THE SESSIONS COURT,THALASSERY
                                                 DATED 29.5.2006

  AGAINST THE JUDGMENT IN CC 901/1996 of JUDICIAL FIRST CLASS MAGISTRATE
                               COURT,KUTHUPARAMBA DATED 19.2.2000

REVISION PETITIONER/APPELLANT/ACCUSED (A1):
---------------------------------------------------------------------

           V.K.MOHANAN, AGED 48 YEARS,
           S/O. KOCHUKUTTAN, SALES REPRESENTATIVE, KUTHUR,
           TRICHUR DISTRICT.

           BY ADV. SRI.P.P.RAMACHANDRAN

RESPONDENTS/RESPONDENTS/COMPLAINANT:
-----------------------------------------------------------------

        1. T.K.BALAN, S/O. ANDY,AGED 58 YEARS,
           PANATHARAMBATH VEEDU, CHITTARIPARAMBA AMSOM DESOM,
           KUTHUPARAMBA (VIA), THALASSERY TALUK, KANNUR DISTRICT.

        2. STATEOF KERALA, REPRESENTED BY
           PUBLIC PROSECUTOR, HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM.

           R1 BY ADV. SRI.R.SURENDRAN
           PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SMT. BINDU GOPINATH

           THIS CRIMINAL REVISION PETITION HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD ON
          20.8.2015, THE COURT ON 07-09-2015 PASSED THE FOLLOWING:


             RAJA VIJAYARAGHAVAN.V. J
                - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                       Crl.R.P.3108/2006
                     - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
               Dated 7th September, 2015
             - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

                              ORDER



1.   The petitioner who is the 1st accused in C.C.901 of

1996 on the files of the Judicial Magistrate of First Class,

Kuthuparamba, challenges the concurrent verdict passed

against him u/s 420 of the IPC.




2.   Originally the petitioner along with five others were

proceeded against at the instance of the 1st respondent

for having committed the offence punishable u/s 420

and 406 IPC, and sec.4 of the Dowry Prohibition Act r/w

S.120(B) of the IPC. Accused Nos.2 to 6 were acquitted

of all charges and the petitioner alone was found guilty

u/s 420 IPC and he was sentenced to undergo rigorous

imprisonment for one year and to pay fine of Rs.5,000/-

in default to undergo rigorous imprisonment for three

Crl.R.P.3108/2006             2



months. Though the above findings were challenged in

appeal, the learned Appellate Court confirmed the

findings of the trial Court after modifying the sentence.

The above concurrent findings are under challenge in

this Criminal Revision Petition filed u/s 397 r/w 401 of

the Code of Criminal Procedure.




3.     The case of the prosecution tersely stated are as

follows:

             PW1,  the complainant is the uncle of one

Usha, with whom, a proposal for marriage with the

petitioner was mooted. Accused Nos.2 and 3 are the

uncles, accused No.4 is the sister, accused No.5 is the

mother and accused No.6 is a friend of the petitioner.

The petitioner belongs to Thrissur District and the

complainant and his family are settled at Kannur. It is

the case of the prosecution that through a mutual

acquaintance, the petitioner came to hear about PW2,

Crl.R.P.3108/2006            3



Usha      and    after making  necessary   inquiries, he

approached her family members. The petitioner talked

to his prospective bride and both of them decided to go

forward with the marriage. Later, a letter was sent by

the petitioner to the father of Usha on 28.6.1996

requesting him to contact his family members.         On

4.7.1996, the father and other near relatives of Usha

went to Thrissur and made inquiries about the

whereabouts of the petitioner and thereafter went to the

house of the petitioner and met his relatives. After that

the petitioner is said to have contacted the complainant

over phone and based on that, on 15.7.1996, the

relatives of Usha went to Thrissur and they agreed for

conducting a function at Kuthuparamba on 19.8.1996 for

fixing the marriage date. On 7.8.1996, the petitioner

sent a letter to the complainant reminding them of the

arrangements to be made. On 19.8.1996 at 2.00 pm,

about 36 persons, including the petitioner, went to the

Crl.R.P.3108/2006             4



house of Usha and in the presence of relatives from both

sides, the engagement ceremony was conducted. It was

also decided that the marriage be conducted on

24.11.1996 at Thrissur. Both the petitioner as well as

Usha exchanged rings at that time. According to the

complainant on the day when the engagement ceremony

was conducted, the petitioner and other accused

demanded a sum of Rs.1,00,000/- and 50 sovereigns of

gold as dowry. The complainant and the family members

of Usha informed them of their inability to pay any

money by way of dowry. Later, the petitioner called the

complainant and demanded a sum of Rs.40,000/- for the

purchase of landed property. The petitioner promised

that the amount would be returned. Accordingly, on

16.8.1996 in the presence of the 6th accused, a sum of

Rs.40,000/- was handed over to the petitioner. Later,

on 24.8.1996 the petitioner issued     a letter to Usha

expressing his inability to give her 'pudava' during the

Crl.R.P.3108/2006            5



Onam festival. On 3.9.1996 another letter was sent to

the complainant asking him to come to Thrissur with

money for the purpose of arranging a hall. On

12.9.1996, the petitioner sent another letter, informing

the complainant to arrange a hall and it was also

informed that the petitioner is an atheist and the

marriage should not be solemnized in a temple. Later,

Usha is said to have received a letter on 16.9.1996 from

a person by name Vijayakumar, in which it was stated

that the petitioner was a person with immoral

connections and he is already married. The petitioner

was described as a drunkard and a ganja addict. The

complainant and his family members were requested to

withdraw from the marriage. Later, on 21.11.1996,

another letter was sent by a person by name Radha, in

which      also  imputations were   made    against  the

petitioner. On 23.9.1996, the father of Usha received

another letter sent by a person by name Balachandran,

Crl.R.P.3108/2006            6



informing him that the marriage as planned should not

be conducted and if it is conducted, same would be

obstructed. It is also mentioned in the said letter that

the petitioner is a person who had failed to pay

maintenance to a child born out of illicit relationship with

another lady. On 24.9.1996, the petitioner sent a letter

to the complainant asking him to forward the copies of

the letter received by the father and the relatives of

Usha imputing bad antecedents of the petitioner. On

1.10.1996, the petitioner informed the complainant that

he was mentally depressed. Thereafter, on 3.10.1996

another letter was received by the father of Usha written

by one Balachandran in which it was mentioned that the

brother of the complainant was instrumental in spoiling

the marriage proposal. Thereafter, on 1.10.1996, the

petitioner is alleged to have sent a letter to the

complainant asking as to why he was taking undue

interest in the matter. The petitioner further informed

Crl.R.P.3108/2006            7



him that his relatives were not interested in the

marriage and that the complainant need not bother to

come to Thrissur to arrange the hall. The complainant

was asked to get a nod beforehand from the petitioner

before making any further endeavor. On 14.10.1996,

the petitioner is said to have issued another letter in

which it is mentioned that the letter was written in the

presence of all the other accused. In the said letter, the

petitioner had stated that Usha was much elder to the

petitioner and that she was taller.




4.       At that time, the complainant realized that the

petitioner was not interested in getting the marriage

solemnized. According to the complainant, petitioner

and his family belong to a wealthy family and they

wanted to withdraw from the marriage. Later, the

complainant and other relatives of Usha went to Thrissur

to persuade the petitioner to solemnize the marriage but

Crl.R.P.3108/2006             8



they realized that the petitioner was not interested. It

was in the said circumstances that the complaint was

filed alleging commission of offence punishable u/s 420,

406 and S.4 of the Dowry Prohibition Act r/w 120 of the

IPC.




5.        The prosecution examined as many as four

witnesses to prove its case.      Exts. P1 to P10 were

marked. On the side of the defence, the petitioner

entered the box and gave evidence as DW1.




6.     The learned Magistrate after detailed evaluation of

the evidence, came to the conclusion that there is no

evidence to prove that the petitioner had received any

money from PW1 as alleged in the complaint and held

that the offence u/s 406 was not attracted in the facts

and circumstances of the case. The trial magistrate also

concluded that the offence u/s 120(B) of the IPC was

Crl.R.P.3108/2006           9



also not made out. The letters produced at the instance

of complainant were considered in earnest and it was

held that the said letters would not give any indication

that the petitioner had ever demanded any sum as

stated in the complaint. Holding so the learned

magistrate held that the offence punishable under

section 4 of the Dowry Prohibition Act is also not made

out. Nevertheless the learned magistrate held that by

the very act of withdrawing from the marriage, it was

clear that the accused had intention to cheat the

complainant and his family. Holding so the petitioner

was convicted under S.420 by the learned Magistrate.




7.        On appeal the conviction and sentence was

confirmed by the appellate court. Though the learned

magistrate has held that there the complainant had

failed to prove the handing over of Rs.40,000/- to the

petitioner, the appellate Court, under the mistaken

Crl.R.P.3108/2006            10



impression that no such finding was made, modified the

sentence imposed and directed the petitioner to pay a

compensation of Rs.40,000/- to PW1 and in default to

undergo simple imprisonment for six months. The above

findings are under challenge in this revision petition.




8. I have heard the learned counsel appearing for the

petitioner as well as the learned Public Prosecutor. The

learned counsel appearing for the petitioner at the

outset submitted that both the courts below have

grievously erred in concluding that the offence under

S.420 was attracted as against the petitioner. According

to the learned counsel the basic ingredients of the

offence was not attracted in the facts and circumstances

of the instant case. The learned counsel appearing for

the petitioner attacked the judgment rendered by the

learned sessions Judge and contended that though the

learned magistrate had expressly held that the evidence

Crl.R.P.3108/2006           11



let in by the complainant was unsatisfactory to hold that

a sum of Rs.40,000/- was handed over to the petitioner,

the learned sessions judge overlooked this particular

aspect and have granted compensation of Rs. 40,000/-

to be payable to PW1. It was contented that a close

analysis of the evidence would reveal that the

prosecution had no case either in the complaint or in

evidence that the petitioners had any intention to

deceive at the inception. According to the learned

counsel, even if it was taken as proved that the

petitioner had withdrawn from the marriage owing to

subsequent developments as evidenced by the letters

produced and proved by the complainant himself, it

would not amount to an offence u/s 420 of the IPC. It

was pointed out that there was categorical admissions in

the evidence of PW1 and PW2 that the complaint was

lodged only for the purpose of realizing compensation

and if the petitioner were to pay the amount the

Crl.R.P.3108/2006             12



complaint would be withdrawn. To buttress their case, it

was pointed out by the learned counsel that Usha had

married and had a child when she had come for giving

evidence which would reveal that the parties had gone

through with their life and at any rate no offence u/s

420 was attracted in the facts of the instant case.




9.     Before this Court the only question is whether the

offence u/s 420 is attracted or not in the facts and

circumstances. The next question is whether the learned

sessions judge was justified in granting compensation

u/s 357 of the Code to the complainant.




10.       From the allegation in the complaint, the

prosecution attempts to bring home the offence of

cheating by examining PWs 1 to 4 and by proving the

letters admittedly sent by the petitioner to PW 1 and the

father of Usha. In order to bring home the guilt the

Crl.R.P.3108/2006                   13



prosecution has to prove that the promise and

representation given by the petitioner were intentionally

false and fraudulent.




11.        S.415, I. P. C. which defines the offence of

cheating runs as follows:




        "415.   Whoever,      by   deceiving  any    person,
        fraudulently or dishonestly induces the person so
        deceived to deliver any property to any person, or to
        consent that any person shall retain property, or
        intentionally induces the person so deceived to do or
        omit to do anything which he would not do or omit if
        he were not so deceived, and which act or omission
        causes or is likely to cause damage or harm to that
        person in body, mind, reputation or property, is said
        to 'cheat'."




12. In the definition of cheating there are set forth two

separate classes of acts, which the person deceived may

be induced to do. In the first place he may be induced

fraudulently or dishonestly to deliver any property to

any person or to consent that any person shall retain

any property. The second class of acts set forth in the

Crl.R.P.3108/2006            14



section is the doing or omitting to do anything, which

the person deceived would not do or omit to do if he

were not so deceived. In the first class of cases, the

inducing must be fraudulent or dishonest. In the second

class of acts, the inducing must be intentional but not

necessarily fraudulent or dishonest. The distinction

between mere breach of contract and the offence of

cheating is a fine one. It depends upon the intention of

the accused at the time of inducement, which may be

judged by his subsequent conduct, but for which the

subsequent conduct is not the sole test. Mere breach of

contract cannot give rise to criminal prosecution under

S.420 IPC, unless fraudulent or dishonest intention is

shown right at the beginning of the transaction, that is

the time when the offence is said to have been

committed.




13. The Apex Court in Mahadeo Prasad V. State of

Crl.R.P.3108/2006                         15



W.B. [AIR 1954 SC 724], has held as follows:




         " ......................when the charge is that the accused
        has committed a breach of a false promise to do
        something at a future date, as a result of which the
        complainant had been induced to part with his money
        or property, the question whether the accused is
        guilty of the criminal offence of cheating or is only
        liable in a civil Court for damages for breach of
        contract depends upon the state of mind of the
        accused at the time when the promise was made. If
        it is established that the intention of the accused was
        dishonest at the very time when he made the
        promise and entered into a transaction with the
        complainant, and that he made a false promise
        knowing it to be false with the purpose of inducing
        the complainant to part with his property or money,
        then the liability is criminal and the accused is guilty
        of the offence of cheating. On the other hand, if all
        that is established is that a representation made by
        the accused has subsequently not been kept criminal
        liability cannot be foisted on the accused, and the
        only right which the complainant acquires is to a
        decree for damages for breach of contract in a civil
        suit, because in such a case the possibility remains
        that the accused may have intended, at the time
        when he made the promise, to carry it out, and his
        subsequent failure to do so may be the result of
        circumstances about which he had no knowledge at
        the time when he made the promise, and not of any
        dishonest intention entertained by him at the very
        outset when the promise was made."




14. In view of the above, and applying the above

principles to the facts of the instant case, it is to be

Crl.R.P.3108/2006            16



ascertained whether there is any evidence to suggest

that at the time when he made the promises, the

accused really did not intend to marry her or to keep up

his promise or carry out his representation. In that

event the petitioner would have committed the offence

of cheating. On the other hand, if at the time when he

made those promises, he really intended to marry PW2

Usha, and, subsequently, changed his mind or gave up

his original intention and refused and failed to marry

PW2, his action would have amounted only to a breach

of contract.




15. I have anxiously considered the evidence tendered

by the prosecution and the letters said to have been

issued by the petitioner. I do not find any assertion

either from PW 1 or PW2 to reveal that at the relevant

time, i.e. at initial stage itself, the accused had no

intention whatsoever, of keeping his promise to marry

Crl.R.P.3108/2006            17



PW2. There may, of course, be circumstances, when a

person having the best of intentions is unable to marry

the woman owing to various unavoidable circumstances.

The letters written by the petitioner also reveals that the

petitioner was sincerely desirous of marrying PW2

initially but owing to certain other factors, the parties

swept away from each other. I am unable to decipher

any indications which would reveal that the petitioner

had made any false promise or representation to PW1 or

PW2       with   the knowledge   that   the   promise    or

representation was false in any manner.       It does not

appear that the petitioner has practiced any deception

upon the complainant nor has he made any attempt to

make any false conception in the mind of the

complainant or PW2. From a subsequent failure of the

petitioner to marry PW2, it cannot be concluded that

deception preceded the actual transaction. Such a

dishonest intention cannot be inferred from the mere

Crl.R.P.3108/2006                   18



fact that the petitioner could not subsequently fulfill the

promise made by him.




16. In Lala Wazir Singh and another Vs. Suraj

Prakash Agarwal and another (1958) 28 AWR

197), it was held as follows :




            "8.  There    are   numerous      occasions     when
     engagements have been made and later on for some
     reason or other they were broken but they will not all
     amount to cases of cheating. The most important
     ingredient of S. 420 IPC would be as to what was the
     intention of the applicants, (at the time of settlement ?)
     of marriage. If at that time there was no bona fide
     intention at all of performing the marriage then a case
     under section 420 would be made out but if at that time
     they had the honest intention of having the marriage
     with the sister of the opposite party but later on for some
     reason or other the relation is broken off and the money
     is not returned it would be a matter of purely civil
     nature."



17. I also take note of the principles laid down in an

unreported judgment dated 15.10.2012 in Crl.M.C. No

2262 of 2011 of this Court, handed over by the learned

counsel appearing for the petitioner, rendered by a

Crl.R.P.3108/2006                        19



single Judge in an identical fact situation. It was held as

follows:




              "3........................The      facts      and
        circumstances presented in the case would clearly
        demonstrate that a marriage of the petitioner with
        the de facto complainant's son was arranged by
        both the families and that was followed by a
        betrothal ceremony. For whatever reason such an
        arranged marriage fixed had not materialised, no
        offence of cheating for that reason could be
        proceeded against the petitioner or her parents
        and those who were               otherwise  involved in
        arranging such marriage. Subsequent to the
        fixation of the marriage, petitioner had collected
        some gifts or cash from the son of de facto
        complainant, that too cannot be a ground to hold
        that she had dishonestly induced her would be
        bride groom with whom a marriage was arranged
        to part with any property. Even if the allegations
        raised in the complaint and also the materials
        gathered by the police, as reflected in its report
        after investigation of the crime, are accepted to be
        true and correct, it cannot be stated that the
        petitioner or her parents have committed any
        offence of cheating. To constitute the offence of
        cheating it must be shown that there was
        inducement by one person to another to deliver
        any property or omitted to do something which he
        otherwise would not have done or omitted to do
        so.

             4.      The facts presented in the case would
        indicate that after an arranged marriage was fixed
        between the de facto complainant's son and the
        petitioner, the latter, for one reason or other
        married another person. If the allegations raised
        by the complainant are true, probably, conduct of

Crl.R.P.3108/2006                   20



        petitioner in eloping with her lover and the breach
        of arranged marriage already fixed, might have
        caused not only monetary loss but damage to the
        reputation of the de facto complainant and his son.
        But, that by itself cannot be a basis to prosecute
        the petitioner for the offence of cheating."




18.      There is another very pertinent aspect of the

matter. When PW1 was cross examined he was asked

about the expenses incurred by him towards conduct of

the engagement ceremony. He stated that he did not

individually incur any expense. He unequivocally stated

that     he    had     filed   the    complainant      to  realize

compensation for the loss sustained and if the accused

was prepared to pay the said amount he was amenable

to withdraw the complaint. When PW2 was cross

examined, she stated that her uncle PW1 had incurred

expenses to the tune of Rs.25,000/ and she was told

that if did not give evidence as a witness, they would

lose the said amount.             Neither PW 1 or PW 2 has

deposed in evidence that the petitioner had a guilty

intention at any point of time at the inception. In view

Crl.R.P.3108/2006             21



of the categorical nature of the evidence tendered by

PW1 and PW2, it cannot be held that the petitioner had

practiced any deception upon the complainant. There is

total paucity of materials to conclude that the petitioner

had intent to deceive PW 1 or PW 2 at the time when

they had fixed the marriage.



19.      Both the Courts below have not appreciated these

aspects of the matter and have concluded that the

offence under S.420 was attracted by inference from his

subsequent conduct. The appellate court has failed to

note the considered findings of the trial Magistrate in so

far as the handing of a sum of Rs.40,000/ is concerned

and have erroneously directed the petitioner to pay

compensation of Rs.40,000/- to PW1. The said finding of

the appellate court is irregular and illegal. When

conviction has been entered into misinterpreting the

legal provisions and without taking note of the vital

ingredients of the offence and/or where the conclusion

Crl.R.P.3108/2006                22



arrived at is based on inadmissible and irrelevant

material this court will be justified in interfering in

Revision.



20.       In view of above, I am of the considered view

that the concurrent findings of the Courts below holding

the petitioner guilty u/s 420 of the IPC cannot be

sustained under law. The same is set aside.




      The revision petition is allowed. The petitioner is set

at liberty.

                                          Sd/-

                                RAJA VIJAYARAGHAVAN. V.
                                         Judge

Mrcs
                      //True Copy//

                     P.S.To Judge



