
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                              PRESENT:

               THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE V.K.MOHANAN
                                  &
                THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE P.D.RAJAN

       TUESDAY, THE 3RD DAY OF FEBRUARY 2015/14TH MAGHA, 1936`

                   Mat.Appeal.No. 792 of 2012 ()
                   ------------------------------

        AGAINST THE JUDGMENT IN OA 341/2012 of FAMILY COURT,
                     KOZHIKODE DATED 09-10-2012


APPELLANT(S)/PETITIONER:
--------------------------

       FAISAL RAHIMAN, AGED 31 YEARS,
       S/O.K.M.ABDUL RAHIMAN, KARIMALA KUZHIYIL HOUSE
       ALANALLUR.P.O, ALANALLUR AMSOM DESOM, MANNARKKAD TALUK
       PALAKKAD-678 601.

       BY ADV. SRI.K.A.SALIL NARAYANAN



RESPONDENT(S)/RESPONDENT:
--------------------------

       SHAMEENA K.K., AGED 28 YEARS
       D/O.KANNOTH KUNHAHAMMED, KANNOTH HOUSE, PUTHUPPADY.P.O
       EANGAPUZHA, KOZHIKODE-673 586.

       BY ADV. SRI.C.P.MOHAMMED NIAS

       THIS MATRIMONIAL APPEAL  HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD  ON
   03-02-2015, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY DELIVERED THE FOLLOWING:


ami/


            V.K.MOHANAN & P.D.RAJAN, JJ.
                  -------------------------------
                Mat.Appeal.No.792 of 2012
                  -------------------------------
        Dated this the 3rd day of February, 2015.


                       J U D G M E N T

Mohanan, J.

     The above appeal is directed against the order dated

9.10.2012 in O.A.No.341/12 of the Family court, Kozhikode,

since the petition filed by the appellant, who is the father of

a minor child, namely Aman Faisal, for granting permanent

custody to the appellant/father, was allowed only in part

and the respondent/mother was directed to provide access

of the child to the father from 2 p.m. to 4 p.m. at the court

premises on the 1st and 3rd Saturdays of every month and

the appellant herein was directed to pay cost of Rs.500/- to

the respondent herein/the mother, on each occasion of such

access.

     2.  As per the averments in the said petition, the

marriage between the appellant and the respondent, which

is a second marriage of both the parties, was solemnised on

Mat.Appeal.No.792 of 2012
                                 2

28.5.2009.          After  the marriage,  they resided   at

Ramanattukara.          According to   the  appellant,  the

respondent was not properly behaving to him and she used

to ill treat the appellant. On 31.3.2012, on the birthday of

the child, without the consent and information of the

appellant, she went to her house with the child and the

appellant was not permitted to meet his son even though

he went to the house of the respondent. Thus according to

the appellant, thereafter, the respondent and his son were

residing in the parental home of the respondent. Thus,

aggrieved by the approach of the respondent, the

appellant preferred O.A.No.341/12 for custody of the child.

      3.       The     respondent filed counter  statement

contending that on 31.3.2012, she went to her house with

the permission of the appellant, since it was study leave

for her. According to her, the appellant used to make

quarrels demanding more dowry and she was subjected to

cruelty and compelled to have unnatural sex. Since the

Mat.Appeal.No.792 of 2012
                             3

appellant is a man of bad character, she is not interested

to send the child with him.    It is also the case of the

respondent that, on 18.4.2012, the appellant and his

parents came to their house and demanded dowry of

Rs.5 lakhs and subjected her to severe cruelty and

threatened to kill the child. According to the respondent,

the appellant approached the Family court to deter her

from taking any legal steps likely to be taken by the

respondent.

     4.    On the basis of the rival contentions and the

evidence on record, the court below considered the

question as to whether it is proper to entrust the custody

of minor child Aman Faisal to the appellant. After having

considered the evidence and age of the child, who born on

31.3.2010, the learned Judge was of the opinion that, it

will not be proper to separate the child from the mother

and to give custody to the father/appellant herein.

However, according to the learned Judge, it is only just

Mat.Appeal.No.792 of 2012
                               4

and proper to direct the respondent to provide access of

the child twice in a month to his father and to direct the

appellant to award cost to comply with the direction

issued by the court below. It is the above finding and

direction that are challenged in this appeal.

     5.     We heard Sri.Salil Narayanan K.A., learned

counsel for the appellant and Sri.C.P.Mohamed Nias,

learned counsel for the respondent.

     6. It is an admitted case that the appellant and the

respondent are husband and wife and the child namely

Aman Faisal was born to them on 31.3.2010.              By

31.3.2015, the child will attain the age of 5 years. It is

also admitted that the said child is now studying in LKG

class   in     T.K.Trust  Public School,   Eangapuzha    in

Thamarassery in Kozhikode District. When the impugned

order was passed, the child was aged only 2 years. The

paternity of the child is not disputed and therefore we are

of the view that, with slight modification with respect to

Mat.Appeal.No.792 of 2012
                                 5

the custody of the child, this appeal can be disposed of,

and thereby the interest of both the father and mother of

the child can be saved and consequently, the welfare of

the child can be ensured, particularly when the child at

this age need the attention, care and love of his father and

mother.

     In the result, this appeal is disposed of with slight

modification with respect to the custody of the child

directed as per the impugned order and the appellant/

father of the minor child namely, Aman Faisal is granted

weekend custody of the child after School hours on every

Fridays, until 3.30 p.m. of next Sundays and he is also

granted custody of the child during first half of every

vacations.       Accordingly, the following directions are

issued.

            1) The appellant is free to collect the minor child Aman
            Faisal from the T.K.Trust Public School, Eangapuzha in
            Thamarassery in Kozhikode District, after the school
            hours on every Fridays and he shall return the child to
            the respondent at her house at 3.30 p.m. on every
            Sundays.

Mat.Appeal.No.792 of 2012
                                   6

            2. The appellant is also entitled to get the custody of
            the child during the first half of every vacations. He is
            free to collect the child on the closing day of the School
            for the vacation and he shall return the child to the
            mother on the beginning of the second half of the
            vacation of the child, at the house of the respondent.

            3. Since the appellant is directed to take the child from
            the School and to hand over him to the respondent at
            her house, the order to pay cost is deleted.

            4. It is made clear that the right given to the appellant
            to take the child, is only for the purpose of taking the
            child to his parental house at Manjeri and not to any
            other place.

            5.    If either of the parties want to vary the above
            directions or arrangements, under any change of
            circumstance, either of them are free to approach the
            Family court, Kozhikode, and the said court is free to
            pass appropriate orders on merit.
                                               Sd/-
                                      V.K.MOHANAN, Judge

                                               Sd/-
                                          P.D.RAJAN, Judge
ami/
                           //True copy//


                           P.A.to Judge



