
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALAAT ERNAKULAM

                                PRESENT:

                THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE K.T.SANKARAN
                                    &
           THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE B.SUDHEENDRA KUMAR

          THURSDAY,THE 9TH DAY OF JULY 2015/18TH ASHADHA, 1937

                         CRL.A.No. 508 of 2010


AGAINST THE JUDGMENT IN S.C.NO.79 OF 2004 ON THE FILE OF THE COURT
OF THE ADDITIONAL SESSIONS JUDGE (ADHOC)-I, MANJERI DATED 11-08-2009

APPELLANT/ACCUSED:

        BASHEER PALLIYALI @ VICHAPPU, 36 YEARS,
        S/O.CHEKKU @ MOHAMMED, PALLIYALI HOUSE,
        NOORIJIKKARA, KARUMARAKKAD AMSOM AND DESOM,
        ERNAD, THALUK, MALAPPURAM DISTRICT.

        BY ADVS. SRI.MANJERI SUNDER RAJ
                 SMT.SUSAN JACOB
                 SRI.B.PREMNATH (E)
                 SMT.K.K.PREETHA

RESPONDENTS/COMPLAINANT:

     1. STATEOF KERALA, REP.BY C.I.OF POLICE,
        KONDOTTY POLICE STATION,
        MALAPPURAM DISTRICT.
        VAZHAKKAD P.S.. (CRIME NO.8/2002)

     2. STATEOF KERALA,
         REP.BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR,
         HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM.

         BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SRI.RAJESH VIJAYAN

           THIS CRIMINAL APPEAL HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD ON
9-7-2015, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY DELIVERED THE FOLLOWING:


                                                                     "C.R."

                           K.T.SANKARAN &
                    B.SUDHEENDRA KUMAR, JJ.
               ----------------------------------------------------
                        Crl. A. No.508 of 2010
               ----------------------------------------------------
                 Dated this the 9th day of July, 2015

                              JUDGMENT

K.T.Sankaran, J.


       The appellant/accused, namely, Basheer Palliyali, was living

with his wife Sulekha and two children. Sulekha was his third wife.

Between the midnight of 16.1.2002 and the early hours of 17.1.2002,

Sulekha died. Basheer was made the accused in the case. The

charge against the accused was that he forcibly administered poison

(furadan) to Sulekha at about midnight on 16.1.2002 with an

intention to commit murder and the victim died due to poisoning.

The prosecution alleged that the accused had an intention to marry

Soudabi, the younger sister of Sulekha. Soudabi was a divorcee at

that time.  Sulekha, the deceased, was against the idea of the

accused marrying Soudabi.



       2. On intimation given to the father of Sulekha, he came to the

spot. At 11 a.m. on 17.1.2002, he gave Ext.P1 First Information

Crl. A. No.508 of 2010

                                    :: 2 ::

Statement, on the basis of which Ext.P9 FIR was registered for

unnatural death. The postmortem was conducted on 18.1.2002 by

PW5 and Ext.P3 postmortem certificate was issued. On 19.1.2002,

the accused was arrested by PW14. According to the prosecution,

the accused made Ext.P7(a) confession statement, on the basis of

which and as led by him, MO1 to MO4 were recovered from a place

where they were hidden in the house of the accused. MO1 is the

plastic cover containing crystalline substance, which, according to

the prosecution, is furadan, a poisonous substance. MO3 is the

cash bill for the purchase of the poisonous substance. MO1 to MO3

were found in MO4 shirt belonging to the accused. MO1 to MO4

were sent for chemical analysis. The viscera, liver, kidney, blood etc.

taken from the body of Sulekha were also sent for chemical analysis.

PW15      completed    the  investigation  in   continuation   of  the

investigation by CW23 and submitted the final report before Court.



       3.   Before the trial court, PW1 to PW15 were examined,

Exts.P1 to P14 were marked and MO1 to MO4 were identified. As

per the judgment dated 6.12.2004, the trial court found the accused

guilty of the offence under Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code and

Crl. A. No.508 of 2010

                                    :: 3 ::

he was sentenced to undergo imprisonment for life and to pay a fine

of 50,000/-.



      4. The accused challenged the conviction and sentence in

Crl.A.No.398 of 2005 before this Court.       This Court noticed that

though PW14, the Sub Inspector of Police, had produced MO1 to

MO4 in Court as per Ext.P13 and made a request to send those

items for chemical examination as per Ext.P14 forwarding Note

dated 4.9.2002, the report of the chemical examination was not

available at the time of trial. This Court called for a report from the

learned Judicial Magistrate. The learned Magistrate reported that

the material objects were sent for chemical examination. This Court

called for the chemical examination report, which was duly

forwarded by the learned Magistrate.



      5. Thereafter, this Court set aside the conviction and sentence

and remanded the case to the trial court to record further evidence in

the light of the observations made in the judgment. This Court in

Crl.A.No.398 of 2005 held thus:

Crl. A. No.508 of 2010

                                     :: 4 ::



            " 12. ...... PW14, investigating officer wanted the

     material objects to be tested in the chemical examiner's

     laboratory obviously to ascertain whether the polythene

     packet (MO1), among other things, contained trace of

     Furedan and made a request to the learned Magistrate

     as per Ext.P14 to send the material objects referred

     therein for chemical examination. When such a request

     was made, it was the responsibility of the jurisdictional

     Magistrate to consider that request. If the request was

     accepted and the material objects were sent to the

     laboratory, learned Magistrate ought to have ensured

     that report is obtained and forwarded to the sessions

     court. We have gone through the report of the chemical

     examination forwarded by the learned Magistrate and

     find that material objects were sent to the laboratory as

     per letter dated 4.9.2002. It is true that when the case

     came up for trial before learned Additional Sessions

     Judge, that report was not available before that court.

     But then, noticing from Ext.P14 that a request had been

     made by the investigating officer as aforesaid to send

     the material objects for chemical examination, learned

     Additional Sessions Judge ought to have ascertained

     whether report of chemical examination was available

     and if not, summon the same from the office concerned.

     It is not as if the report of chemical examination was not

Crl. A. No.508 of 2010

                                   :: 5 ::

      available. It is only that it was not summoned at the

      appropriate time either by the law officer who conducted

      the prosecution or by the courts concerned.       In the

      circumstances, we do not think that giving prosecution

      an opportunity to prove the said report would amount to

      filling up any lacuna."



      6. After remand, some of the witnesses were examined again

and Ext.P15 and MO5 to MO8 were marked. Subsequently, the

Additional Public Prosecutor filed a petition to recall PW5 and to

summon the chemical examiner. The Additional Public Prosecutor

also filed a petition to receive the certified copy of the chemical

analysis report with respect to the internal organs of the deceased

Sulekha which were collected at the time of her autopsy.      Those

applications were allowed by the trial court.       That order was

challenged by the accused before the High Court in Crl.M.C.No.1307

of 2009. This Court confirmed the order passed by the trial court

and dismissed Crl.M.C.No.1307 of 2009.        Thereafter, PW5 was

examined further and PW16 was also examined. On the side of the

defence, DW1 and DW2 were examined and Ext.D1 was marked.

The certified copy of the chemical examination report with respect to

Crl. A. No.508 of 2010

                                  :: 6 ::

the internal organs of the victim was proved through PW16 and it

was marked as Ext.P16.



      7. After remand, the trial court found the accused guilty, as

per the judgment dated 11.8.2009 and he was sentenced to undergo

imprisonment for life and to pay a fine of 25,000/-.      The said

conviction and sentence are under challenge in Crl.A.No.508 of

2010 filed by the accused.



      8. The prosecution mainly relies on the evidence of PW1 - the

father of the deceased, PW3 - the minor daughter of the deceased,

PW4 - the mother of the deceased and PW13 - the sister of the

deceased as well as the chemical examination report and the

medical evidence in the case.



      9. The prosecution also relies on the evidence of PW9, who

sold   the poisonous substance to the accused, as well as the

discovery of MO1 to MO4 under Section 27 of the Evidence Act as

per Ext.P7 seizure mahazar.

Crl. A. No.508 of 2010

                                  :: 7 ::




      10. PW1, the father of the deceased, stated that at the time of

the marriage of the deceased with the accused he was working in a

gulf country and sufficient dowry was given. After one year of the

marriage, PW1 came to the native place. On 17.1.2002, PW1 got

information that his daughter was hospitalised. While proceeding to

the hospital, he was taken to the house of the accused where he

found his daughter lying dead. He found that froth had oozed out

from the mouth of the deceased. He gave information to the police

and the FIR was registered.



      11. PW3 was aged seven years at the time of occurrence.

Her statement was recorded under Section 164 of the Code of

Criminal Procedure. PW3 stated in evidence that on the date of the

incident, she and her mother and sister went to bed after dinner. Her

father (the accused) was in another room. He came to the room

where the deceased was lying and enquired whether she was

having pain. She told him that she had severe headache. At that

time, the accused brought a black crystalline medicine and

administered the same to the deceased. The accused pressed on

Crl. A. No.508 of 2010

                                   :: 8 ::

both sides of the cheek of the deceased and he also poured water

into the mouth of the deceased. After some time, the deceased told

PW3 "R.fa gN^f{, )M:n_ Ix_:ng\o^Q (meaning thereby 'my

daughter, father had cheated'). PW3 stated that her father insisted

on her to go to bed stating that she had to go to the 'Madrassa' on

the next day morning.     The deceased insisted on going to the

hospital, but the accused refused. Even though the deceased cried

aloud, the accused stated that her illness would be cured by the next

day morning. On the next day morning, PW3 found her mother

dead. The accused told PW3 that her mother was dead. She also

stated that the accused took the key of the door from the almirah

and opened the door.



      12. PW4, the mother of the deceased, stated about the ill-

treatment meted out by the parents of the accused towards the

deceased. She stated that the deceased was pregnant and the

accused insisted on aborting the pregnancy. But the deceased was

not willing for the same. The deceased told that her husband had

brought a medicine and it was a black crystalline one. The deceased

asked PW4 whether there is such a medicine. PW4 also stated that

Crl. A. No.508 of 2010

                                    :: 9 ::

the accused expressed his desire to marry the younger sister of the

deceased.



       13. PW13, the sister of the deceased, stated in evidence that

on the previous week of the death of Sulekha, she met her. The

deceased said that she was pregnant and the accused had brought

a medicine for aborting the pregnancy.        The deceased was not

willing for abortion. On getting information, PW13 went to the house

of the deceased.      The deceased was about to be taken to the

hospital in a cot. By the time, the doctor came to the place and the

doctor stated that Sulekha was dead.



       14. The trial court believed the evidence of PW3, PW4 and

PW13. On a careful re-appraisal of the evidence of these witnesses,

we do not find any ground to take a view different from the view

taken by the trial court.



       15. The evidence of PW9 would clearly establish that he sold

furadan to the accused as per MO3 bill. PW9 identified MO1, the

packet containing furadan. PW10 is the witness to the discovery of

Crl. A. No.508 of 2010

                                   :: 10 ::

MO1 to MO4. The accused took those articles from a heap of metal

kept in one of the rooms of his house, in the presence of the Sub

Inspector of Police and the witnesses.       The court below, after

analysing the facts and circumstances of the case, came to the

conclusion that the recovery of MO1 to MO4 based on the

information given by the accused is reliable.



      16.   PW5 stated in Ext.P3 postmortem certificate that the

stomach of the deceased contained about 200 ml of pale violet fluid,

few cooked rice and about two teaspoon full of purple crystalline

substance.     The postmortem certificate also indicates that the

deceased was pregnant. The opinion as to cause of death is stated

in Ext.P3 as follows:    "Postmortem findings were consistent with

death due to poisoning."      PW5 stated in evidence that from his

experience, he could say that the poison was furadan, an

insecticide. PW5 stated that viscera and blood of the deceased

were sent for chemical examination. According to PW5, 50 to 500

mg. of furadan per 1 kg of weight of a person is required to cause

death. If one consumes furadan, symptoms will start by half an hour

and a person will die within few hours.

Crl. A. No.508 of 2010

                                    :: 11 ::




       17.   PW16 stated that he prepared Ext.P16 and that he

verified Ext.P16 with the original, namely, the office copy signed by

him. The evidence of PW16 shows that Ext.P16 certified copy was

prepared from the manuscript office copy. Ext.P16 shows that the

internal organs were received with reference to letter PM No.82/02

dated 18.1.02 from Dr.K.Prasannan, Department of Forensic

Medicine, Medical College, Kozhikode (PW5). Ext.P16 report shows

that carbofuran, a poisonous carbamate compound, was detected in

item Nos.1, 2 and 3, those items being the stomach and part of

intestine, part of liver and one kidney and blood.      Ext.P16 also

shows that carbofuran is the active ingredient of the insecticide

usually sold under the trade name 'furadan'.



       18.  Ext.P16 and the evidence of PW16 would clinchingly

establish that the deceased died of consuming carbofuran, a

poisonous carbamate compound which is usually sold under the

trade name 'furadan'. The finding of the court below in this regard is

beyond challenge.

Crl. A. No.508 of 2010

                                   :: 12 ::

      19. The accused was examined as DW1. He denied the

allegations made against him and also the confession and discovery

of MO1 to MO4. He denied of having purchased furadan from the

shop of PW9. DW1 stated in evidence that on 17th morning, he

found Sulekha in a serious condition and she had vomited. He took

her to the hospital of Dr.Dinesan at Vazhakkala and thereafter, to the

Medical College Hospital. The death of Sulekha was declared at the

Medical College Hospital.     Thereafter, steps were taken for the

postmortem examination. In cross examination, he stated that he

did not remember whether Sulekha was examined by Dr.Ayishabi in

the morning; that he got information that Sulekha died when she was

taken to Dr.Dinesan's hospital by about 7 a.m. and that the Doctor

stated that Sulekha died just then. He stated that there would be

documents to show that Sulekha was examined by Dr.Dinesan.

DW1 stated that Sulekha was taken to the Medical College Hospital

as directed by Dr.Dinesan. According to DW1, only himself, his

seven year old daughter (PW3) and Sulekha knew what transpired in

the house on the date of occurrence. He stated that there is no

reason why PW3 should state a falsehood against him.            DW1

admitted that he poured a greenish coloured Ayurvedic medicine to

Crl. A. No.508 of 2010

                                  :: 13 ::

the mouth of Sulekha after pressing her cheeks. This was done

since she was reluctant to take medicine.   He stated that he does

not know whether Sulekha exhibited restlessness after taking the

medicine. Dr.Ayishabi, who examined Sulekha at about 7 a.m. on

17.1.2002, stated in evidence as DW2 that a few people came in a

jeep and requested to attend a pregnant lady who was ill, at her

house. DW2 accompanied them. DW2 saw a few men carrying a

cot on which a lady was lying covered with bed sheet.      On seeing

DW2 (Dr.Ayishabi), they kept the cot down in front of the doctor.

DW2 examined the lady and declared that she was dead.           The

father-in-law of the deceased asked DW2 whether the dead body

could be buried immediately, which occurred very strange to the

doctor.    She also noticed that only one young lady was found

weeping.



      20. The evidence of DW1 and DW2 is irreconcilable with each

other. If DW2 declared that Sulekha was dead, it cannot be believed

that the accused would have taken her to Dr.Dinesan's hospital and

thereafter, to the Medical College Hospital. It is clear from Ext.P2

inquest report that the inquest was conducted on 17.1.2002 at 2.45

Crl. A. No.508 of 2010

                                   :: 14 ::

p.m. If the evidence of DW1 is believed, the dead body of Sulekha

must have been at the Medical College Hospital, Kozhikode at that

time. DW1 admitted that he had administered medicine to Sulekha

on the fateful night and he applied pressure on her cheeks to do so.



      21. In the house of the deceased, the deceased, her minor

daughters and the accused were the only inmates. Sulekha went to

bed after taking food. She was found dead in the morning. It is

clear from the medical evidence that Sulekha died as a result of

consuming a poisonous substance.          There is no case for the

accused that Sulekha committed suicide or that the poisonous

substance was available with her.      On the other hand, there is

clinching evidence that the accused purchased furadan from the

shop of PW9 and he kept the same secretly. That he administered a

substance as medicine to Sulekha is not in dispute. He did not

disclose as to what that substance was.         The violet coloured

substance found in the stomach of the deceased was a poisonous

substance called furadan.     The evidence of PW3 is clear and

cogent. There is no reason why PW3, the daughter of the accused,

should tell a falsehood against him.

Crl. A. No.508 of 2010

                                    :: 15 ::




       22. The motive alleged by the prosecution is also established

by the evidence of PW4, the mother of the deceased, and PW13,

the sister of the deceased.



       23. The learned counsel for the appellant/accused submitted

that in the nature of the evidence available in the case, the accused

is entitled to the benefit of doubt. He also relied on the decisions of

the Supreme Court in Ramgopal v. State of Maharashtra (AIR

1972 SC 656), Jaipal v. State of Haryana (AIR 2002 SC 3447),

State of U.P. v. Charles Gurmukh Sobhraj (AIR 1996 SC 3473)

and Sharad Birdhichand Sarda v. State of Maharashtra (AIR

1984 SC 1622).         He submitted that the decision in Anant

Chintaman Lagu v. The State of Bombay (AIR 1960 SC 500) cited

by the learned Public Prosecutor was distinguished in Sharad

Birdhichand Sarda v. State of Maharashtra (AIR 1984 SC 1622).




       24. In Anant Chintaman Lagu v. The State of Bombay (AIR

1960 SC 500), the Supreme Court laid down the principles with

respect to proof as to murder by poison and held thus:

Crl. A. No.508 of 2010

                                  :: 16 ::

           "58. ...... In these cases, the Court referred to

     three propositions which the prosecution must establish

     in a case of poisoning: (a) that death took place by

     poisoning; (b) that the accused had the poison in his

     possession; and (c) that the accused had an opportunity

     to administer the poison to the deceased. ......


           59. ..... If the evidence in a particular case does

     not justify the inference that death is the result of

     poisoning because of the failure of the prosecution to

     prove the fact satisfactorily, either directly or by

     circumstantial evidence, then the benefit of the doubt

     will have to be given to the accused person. But if

     circumstantial evidence, in the absence of direct proof

     of the three elements, is so decisive that the Court can

     unhesitatingly hold that the death was a result of

     administration of poison (though not detected) and that

     the poison must have been administered by the

     accused person, then the conviction can be rested on it.

           ...... ........

           65. A case of murder by administration of poison

     is almost always one of secrecy. The poisoner seldom

     takes another into his confidence, and his preparations

     for the commission of the offence are also secret. He

     watches his opportunity and administers the poison in a

     manner calculated to avoid its detection. The greater his

Crl. A. No.508 of 2010

                                    :: 17 ::

      knowledge of poisons, the greater the secrecy, and

      consequently the greater the difficulty of proving the

      case against him. What assistance a man of science

      can give he gives; but it is too much to say that the guilt

      of the accused must, in all cases, be demonstrated by

      the isolation of the poison, though in a case where there

      is nothing else such a course would be incumbent upon

      the prosecution. ......."



      25. In Sharad Birdhichand Sarda v. State of Maharashtra

(AIR 1984 SC 1622), the Supreme Court considered the mode and

manner of proof of cases of murder by administration of poison and

held thus:

            "164. So far as this matter is concerned, in such

      cases the Court must carefully scan the evidence and

      determine the four important circumstances which alone

      can justify a conviction :

      (1) there is a clear motive for an accused to administer

      poison to the deceased.

      (2) that the deceased died of poison said to have been

      administered.

      (3) that the accused had the poison in his possession.

      (4) that he had an opportunity to administer the poison

      to the deceased."

Crl. A. No.508 of 2010

                                   :: 18 ::




On facts, it was held that two ingredients have been proved while

two other ingredients were not proved.       The decision in Anant

Chintaman Lagu v. The State of Bombay (AIR 1960 SC 500), was

referred to in para 170 of the judgment and it was distinguished on

facts.   We do not think that the Supreme Court in Sharad

Birdhichand Sarda v. State of Maharashtra (AIR 1984 SC 1622),

has laid down something different from what has been held in Anant

Chintaman Lagu v. The State of Bombay (AIR 1960 SC 500).



      26. In Ramgopal v. State of Maharashtra (AIR 1972 SC

656), the Supreme Court held thus:

             "15.  Further, this court, in Dharambir Singh v.

      State of Punjab, Cri App. No. 98 of 1958, D/- 4-11-1958

      (SC) dealing with a case of poisoning observed that

      where the evidence is circumstantial the fact that the

      accused had motive to cause death of the deceased

      though relevant, is not enough to dispense with the

      proof of certain facts which are essential to be proved in

      such cases. Three questions arise in such cases,

      namely (firstly), did the deceased die of the poison in

      question. (secondly), had the accused the poison in

Crl. A. No.508 of 2010

                                  :: 19 ::

      question in his possession? And (thirdly), had the

      accused an opportunity to administer the poison in

      question to the deceased? It is only when the motive is

      there and these facts are all proved that the court may

      be able to draw the inference, that the poison was

      administered by the accused to the deceased resulting

      in his death."



      27.   The learned counsel for the appellant relied on the

decision in Jaipal v. State of Haryana (AIR 2002 SC 3447) and

contended that when there is a conflict between the medical

evidence and chemical analysis report, conviction cannot be

sustained and the accused is entitled to the benefit of doubt. On

going through the judgment of the Supreme Court, we do not find

any such dictum having been laid down. In the present case, there

is no conflict between the medical evidence and the Chemical

Analysis Report. In Jaipal's case, the Supreme Court, after referring

to the four ingredients to constitute murder by poisoning stated in

Birdhichand Sarda v. State of Maharashtra (AIR 1984 SC 1622),

held thus:

Crl. A. No.508 of 2010

                                     :: 20 ::




           "28. We may hasten to add that the availability of

     the third piece of evidence as necessary to establish the

     case of murder by poisoning has been doubted in some

     of the later decisions. To wit, in Bhupinder Singh v. State

     of Punjab, AIR 1988 SC 1011 it has been held that there

     may be very many facts and circumstances proved

     against the accused which may call for tacit assumption

     of the factum of possession of poison with the accused,

     and therefore, the insistence on proof of presence of

     poison with the accused is neither desirable nor

     practicable. Anant Chintaman Lagu v. State of Bombay,

     AIR 1960 SC 500 is a case peculiar to its own facts and

     this Court by a majority of 2:1 held that even in the

     absence of a decisive finding as to the exact cause of

     death and on a finding that the death of the victim was

     the result of the administration of some unrecognised

     poison or drug which would act as a poison, a finding as

     to guilt can be arrived at based on circumstantial

     evidence. It was the case of extreme cunning and pre-

     meditation. The conduct of the accused after the death

     of his wife was unusual and abnormal and was so knit

     together as to make a network of circumstances pointing

     only to his guilt. Still the majority opinion observed:

Crl. A. No.508 of 2010

                                    :: 21 ::

              "Circumstantial evidence in this context means, a

       combination of facts creating a network through which

       there is no escape for the accused, because the facts

       taken as a whole do not admit of any inference but of his

       guilt."



       28. We do not think that the decision in State of U.P. v.

Charles Gurmukh Sobhraj (AIR 1996 SC 3473) would apply to the

facts of the present case.



       29. In the present case, all the four circumstances stated by

the Supreme Court in       Sharad Birdhichand Sarda v. State of

Maharashtra (AIR 1984 SC 1622) have been established. The trial

court arrived at the finding on these aspects after carefully analysing

the evidence on record. On re-appraisal of the evidence, we do not

find any reason to interfere with the said finding of fact.



       30. For the aforesaid reasons, we are of the view that the

conviction and sentence passed by the trial court do not justify any

interference in the Criminal Appeal. The Criminal Appeal lacks merit

and it is, accordingly, dismissed.

Crl. A. No.508 of 2010

                                     :: 22 ::




       31. Before parting of the case, we find it expedient to note

that in respect of a murder which took place on 17.1.2002, the High

Court could finally dispose of the Criminal Appeal only in 2015. The

only reason for this delay was the non-availability of the chemical

analysis report before the trial court. It is seen that the samples

were sent to the Regional Chemical Examiners Laboratory,

Kozhikode on 18.1.2002.          It is also seen that the chemical

examination report was prepared and signed in March, 2004. But,

when the case was disposed of by the trial court on 6.12.2004, the

chemical examiner's report was not made available before the

Sessions Court. This Court, while dealing with Crl.A.No.398 of 2005

called for the chemical analysis report and by that time, Ext.P15 was

made available. Even after remand, Ext.P16 was brought on record

much later. Ext.P16 is the document which would show the results

of chemical analysis with respect to internal organs of the deceased.

In this context, we would like to refer to the judgment of the Supreme

Court in Crl.A.No.259 of 2009 (Joshinder Yadav v. State of Bihar)

wherein he Supreme Court issued the following directions:

Crl. A. No.508 of 2010

                                     :: 23 ::

              "24. Having noticed that, in several cases where

       poisoning is suspected, the prosecuting agencies are

       not taking steps to obtain viscera report, we feel it

       necessary to issue certain directions in that behalf. We

       direct that in cases where poisoning is suspected,

       immediately after the post-mortem, the viscera should

       be sent to the FSL. The prosecuting agencies should

       ensure that the viscera is, in fact, sent to the FSL for

       examination and the FSL should ensure that the viscera

       is examined immediately and report is sent to the

       investigating agencies/courts post haste. If the viscera

       report is not received, the concerned court must ask for

       explanation and must summon the concerned officer of

       the FSL to give an explanation as to why the viscera

       report is not forwarded to the investigating agency/court.

       The criminal court must ensure that it is brought on

       record."



The Supreme Court also directed the Registry to send a copy of the

order to all the High Courts with a direction to circulate the same to

all the subordinate Criminal Courts, to the Director of Prosecution, to

the Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs, to the Secretary, Home

Department and to the Director, Forensic Science Laboratory within

the jurisdiction of the respective High Courts.

Crl. A. No.508 of 2010

                                 :: 24 ::




      The evidence of PW16 shows that there was pressure of work

in the Regional Chemical Examiners Laboratory and that the

Laboratory caters to the needs of five Districts. The accused relied

on Ext.D1 newspaper report. Ext.D1 report shows that the internal

organs of the victims in about 2000 cases were waiting examination

at the Chemical Examination Laboratory, Kozhikode.      Taking into

account the directions issued by the Supreme Court as quoted

above, we only add that the State Government shall do the needful

to avoid delay in the matter of examination of samples at the

Regional Chemical Examiners Laboratories and Forensic Science

Laboratories.




                                          (K.T.SANKARAN)
                                                  Judge




                                     (B.SUDHEENDRA KUMAR)
                                                  Judge

ahz/



