
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                PRESENT:

                THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE SUNIL THOMAS

      WEDNESDAY, THE 11TH DAY OF NOVEMBER 2015/20TH KARTHIKA, 1937

                       CRL.A.No. 1319 of 2014 ()
                       --------------------------


(AGAINST THE ORDER/JUDGMENT IN SC 292/2010 of ADDL. DIST. COURT
(ADHOC)-II, KALPETTA DATED 27-04-2012, CRIME NO. 777/2010 OF S.BATTERY
POLICE STATION , WAYANAD)

APPELLANT(S):
------------

       NABEESA,W/O.ITHALU,
       FEMALE C.NO.72,
       WOMEN'S PRISON, KANNUR.


       BY ADV. SRI.G.SANTHOSH KUMAR (P).

RESPONDENT(S):
-------------

       STATE OF KERALA


       R1  BY ADV. PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SMT.MG LISHA


       THIS CRIMINAL APPEAL  HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD  ON  11-11-2015,
THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY DELIVERED THE FOLLOWING:


                         SUNIL THOMAS, J.
                    - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
               Crl.Appeal. No. 1319 of 2014
                    - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
         Dated this the 11th day of November, 2015

                           JUDGMENT


     The second accused, a 51 year old woman, who stands

convicted in S.C.No.292/2010 of the Additional Sessions Judge

(Adhoc)II, Kalpetta along with the first accused,her son, for

offences punishable under Sections 304(B),306 read with

Section 34 IPC, is the appellant herein.

     2.   According to the prosecution, the first accused had

married one Sameena on 25/4/2010 according to the religious

rites and thereafter have been living together along with the

second accused in their house. It was alleged that at the time

of marriage, she was offered a dowry of Rupees one and half

lakhs and ten sovereigns. Alleging that only one lakh rupees

was paid and that there was a further payment of Rs.50,000/-

to be made by the in-laws, both the accused physically and

mentally harassed her at the matrimonial house.               It was

alleged that when the torture became unbearable, she left the

matrimonial home on 6/9/2010.                In the evening, the first

Crl.Appeal No.1319/2004         2


accused took her back to the matrimonial home and thereafter

on the next day, while both the accused were sitting in the house

of a neighbour, they found Sameena on flames rushing outside

from the house. By the time, flames were doused, she had

suffered extensive burn injuries. She was rushed to a nearby

hospital, from where she was referred to the Medical College

Hospital for expert management. Having sustained 99% burn

injuries, she succumbed on 8/9/2010. FI statement was lodged

on 8/9/2010 by PW1 which was registered by PW20. After the

investigation, final report was laid for offences punishable under

Sections 304(B) and 306 read with Section 34 IPC. Both the

accused denied the charges, pleaded innocence and faced the

trial.  On the side of the prosecution, PWs 1 to PW21 were

examined and Ext.P1 to P15 were marked.           Mos 1 to 5 were

identified. No defence evidence was adduced. Accused relied

exclusively on the cross examination of the prosecution

witnesses and Exts.D1 contradiction marked in the course of

cross examination.

      3.     The court below, on an appreciation of the entire

evidence, found both the accused guilty, convicted and

sentenced the first accused to undergo SI for seven years each

Crl.Appeal No.1319/2004        3


for offence punishable under Sections 304(B) and 306 read with

Section 34 IPC and to pay fine of Rs.25,000/- for offence

punishable under Section 306 IPC with default sentence of two

years simple imprisonment. The second accused was sentenced

to undergo SI for ten years for offence punishable under Section

304(B) IPC and to suffer SI for seven years          for offence

punishable under Section 306 IPC. She was further imposed

with a fine of Rs.50,000/- in default of which she was to undergo

Si for two more years for offence under Section 306 IPC.

      4.     Aggrieved by the above conviction and sentence, the

second accused alone has preferred this appeal from jail. Since

she is not represented by a counsel of her own, Adv.Santhosh

Kumar G. was appointed as the counsel on State brief. Learned

counsel marshelled all available points in favour of the accused

and effectively defended the appellant. Heard the learned Public

Prosecutor Smt. M.G.Lisha also. Examined the records.

      5.     The marriage between the first accused and the

deceased Sameena is not in dispute.        This is proved by the

evidence of PW9, who was the Secretary of the concerned

Mahal.     He marked Ext.P4, extract of the marriage register.

Ext.P5 is the marriage certificate. PW10 was the person, who

Crl.Appeal No.1319/2004       4


solemnised the marriage. The evidence of both the witnesses

indicate that the accused married Sameena on 25/4/2010 as per

the religious rites.

      6.     Ext.P1 FI statement was laid by PW1 on 8/9/2010,

whereupon PW20 registered Ext.P20 FIR. The eye witnesses

have tendered evidence asserting that on 7/9/2010, an incident

occurred in which Sameena sustained severe burn injuries. The

version of PW1 as well as his wife PW15 indicates that while

both the accused were at their home, they heard a loud noise

and saw one person on flames rushing towards court yard.

Flames were doused and they found that it was Sameena. She

was rushed to the hospital. The fact that she sustained burn

injuries on the relevant day is spoken by other witnesses who

had either taken her to the hospital or seen at the hospital. It is

not seriously disputed that Sameena has sustained severe burn

injuries on 7/9/2010. Ext.P2 is the inquest report which also

shows that said Sameena died of burn injuries. PW14 is the

Professor of Forensic Science and the police Surgeon attached to

the Medical College Hospital. He conducted autopsy on the body

of Sameena and prepared Ext.P7 postmortem report. He had

referred to severe burn injuries.   According to him, the death

Crl.Appeal No.1319/2004          5


was due to burn injuries and its inhalation effects. Hence, the

entire materials on record prove beyond any doubt that Sameena

died of burn injuries which was sustained on her body on

7/9/2010 as alleged by the prosecution.

      7.     The specific allegation of the prosecution is that the

accused have harassed Sameena during her life time, in

furtherance of their demand for more dowry. The allegation was

that the entire dowry, as agreed upon, was not paid and a sum of

Rs.50,000/- remained to be paid. Demanding this, it is alleged

that both the accused harassed her, physically and mentally.

      8.     The above specific allegation of the prosecution is

sought to be established through the various witnesses. The

crucial witnesses, who were relied on by the prosecution to

establish the above allegation, were PW2, PW3, PW4, PW6,PW8,

PW11 and PW15. Among them PW1 and PW15 are the husband

and wife who were the immediate neighbours of the accused. It

is admitted by both of them that the incident occurred while both

the accused were at their residence. However,PW1 remained

hostile and was cross examined in detail by the prosecution.

PW1 had stated that on the relevant day, he and his wife were

talking to the accused at their house. At that time, the incident

Crl.Appeal No.1319/2004         6


happened. He deposed that the quarrel and bickering in the

house of the accused was stated to be the cause for the incident.

Beyond this, PW1 did not support the prosecution allegation in

any manner.       He denied the allegations of physical and mental

harassment and denied his statement given to the police as well

as the statement given by him under Section 164 Cr.P.C.

Though he admitted his signature in FIS, he stated that he had

not gone to the police station and the contents of Ext.P1 were

not read over to him. PW3 is the brother of deceased Sameena.

He deposed that sister used to complain about the accused

harassing her, for not bringing the balance amount of

Rs.50,000/-. She was not given the food. On 6/9/2010 she called

PW3 on telephone and informed about the harassment. PW3

further stated that, the victim had stated that if the harassment

continued, she will have to commit suicide. Thereupon, PW3 is

stated to have consoled her and called the first accused. The first

accused replied that the second accused was responsible for the

harassment and assured not to repeat it. PW3 further stated

that on the next day Sameena sustained burn injuries and was

taken to the Medical College Hospital, Kozhikode. He had gone

there and met Sameena. She stated that they should not have

Crl.Appeal No.1319/2004       7


sent her to that house, since they were not giving her peace of

mind. He deposed that the next day she died and death was due

to dowry harassment.

      9.     PW4 was a neighbour of the accused. He stated that

he had participated in the marriage. The in-laws had demanded a

sum of Rs.1,50,000/- and ten sovereigns. She stated that she

knew about the harassment. She deposed that the accused was

not given food and was not even given bucket for carrying water

for bathing. On the previous day, she had come to the house of

PW4 stayed there and thereafter went to her own house. The

first accused brought her back.      At 11.a.m., she heard the

accused quarreling with Sameena. Thereafter, they saw the first

and the second accused going to the house of PW1. After some

time, she heard the sound and found a body in flames. It was

doused with water and the injured was taken to the hospital.

The first and the second accused were standing near the house

at the time of the incident. She reiterated that Sameena was

harassed for not bringing Rs.50,000/- and hence, she set herself

on fire. In the cross examination she asserted that she knew

about the harassment.

      10. PW6 was the aunt of the deceased. She deposed that

Crl.Appeal No.1319/2004       8


Sameena was offered one and half lakhs of rupees and ten

sovereigns of gold. However, the family could not give the whole

amount. On the previous day of the incident, she came to the

house of PW6 and stated that she cannot live in the house of the

in-laws and that she had been thrown out. She has stated that

she was sent out for not bringing the balance amount of

Rs.50,000/-. Sameena wanted to stay there during night. But

the first accused came there, took her with an assurance not to

repeat the incident.    Subsequently, she got information that

Sameena was taken to the hospital and later died in the hospital.

She stated that injured had told her that the harassment had

become unbearable and hence she set herself on fire.         She

reiterated that she was harassed for not bringing Rs.50,000/-.

      11. PW7 was the auto rickshaw driver who took the

injured to the hospital. PW6 had accompanied her. PW8 was a

relative of the deceased who deposed that he had gone to the

Medical College Hospital, met Sameena and she revealed that

she did it herself, since the harassment became unbearable.

PW11 is the brother of Sameena who deposed that the accused

had demanded one and half Lakhs of rupees and ten sovereigns.

He could pay only Rs.One Lakh and ten sovereigns. Sameena

Crl.Appeal No.1319/2004        9


used to complain that the accused had harassed her for the

balance amount. He has further stated that he had gone to the

Medical College Hospital and met her. At that time, Sameena

told that she did it since the harassment became unbearable.

PW15 was the wife of PW1. She stated that the accused used to

quarrel with Sameena for not bringing Rs.50,000/-. Sameena

used to take bucket from her house for bathing. On the previous

day, she had come to her house and revealed about the

harassment. On the day of the incident, she saw her in flames,

which was doused. When asked about the reason for such an

act, Sameena is stated to have revealed that she did it due to the

problems that existed at the house. She further added that if she

had not done that, the accused would have done it.

      12. The defence set up by the accused was that they are

totally innocent and had not harassed her. It was contended that

she had a growth in her ovaries which was treated by the first

accused and she might have committed suicide because of that

desperation. It is true that the post mortem report revealed the

existence of a cyst. However, there is absolutely nothing to show

that Sameena was desperate due to that medical reason.

      13. The prosecution heavily relied on the oral testimony of

Crl.Appeal No.1319/2004         10


the above witnesses to corroborate the dying declaration given

by Sameena in the hospital. PW13 was the Judicial First Class

Magistrate who recorded Ext.P6 dying declaration on 7/9/2010

at 4.50p.m. In Ext.P6, the doctor had certified about her ability

to give statement. He had certified that patient was conscious

and had sound mind. PW13 had deposed that he was satisfied

that Sameena was conscious and was of sound mind. Doctor had

certified in Ext.P6 that the patient, though had sustained 99%

burns, was oriented. She had given a detailed dying declaration.

She stated that she did it herself at the outside of the house of

her husband. She poured kerosene on her and lighted herself.

The mother-in-law had been harassing her, which became

unbearable. She used to attempt to beat her, always pick up

quarrel and even on the day of the incident there was a quarrel

at about 10 a.m. She further stated that at that time, the first and

the second accused had gone to the home of neighbour. The

second accused had threatened to finish her, if she attempted to

shift the house along with the first accused.

      14. The evidence on record confirm that the incident

happened on 7/9/2010 and Sameena died on 8/9/2010. FIS was

laid on 8/9/2010. It gives the details of the incident and about the

Crl.Appeal No.1319/2004         11


specific allegation that she committed suicide due to the alleged

harassment. The prosecution heavily relied on the oral testimony

of PWs.3, 4, 6, 8, 11 & 15 to establish the case. Though PW1

turned hostile, he had admitted the laying of FIS statement and

vaguely indicated that the cause for death was family bickering.

Version of the witnesses PW3, 4, 6, 8, 11 and 15 are consistent

and they specifically refer to the various instances of

harassment.       They also directly attributed to the unbearable

instances of harassment as the cause for committing suicide.

There is absolutely no major contradiction in the versions spoken

by them. It is true that few of the witnesses have given minor

embellished version and some parts of the version were hearsay,

but on the substratum of the case to the extent of implicating the

appellant, their version were consistent. The contradiction that

have been brought out were only minor and not material.

However, all the witnesses consistently deposed out that the

cause of the incident was harassment meted out by the accused,

specifically the second accused.

      15. Ext.P6 dying declaration indicates that she has given

consistent, cogent and categoric version in clear terms

incriminating the second accused. She had even stated with

Crl.Appeal No.1319/2004         12


reference to the exact time when the accused had gone to the

neighbour's house, the exact place where she committed act and

the details of the incident. It clearly shows that she was capable

of tendering dying declaration and which was beyond any

shadow of doubt.

      16. The evidences of the witnesses indicate that they got

the information either directly from Sameena herself or had

knowledge regarding certain instances. In spite of lengthy cross

examination of the witnesses, no doubtful circumstances were

brought out.       Further Ext.P6 dying declaration is categoric,

clear and there is nothing to doubt its veracity to the extent of

incriminating the second accused in the allegation. The fact that,

Sameena had left the home on one occasion due to unbearable

nature of harassment, is spoken to by PWs 3,4 and 6. The dying

declaration further indicates that even on the date of incident,

there was a quarrel with the second accused. PWs 3, 6, 8, 11 and

15 have deposed that they have met the injured in the hospital

and had individually received information from her that she

committed the above act due to the mental and physical

harassment.       In the absence of anything to show that the

witnesses had no specific reason to tell falsehood against the

Crl.Appeal No.1319/2004        13


accused, their version incriminating appellant herein is only to

be relied. The evidence on record clearly shows that the

prosecution has succeeded in proving that the conduct of the

second accused amounted to an offence punishable under

Section 304(B). I find no reason to take a different view and

there is no merit in the appeal.

      17. The learned counsel for the appellant contended that

appellant is an old lady and a lenient view is liable to be taken.

It is pertinent to note that though she is old, all the witnesses

have uniformly stated that she is responsible for the whole

incident. The specific allegations of the witnesses directly point

to her complicity. Even the injured in her dying declaration has

specifically spoken about the second accused alone.          It is

pertinent to note that the victim was around 20years at the time

of her death. She has lived with her husband only for just four

months. The greed of the second accused for money had led to

the death of her daughter-in-law and has resulted in spoiling the

life of her son, who is also undergoing imprisonment. In the

above circumstances, the conviction imposed on him should have

an element of detterance      also.    However, the substantive

sentence of ten years RI imposed on her coupled with a fine of

Crl.Appeal No.1319/2004        14


Rs.50,000/- with a default sentence of two years for offence

punishable under Section 304(B) IPC and seven years imposed

for offence proved under Section 306 IPC, appear to be slightly

on the higher side. Considering her age, a substantive sentence

of 8 years for offence punishable under Section 304(B) of the IPC

while retaining all other sentences would serve the interest of

justice.

             In the result, the appeal is allowed in part.   The

substantive sentence for offence punishable under Section

304(B) of the IPC is reduced to 8 years. All other sentences are

confirmed.



                                      Sd/-

                                SUNIL THOMAS
                                     Judge
dpk

                                 /true copy/   PS to Judge.



