
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                   PRESENT:

                          THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE K.RAMAKRISHNAN

                 WEDNESDAY, THE 1ST DAY OF APRIL 2015/11TH CHAITHRA, 1937

                                           RPFC.No. 67 of 2010 ( )
                                          -------------------------------
              AGAINST THE ORDER IN MC 33/2007 OF FAMILY COURT, ALAPPUZHA,
                                              DATED 10-06-2009.

REVISION PETITIONER(S):
-------------------------------------

            K.P. SIDHARTHAN, SON OF PADMANABHAN,
            KOCHUVELI VEEDU, VARANADU P.O., CHERTHALA,
            ALAPPUZHA DIST.

            BY ADVS.SRI.P.SANTHOSH KUMAR (TR)
                          SRI.T.P.SAJAN
                          SRI.L.ALOYSIUS THOMAS


RESPONDENT(S):
------------------------


        1. VIJITHA, D/o.C.V. SUSEELAN,
            VASUDEVA SADANAM, PERISSERY MURI, PULIYOOR VILLAGE.

        2. ATHULYA .S, AGED 3 YEARS,
            D/o. VIJITHA, REP. BY HER MOTHER VIJITHA,
            VASUDEVA SADANAM, PERISSERY MURI,
            PULIYOOR VILLAGE.

            R1 & R2 BY ADVS. SRI.V.MANOJ KUMAR
                                     SRI. IYPE JOSEPH

              THIS REV.PETITION (FAMILY COURT) HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD     ON
01-04-2015, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE FOLLOWING:


ss


                            K. RAMAKRISHNAN, J.
        . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
                            R.P.(F.C.) No.67 of 2010
         . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
                  Dated this the 1st day of April, 2015


                                    O R D E R



          Counter petitioner in M.C.33/2007 on the file of

the Family Court, Alappuzha, is the revision petitioner

herein. The first respondent herein is the wife of the

revision petitioner and the 2nd respondent is the daughter

born to them in the wedlock. The marriage between the

revision petitioner and first respondent is the second

marriage as far as both parties are concerned. At the time

of marriage, she was given 42 sovereigns of gold

ornaments. He demanded more dowry and started ill-

treating her and demanding money for the purpose of

starting a photo studio. When she failed to meet the

unlawful demand, he started treating her cruelly and she

was taken to her house for delivery and thereafter second

respondent was born and he did not come and take the

R.P.(F.C.) No.67 of 2010
                                 2

respondents back and no maintenance was given thereafter.

She has no income to maintain herself and the child. She

requires 5,000/- as monthly maintenance for herself and

the child. He is a photographer by profession and getting

good income and capable of providing maintenance and he

had neglected to maintain the respondents. So the

petitioners have no other remedy, except to approach the

court, seeking maintenance of 5,000/- for both the

respondents under Section 125 of the Code of Criminal

Procedure.

              2.    Revision petitioner appeared and  filed

counter admitting the marriage and paternity of the second

respondent. According to him, she had left the house

voluntarily and at the time of marriage, the father of the

first respondent had promised to put up a photo studio for

him in Alappuzha, but later he resiled from that promise.

He was residing in their house and he was treated cruelly

and sent out of the house. He had taken a rented house and

resided there for eight months along with the first

R.P.(F.C.) No.67 of 2010
                                  3

respondent and at that time she became pregnant and she

was taken to her house for delivery and he had met the

delivery expenses and also provided maintenance to the

child and the first respondent. Since the respondents did

not come, petitions have been filed before the SNDP Sakha

and though they intervened, the matter could not be settled.

The Sakha office bearers have directed the first petitioner

to go and live with the revision petitioner, but she did not

prepare for the same. She is doing embroidery work and

getting good income. He is an asthma patient, unable to do

any work and the respondents are not entitled to get any

maintenance. So he prayed for dismissal of the application.

              3.    First respondent was examined as PW1 and

no documents were marked on her side. Revision petitioner

was examined as CPW1 and one witness was examined as

CPW2 and Exts. P1 to P4 and P5 series were marked on his

side. After considering the evidence on record, the Family

Court found that, the revision petitioner had neglected to

maintain respondents          and  he  is  capable  of being

R.P.(F.C.) No.67 of 2010
                                 4

maintenance and the respondents are not having any

income and directed the revision petitioner to pay

maintenance at the rate of 500/- to the first petitioner and

1,000/- to the second petitioner. The maintenance was

directed to be paid from the date of petition. Dissatisfied

with the same, the present revision has been filed.

              4.    Heard and perused the records.

              5.    The case of the respondents in the petition

was that, after delivery he had not taken her back and no

maintenance was provided. According to the revision

petitioner, it was due to the adamant attitude of the first

respondent that she did not join with him, though he is

prepared to take them back. The marriage and birth of the

second respondent in the wedlock was not disputed. it is

also an admitted fact that, it is the second marriage for both

the parties. Even in the counter statement, the allegation

was that, at the time of marriage, the first respondent's

father had agreed to put up a photo studio and he had

resiled from that promise. Further Exts.B2, B3 and B4

R.P.(F.C.) No.67 of 2010
                               5

produced on the side of the counter petitioner also will go

to show that, the dispute was regarding non-fulfillment of

the promise by the petitioner's father to put up a photo

studio for the revision petitioner and also taking away

certain gold ornaments given to PW1 at the time of

marriage by her father. Further it is seen from the

observation in Ext.P4 that, since the dispute between the

parties could not be settled amicably, they have closed the

petition. A reading of that observation will go to show that,

the main dispute was regarding not providing a photo

studio to the revision petitioner by the father of the first

respondent as promised at the time of marriage and also

non-return of the gold ornaments alleged to have been

taken by the father of the first respondent, which was given

to her at the time of marriage. Further the evidence of PW1

will go to show that, on account of not putting up the photo

studio as promised by her father, she was ill-treated by the

revision petitioner and that was the reason why she was not

interested in going back and living with the revision

R.P.(F.C.) No.67 of 2010
                               6

petitioner. Over all circumstances and also the evidence will

go to show that, the dispute between them arose when the

father of the first respondent alleged to have resiled from

the promise said to have been made by him for putting up a

photo studio for the revision petitioner. So under the

circumstances, the court below was perfectly justified in

coming to the conclusion that the first respondent was

residing separately from the revision petitioner. Further it

is brought out in the evidence of CPW1 that, after delivery

he had not provided any maintenance and he was not aware

of the prospects of the second respondent as well. That

shows that, he had neglected to maintain them as

contended by the respondents in their petition.

              6.    It is an admitted fact that he is a

photographer by profession. It is true that he had produced

Ext.P5 series medical prescriptions to show that he is

undergoing treatment for some disease, but there is no

evidence adduced on his side to show that, he is totally

incapacitated from doing any work. Further the fact that, if

R.P.(F.C.) No.67 of 2010
                               7

the photo studio is put up, he is able to work in spite of his

ailments, namely asthma, shows that he can carry on his

profession as a photographer and earn a reasonable income

and provide maintenance to the respondents. So under the

circumstances, courts below were perfectly justified in

coming to the conclusion that, he is capable of maintaining

the respondents and in spite of that fact, he had neglected

to maintain them and he is liable to pay maintenance to the

respondents.

              7.    Though a contention was raised that, the

first respondent is conducting a beauty parlour, no

document has been produced to prove this fact. Merely

because she got some temporary employment is not a

ground to deny maintenance to her, as she will have to do

some work and maintain herself, that will not be a ground

for denying maintenance to them which the revision

petitioner is liable to pay maintenance as per law. So the

court below was perfectly justified in coming to the

conclusion that the first respondent is without any means to

R.P.(F.C.) No.67 of 2010
                                  8

maintain herself and the second respondent, who is aged

51/2 years at that time. So under the circumstances, court

below was perfectly justified in coming to the conclusion

that, respondents are entitled to get maintenance from the

revision petitioner. Considering the status of the parties,

the amount of 500/- as monthly maintenance to the first

respondent and 1,000/- as maintenance to the second

respondent fixed by the court below from the date of

petition cannot be set to be excessive, warranting

interference at the hands of this court. So the revision lacks

merits and the same is liable to be dismissed.

              In the result, the revision petition is dismissed.

Office is directed to communicate this order to the

concerned court, immediately.




                                                   Sd/-
                                         K. Ramakrishnan, Judge

                            // True Copy //

                                             P.A. to Judge

ss



