
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                      PRESENT:

                       THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE K.RAMAKRISHNAN

                MONDAY,THE 2ND DAY OF MARCH 2015/11TH PHALGUNA, 1936

                                       Crl.Rev.Pet.No. 1247 of 2004 (A)
                                             ---------------------------------


     AGAINST THE JUDGMENT IN CRL.A.NO.293/2002 of V ADDL.SESSIONS COURT,
                                      ERNAKULAM DATED 27-02-2004

     AGAINST THE JUDGMENT IN C.C.NO.798/1998 of CHIEF JUDICIAL MAGISTRATE
                                 COURT, ERNAKULAM DATED 12-04-2002


REVISION PETITIONER(S)/APPELLANT/ACCUSED:
------------------------------------------------------------------------

            RAVEENDRAN, S/O.SANKARAN,
            KARUKAPPILLY VEETTIL, SOUTHERN SIDE OF T.D. ROAD,
            GOPALAPRABHU ROAD, ERNAKULAM.

            BY ADVS.SRI.S.RAJEEV
                          SRI.T.RAVIKUMAR(B/O)

RESPONDENT(S)/COMPLAINANT:
------------------------------------------------

            STATE OF KERALA, REPRESENTED BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR,
            HIGH COURT OF KERALA.

            BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SMT.V.H.JASMINE.

            THIS CRIMINAL REVISION PETITION HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD ON 02-
03-2015, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE FOLLOWING:




Bb


                    K. Ramakrishnan, J.
    ==============================
                 Crl.R.P.No.1247 of 2004
    ==============================
        Dated this, the 02nd day of March, 2015.


                          O R D E R



      Accused in C.C.No.798/1998 on the file of the Chief

Judicial Magistrate Court, Ernakulam is the revision petitioner

herein.  He was charge sheeted by the Circle Inspector of

Police,  Central    police   station,  Ernakulam    in   Crime

No.749/1997 of that police station under Section 498A of the

Indian Penal Code.

      2.   The case of the prosecution in nutshell was that the

revision petitioner married the de facto complainant on 09.02.

1981 and thereafter, they were living together as husband and

wife and while they were living together, he used to

manhandle her, treat her cruelly and also harassed her with a

view to coerce her father to meet his unlawful demands for

transfer of five cents of land. On 20.12.1997 at about 8.45

p.m., he assaulted her with hands and kicked her and beat her

with a wooden roller used for making chappathies and

thereby, he had committed the offence punishable under

Section 498A of Indian Penal Code. After investigation, final

Crl.R.P.No.1247 of 2004    :  2 :

report was filed and the case was taken on file as

C.C.No.798/1998 under Section 498A of Indian Penal Code.

       3.    When the revision petitioner appeared before the

court below, after hearing both sides, charge under Section

498A of Indian Penal Code was framed and the same was read

over and explained to him and he pleaded not guilty. In order

to prove the case of the prosecution, PWs 1 to 10 were

examined and Exts.P1 to P7 were marked on their side. After

closure of the prosecution evidence, the revision petitioner was

questioned under Section 313 of Code of Criminal Procedure

and he denied all the incriminating circumstances brought

against him in the prosecution evidence. He had further stated

that he had not committed any offence and in fact, both he

and PW1 were living happily and when PW1's brother had

some illicit connection with a Harijan girl and on account of

that illegal relationship, when she became pregnant, he

interfered and insisted for their marriage and on account of

that, the marriage was conducted and due to that, there was

some enmity between PW1, himself and her family members

which prompted her to file a false case against him at the

instigation of her family members.     The revision petitioner

Crl.R.P.No.1247 of 2004      :  3 :

himself was examined as DW1 and Exts.D1 to D4 were marked

on his side.

       4.    After considering the evidence on record, the court

below found the revision petitioner guilty under Section 498A

of Indian Penal Code and convicted him thereunder and

sentenced him to undergo rigorous imprisonment for one year

and also to pay a fine of Rs.50,000/- in default to undergo

simple imprisonment for three months more and directed to

pay Rs.45,000/- to PW1 as compensation out of the fine

amount under Section 357(1)(b) of Code of Criminal

Procedure.         Aggrieved by the same, he filed Crl.Appeal

No.293/2002 before the Sessions Court, Ernakulam which was

made over to Vth Additional Sessions Court, Ernakulam and the

learned Additional Sessions Judge dismissed the appeal

confirming the order of conviction and sentence passed by the

court below. Aggrieved by the same, the present revision has

been filed by the revision petitioner - accused before the court

below.

       5.    Heard the Counsel for the revision petitioner and

the Public Prosecutor.

       6.    The Counsel for the revision petitioner submitted

Crl.R.P.No.1247 of 2004      : 4 :

that there was a delay of nearly five days in lodging the First

Information Report and there is no explanation forthcoming for

the delay. Further, in Ext.P1, there is no allegation of any

demand for dowry and that was subsequently incorporated by

way of additional statement said to have been given by PW1.

Further, there is no documents produced to prove the reason

for PW1 to go to City Hospital from General Hospital and no

document has been produced to prove the treatment given

there as it is seen from Ext.P1 that the statement was

recorded from City Hospital, not from General Hospital where

she was said to have been treated first. The evidence of PWs

1, 2 and 5 and 6 are contradictory to each other and as such,

the ingredients of the offence under Section 498A has not been

made out. He had relied on the decisions reported in Thulia

Kali v. State of T.N. [1972 KHC 592], Dilawar Singh v.

State of Delhi [(2007) 12 Supreme Court Cases 641],

Bhajan Singh alias Harbhajan Singh & Ors. v. State of

Haryana and connected cases [AIR 2011 SUPREME

COURT 2552] and Peethambaran v. State of Kerala

[1998 (1) KLT 602] in support of his case.

       7.    The     learned Public Prosecutor supported   the

Crl.R.P.No.1247 of 2004     :  5 :

concurrent findings of the court below on this aspect.

       8.    The case of the prosecution as emerged from the

prosecution witnesses was as follows:

       The revision petitioner married the de facto complainant

on 09.02.1981 and thereafter, they were living together as

husband and wife. The case of the prosecution was that, at

the time of marriage, Rs.3,001/- cash and three and half

sovereigns of gold ornaments were given and even from the

date of marriage, there was ill treatment and that continued

and even during the subsistence of marriage, she had to leave

the house on several occasions on account of the same and on

20.12.1997 while she was in the house at about 8.45 p.m., the

revision petitioner came drunk and beat her and kicked her

and then, hit her with Mo1 Chappathi stick. On the next day,

PW4 who is the cousin of the revision petitioner came there

and on seeing the pitiable condition of PW1, informed PW2 and

he came there and thereafter, she was taken to hospital from

where she was seen by PW3 who issued Ext.P2 wound

certificate.    Thereafter, she went to City Hospital and on

getting intimation from there, PW7 - the Sub Inspector of

police attached to City police station, Kochi went to hospital

Crl.R.P.No.1247 of 2004     :  6 :

and recorded Ext.P1 statement of PW1 and came back to

police station and registered Ext.P4 First Information Report as

Crime No.749/1997 of that police station under Section 498A

of Indian Penal Code against the revision petitioner.       The

investigation in this case was conducted by PW9 - the Circle

Inspector of Police. He went to the place of occurrence and

prepared Ext.P7 scene mahazar in the presence of PW10 and

another and seized MO1 Chappathi stick. He seized Ext.P3 and

P6 consent deeds produced by PW5 as per Ext.P5 mahazar.

He questioned the witnesses and recorded their statements.

He completed the investigation and submitted final report

against the revision petitioner.

       9.    PW1 is the de facto complainant and the victim in

this case. She had categorically stated that the marriage was

solemnized on 09.02.1981 and thereafter, they were living

together for some time.        Even during that time, the ill

treatment started. But, she did not complained much about

the same and even during that time, she had left the house

several times and due to mediation, she had come back and

started living with him.      Even though the ill treatment

continued, she had tolerated the same. She had further stated

Crl.R.P.No.1247 of 2004    :  7 :

on 20.12.1997 at about 8.45 p.m., the revision petitioner

came fully drunk and abused her and then, started beating her

and kicked her and then, hit with MO1 Chappathi stick. She

became weak on account of the assault.         On the next day

morning, PW4 - the cousin of the revision petitioner came and

on seeing her pitiable condition, he informed PW2 - her brother

who came and took her to hospital. She had identified MO1 as

the weapon used for attacking her and proved Ext.P1

statement given by her. In the cross examination, she had

stated that, even on earlier occasions, complaints were filed

before the police and from the police station, it was settled and

she had also stated that he had demanded property from the

father. It is true that there was no allegation in Ext.P1 that

the ill treatment was on account on demanding property and

she had answered this on the suggestive question given at the

time of chief examination. Further, she had also stated that

though he had beaten her, she had no complaint against him

and she does not want to punish him.            That shows the

magnanimity of the woman though she had suffered the

injuries at his hands. That doesn't mean that she is telling lie

against her husband.

Crl.R.P.No.1247 of 2004           :  8 :

       10. PW2 had stated that, PW2 had only hearsay

knowledge about the incident. He had stated that he came to

the house of the revision petitioner on the next day of the

incident on getting intimation from PW4 - the cousin of the

revision petitioner and took her to hospital on seeing her

pitiable condition. He had stated that the ill treatment was

there from the beginning            and even when she was in the

parental house, she was beaten by the revision petitioner.

       11. PW3 is the Doctor who treated PW1 and issued

Ext.P2 wound certificate.           In Ext.P2 wound certificate, the

cause of injury was shown as;

            "n!>LvV qv}NN" RRW RWL:OU \UL>] ksW RWL:OU
     o!G]\f]jL$    at 8 p.m. on 20/12/97;n!>Lv]R# v}Y]$ Rv\V "


It is also noted that she was brought to the hospital on

21.12.1997 at 2.00 p.m., and was brought by Radhakrishnan

who is none other than PW2 examined before this court. It is

true that there is interlineation regarding introducing the

weapon as;

      "\UL>] ksW RWL:OU, then, n!>Lv]R# v}Y]$ Rv\V"

But, it may be mentioned here that when PW3 was examined,

no questions were put to her regarding this aspect. The only

Crl.R.P.No.1247 of 2004      : 9 :

suggestion given to him was that the injury could be self

inflicted. Further, she had also stated that she would have

been beaten with less force with MO1. So, it cannot be said

that unless the genuineness of this document was questioned

when PW3 was examined, there is no meaning in saying that it

was a subsequent interlineation made by the Doctor so as to

help the prosecution.     Further, when the revision petitioner

was examined under Section 313 of Code of Criminal

Procedure, he had no explanation as to how these injuries

were caused as well and he had pretended ignorance about the

same as well. So, the fact that she sustained injuries on the

night on account of the beating by the revision petitioner is

evident and proved by the prosecution.

       12. It is true PW5 had stated that the revision petitioner

demanded five cents and he had said that he will not be able

to give the same. But, he had no case that it was on account

of that the ill treatment started. It is true that there is some

delay in filing the First Information Report. Further, she was

taken to hospital on the next day of the incident and Ext.P2

wound certificate was prepared. There is a duty cast on the

Doctor to inform the police. Further, PW7 - the person who

Crl.R.P.No.1247 of 2004    : 10 :

recorded Ext.P1 had stated that on getting intimation from the

City Hospital, he went there. Once a wound certificate has

already been prepared, there is no necessity to prepare

another wound certificate by the subsequent hospital from

where the further treatment was given. Merely because the

treatment documents from the subsequent hospital were not

produced is not a ground to disbelieve the       case of PW1

regarding the nature of injuries sustained by her which has

already been recorded in Ext.P2 wound certificate.         The

explanation to Section 498A of Indian Penal Code not only

deals with cruelty for demanding more dowry or valuable

property, but also, conduct of the accused in beating and

causing injury cruelly both mental and physical which is likely

to drive the victim to commit suicide also. In this case, the

evidence will go to show that she had stated that she does not

want to live with revision petitioner on account of the ill

treatment and she was afraid of the same.

       13. There is no dispute regarding the propositions laid

down in the decisions reported in Peethambaran v. State of

Kerala [1998 (1) KLT 602],            Bhajan Singh alias

Harbhajan Singh & Ors. v. State of Haryana and

Crl.R.P.No.1247 of 2004      :   11 :

connected cases [AIR 2011 SUPREME COURT 2552],

Dilawar Singh v. State of Delhi [(2007) 12 Supreme

Court Cases 641] and Thulia Kali v. State of T.N. [1972

KHC 592]. But, in matrimonial cases, the delay cannot be

said to be fatal always unless the court is satisfied that it was

intended to harass the accused.          In matrimonial cases,

normally people will not rush to the court or police immediately

after the incident and they will wait for some time to patch up

the dispute as well. In this case, in Ext.P1, it was mentioned

that, even after the incident, the revision petitioner came and

threatened if any case is given, they will have to face the

consequences, that prompted them to file the complaint. So,

that shows that the delay has been explained and it cannot be

said that delay is fatal in this case.

       14. It is true that Ext.P6 shows that the stamp paper

was purchased on 10.02.1981. But, the agreement was said

to have been executed with date 02.02.1981 and this

document was not proved through any witnesses and it was

marked only through the investigating officer.        So, much

reliance cannot be made on that document to prove that there

was demand even prior to the marriage as observed by the

Crl.R.P.No.1247 of 2004     :  12 :

courts below in their judgments.

       15. There is no dispute regarding the proposition laid

down in the decision reported in State of Andhra Pradesh v.

M.Madhusudhan Rao [(2008) 15 Supreme Court Cases

582] wherein the Hon'ble Supreme Court has held that, for

the purpose of considering the question of cruelty under this

Section, court need only consider the cruelty defined under the

explanation under Section 498A and the scope cannot be

widened.      There are two circumstances mentioned in the

Section and if those circumstances were not proved, the

accused is entitled to get the benefit.

       16. Further, in the decision reported in Harbans Singh

v. State of Punjab [1984 Supreme Court Cases (Cri)

486], the Hon'ble Supreme Court has held that when there is

doubt regarding the prosecution case and if there are two

views possible and that benefit must be given to the accused.

In this case, though the evidence adduced on the side of the

prosecution is not supportive of the fact that the ill treatment

was made on account of demand for dowry, but, the evidence

of PW1 and the manner in which she had given evidence will

go to show that she was subjected to cruelty and even caused

Crl.R.P.No.1247 of 2004     :  13 :

bodily harm continuously even questioning her chastity. The

fact that she had shown the magnanimity of deposing before

the court that she did not want to see her husband punished,

but, at the same time, she was sticking on to the manner in

which the cruelty was attributed to her in the hands of the

revision petitioner.     So, under the circumstances, the

submissions made by the Counsel for the revision petitioner

that the evidence of PW1 cannot be believed has no force. The

way in which she had given evidence shows that she was

tolerating these acts of the revision petitioner so as to keep up

with the matrimonial home as far as possible happy and the

way in which she gave evidence coupled with Ext.P2 wound

certificate shows that she was beaten and caused injuries as

well by the revision petitioner. So, under the circumstances,

this will come under the first limb of the explanation to Section

498A for the purpose of convicting the revision petitioner for

the offence under Section 498A and this court do not find any

reason to interfere with the concurrent finding of the court

below on this aspect and the conviction entered by the court

below is proper and just and does not call for interference at

the hands of this court.

Crl.R.P.No.1247 of 2004    :  14 :

       17. As regards the sentence is concerned, the court

below had sentenced him to undergo rigorous imprisonment

for one year and also to pay a fine of Rs.50,000/- in default to

undergo simple imprisonment for three months and it is

further ordered that if the fine amount is realised, an amount

of Rs.45,000/- be paid to PW1 as compensation under Section

357(1)(b) of Code of Criminal Procedure. This was confirmed

by the appellate court.     But, considering the fact that the

victim herself had no intention to send him to jail, this court

feels that the substantive sentence imposed by the court below

could have been avoided. Even the witnesses examined also

had no intention to send him to jail. But, they want only that

he must be given some punishment for the wrong committed

by him to realise his mistake. So, under the circumstances,

the substantive sentence as well as the fine of Rs.50,000/-

imposed by the court below appears to be harsh. Considering

the circumstances and also considering the fact that they were

living separately now for     nearly seventeen years and the

revision petitioner is more than 65 years now, this court feels

that imposing a fine of Rs.10,000/- with default sentence of

simple imprisonment for two months will be sufficient and that

Crl.R.P.No.1247 of 2004      :  15 :

will meet the ends of justice and if the fine amount is realised,

Rs.8,000/- can be given to PW1 as compensation under

Section 357(1)(b) of Code of Criminal Procedure.          So, the

sentence imposed by the court below and confirmed by the

appellate court are set aside and the same is modified as

follows:

           The revision petitioner is sentenced to pay a fine

     of   Rs.10,000/-    in  default   to  undergo    simple

     imprisonment for two months. If the fine amount is

     realised, an amount of Rs.8,000/- be paid to PW1 as

     compensation under Section 357(1)(b) of Code of

     Criminal Procedure. Two months time is granted to

     the revision petitioner to pay the amount. Till then,

     the execution of sentence is directed to be kept in

     abeyance.

       With the above modification of the sentence alone, the

revision petition is allowed in part and disposed of accordingly.

       Office is directed to communicate this order to the

concerned court immediately.

                                             Sd/-
                                   K.Ramakrishnan, Judge.

Bb

                                        [True copy]

                                             P.A to Judge



