
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                PRESENT:

                             THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE V.K.MOHANAN
                                                      &
                    THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE RAJA VIJAYARAGHAVAN V

                    TUESDAY,THE 2ND DAY OF JUNE 2015/12TH JYAISHTA, 1937

                                       CRL.A.No. 1188 of 2011 ( )
                                          ---------------------------


 AGAINST THE JUDGMENT IN S.C.NO.450/2009 of ADDL.SESSIONS COURT, FAST TRACK
                                COURT NO.II, PALAKKAD, DATED 25-01-2011


APPELLANT(S)/ACCUSED:
-------------------------------------

            CHANDRAN @ NANDAKUMAR, AGED 59 YEARS,
            S/O. NARAYANAN EZHUTHASSAN, PUTHENTHODIYIL HOUSE,
            MANISSERY, OTTAPALAM.
            C.NO.9185, CENTRAL PRISON,
            KANNUR,


            BY ADV. SMT.LISSY JOSE. P (STATE BRIEF)

RESPONDENT(S):
-------------------------

            STATE BY CIRCLE INSPECTOR OF POLICE,
            OTTAPALAM POLICE STATION.


            BY SMT. PRAICY JOSEPH, SPL. GOVERNMENT PLEADER

            THIS CRIMINAL APPEAL HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD ON 02-06-2015, THE
COURT ON THE SAME DAY DELIVERED THE FOLLOWING:




Bb


 V.K.MOHANAN & RAJA VIJAYARAGHAVAN V., JJ.
----------------------------------------------------------
             Crl.Appeal.No.1188 of 2011
----------------------------------------------------------
        Dated this the 02nd day of June, 2015

                     J U D G M E N T


V.K.MOHANAN, J.


     This Criminal Appeal is filed challenging the judgment

dated 25.01.2011 in S.C.No.450/2009 on the files of

Additional Sessions Judge, Fast Track Court No.II,

Palakkad, by the sole accused in the above sessions case.

     2. The case of the prosecution is that, the deceased

Lakshmi Amma was residing in house No.X/298 of

Vaniamkulam Panchayath, Vaniamkulam II village, along

with her son-in-law (the accused) and his children. Her

daughter Parukutty had expired 6 months back. The house

and the property, wherein the house is situated, has

already been assigned in favour of her daughter Parukutty

and thus, while Lakshmi Amma was residing along with her

son-in-law, on 15.10.2008, at about 3.30 p.m., the accused

committed murder of the said Lakshmi Amma and thereby,

he committed the offence punishable under Section 302 of

Indian Penal Code.

Crl.Appeal.No.1188 of 2011   : 2 :

      3. One Chandran, neighbour of the said deceased and

accused, went to the Ottapalam Police Station at about

8.00 p.m on 15.10.2008 and he gave an information about

the death of the said Lakshmi Amma before the then Sub

Inspector of Police, Ottapalam Police Station, on the basis

of which First Information Report in Crime No.789/2008 of

the Ottapalam Police Station, was drawn for the offence

punishable under Section 302 of Indian Penal Code.

      4. On the registration of the above First Information

Report, the investigation was undertaken by the then Circle

Inspector of Police, who is examined as PW12, pursuant to

which, he proceeded to the place of occurrence and after

examining the body of the deceased, he prepared an

inquest report and during the inquest, they had seized a

blouse and two dhothis and hairs seen in between the

fingers of the hand of the deceased. Thereafter, PW12 sent

the body of the deceased to Medical College Hospital,

Thrissur, with a requisition for conducting postmortem

examination of the said body. He had also questioned the

witnesses and recorded their statements. PW12, on getting

reliable information that the accused was available near the

Crl.Appeal.No.1188 of 2011   : 3 :

Ottapalam railway station, proceeded to there and

thereafter, in the presence of witnesses, the accused was

placed under lawful arrest at about 4.15 p.m on

16.10.2008. He prepared the arrest memo. The intimation

regarding the arrest was given to Santhosh Kumar, the son

of the accused through an arrest intimation prepared by

him. On the arrest of the accused, the shirt and dhothi

worn by the accused, at the time of arrest, were seized as

per mahazar and those properties were produced before

the court as per the property list. While the accused was

undergoing as a pre-trial prisoner in the Ottapalam Sub-

Jail, his hair was taken by the Medical officer in the

presence of the witnesses as ordered by the court and the

same were seized and the same were produced before the

court as per the property list prepared. The Sub Inspector

of Police has also questioned the doctor, who conducted

the autopsy and obtained the postmortem certificate and

the same is produced before the court. He had also

collected the document about the ownership of the

property, where the crime had occurred, from the Secretary

of the Panchayath. The scene plan was also got prepared

Crl.Appeal.No.1188 of 2011   : 4  :

through the Vaniamkulam Village Officer and the same has

also been produced before the court. He had also prepared

mahazar of the scene of occurrence and the material

objects were produced before the court and to get chemical

examination report, he made a request before the court by

preparing a forward note to send the same to Chemical

Examination Lab and obtained Chemical Examination

Report. PW12 has also questioned the witnesses and

recorded their statements and finally, after verification, he

himself laid the charge before the court.

      5. On the basis of the police charge filed before the

Judicial    First     Class Magistrate  Court,   Ottapalam,

C.P.No.21/2009 was instituted therein and the learned

Magistrate, by the proceedings dated 23.09.2009 in

C.P.No.21/2009, committed the case to the Sessions Court

wherein, S.C.No.450/2009 was instituted and the same was

subsequently made over to the present trial court. When

the accused appeared, after hearing to the prosecution as

well as the defence, a formal charge was framed against

the accused for the offence punishable under Section 302 of

Indian Penal Code, which when read over and explained to

Crl.Appeal.No.1188 of 2011   : 5 :

the accused, he denied the same and pleaded not guilty.

Consequently, the trial was proceeded further during which

PWs.1 to 13 were examined, Exts.P1 to P15 and MO1 to

MO11 were marked on the side of the prosecution.       On

completing the prosecution evidence, the incriminating

circumstances and evidence which brought out during the

prosecution evidence, were put to the accused under

Section 313 of Code of Criminal Procedure and he denied

the same. As no acquittal was possible under Section 232

of Code of Criminal Procedure, the accused was asked to

enter into his defence, during which, DW1 was examined on

the side of the defence. The trial court, by the impugned

judgment has found that the 12 circumstances enumerated

in the impugned judgment have been proved, which are

consistent only with the hypothesis of the guilt of the

accused and inconsistent with his innocence and the proved

circumstances are conclusive in nature and tendency. The

chain of evidence is also complete. Consequently, it is

further found that the prosecution has succeeded in

establishing that the accused had committed the murder of

Lakshmi Amma by throttling and smothering as alleged by

Crl.Appeal.No.1188 of 2011   : 6 :

the prosecution. Thus, the accused was found guilty of the

offence under Section 302 of Indian Penal Code and

consequently he was convicted thereunder. After hearing

the accused on the question of sentence, he was sentenced

to undergo rigorous imprisonment for life and to pay a fine

of Rs.10,000/- and in default to undergo rigorous

imprisonment for 6 months. Set off was allowed under

Section 428 of Code of Criminal Procedure.

      6. It is the above finding and order of conviction and

sentence are challenged by the accused by filing an appeal

from the jail where he is undergoing the imprisonment. On

receiving the above appeal, this Court, by order dated

03.11.2011 directed the Registry to appoint a State Brief to

prosecute the appeal on behalf of the appellant. Thus,

Advocate Smt.Lissy Jose P. is appointed to prosecute the

appeal.

      7. We have heard Smt.Lissy Jose P., learned counsel

appearing for the appellant and Smt.Praicy Joseph, the

learned Public Prosecutor.

      8.    Let us consider the evidence and materials on

record, before considering the arguments advanced in this

Crl.Appeal.No.1188 of 2011   : 7   :

case.

      9. As we have already stated, the police machinery in

this case was set in motion when one Chandran appeared in

the Ottapalam Police Station and gave an information about

the death of the deceased Lakshmi Amma. The First

Information Statement given by the said Chandran is

recorded by the then Sub Inspector of Police, Ottapalam

Police Station, which is marked as Ext.P1. As we have

already stated, the First Information Statement was given

before      the    Sub    Inspector  of  Police,  namely.,

M.V.Manikandan, in the Ottapalam Police Station at about 8

p.m on 15.10.2008. In the said statement, it is stated that

the informant is engaged in the agricultural operation. It is

further stated that he came to the Police Station to report

the fact that he had seen one Lakshmi Amma, wife of

deceased Raman Ezhuthachan, lying dead and the said

Laskhmi Amma was his neighbour and distant relative. It is

stated that, on 15.10.2008, at about 4 p.m, when he was

going to his property where the agricultural operations are

going on, Bhaghyam and Radha were standing on the road

in front of the house of the deceased Lakshmi Amma. When

Crl.Appeal.No.1188 of 2011   :  8  :

they saw him, Bhagyam approached him and told him that

she had heard a screaming of the Lakshmi Amma and there

was quarrel with Chandran.       At that time, no noise has

been heard. According to the statement, himself, Bhagyam

and Radha together went to the house of Lakshmi Amma,

but, they could not open the door. On looking through the

opened window panel, they have seen one hand alone.

According to the statement, on doubt, they together went

to the backside of the house and the closed door was

pushed and opened and got inside the house and on

search, Lakshmi Amma was found dead and lying on the

corridor adjacent to the front door found in supinely

position.     It is also stated that they have seen reddish

colour and blood mark on her neck. It is also stated that,

after coming outside the house, and when enquired about

Chandran, they were told by one Gopi Thazhathethil that he

had seen Chandran going busily towards the Manthannur

Railway Station side. The deponent has also stated that he

knows that there was quarrel between Chandran (accused)

and Lakshmi Amma (deceased) with respect to the

property. According to the deponent, Lakshmi Amma is the

Crl.Appeal.No.1188 of 2011   :  9 :

mother of Chandran's (accused) wife Parukutty, who is no

more. It is also stated by the deponent that, Chandran

(accused), Lakshmi Amma and Priya, daughter of Chandran

were residing together in the said house. It is also recorded

that Chandran has committed the murder somehow of

Lakshmi Amma, when there occurred quarrel between

Lakshmi Amma and the said Chandran. He had also

deposed      that     the correct name  of    Chandran     as

Nandakumaran, son of Narayanan Ezhuthachan, Manisheri

Puthan Thodiyil. He is at about 57 years old and after the

marriage of Chandran, he is residing in the house of

Lakshmi Amma. It is also stated that since he had gone to

inform the matter to the near relatives and gone in search

of Chandran, some delay occurred in giving the intimation.

It is also stated that the dead body was lying in the house

itself and the house in question situating about 8 kms

towards South-West. The said statement was recorded by

Mr.M.V.Manikandan, the then Sub Inspector of Police,

Ottapalam. The signature of the Sub Inspector is identified

by PW12, the then Sub Inspector of Police, who had

recorded the statement.

Crl.Appeal.No.1188 of 2011   : 10 :

      10. The informant Mr.Chandran is examined as PW1

in the present case. When he is examined, it is stated that

he is residing at Velliyad and he is an agriculturalist. He

knows the accused who is residing at Velliyad. He had also

stated that, he knows Lakshmi Amma, who is the mother of

the wife of the accused and the incident occurred whereby

Lakshmi Amma had died.            The occurrence was on

15.10.2008. He had deposed that it was he, who had seen

firstly the said Lakshmi Amma, as dead. It is also stated

that himself and his wife were going to their property, at

that time, Bhagyam and Radha were standing in front of

the house of Lakshmi Amma and they told him that the the

deceased woman and Chandran (accused) had some

quarrel. It is also deposed that at that time, no sound has

been heard. According to PW1, at that time, he along with

the said Bhagyam and Radha had gone to the house of the

deceased woman and by pushing, an attempt was made to

open the front door which was bolted from inside, hence, it

could not open. PW1 has also stated that on the eastern

side, half of the window panel was seen opened. It is also

stated that when he looked inside through the half opened

Crl.Appeal.No.1188 of 2011   : 11 :

window panel, he had seen the hand of Lakshmi Amma on

the side of the door. According to PW1, he called her

several times and himself, Radha and Bhagyam went to the

back side of the house. There they have seen the door

bolted from outside. According to PW1, they entered into

the house after opening the said door and at that time,

Lakshmi Amma was found dead. There were marks on her

neck and he had not noticed anything else. According to

PW1, he enquired about the accused. It is also stated by

PW1, one Gopi told him that he had seen the accused going

hurriedly changing his shirt and dhothi. He had also

deposed that there was a quarrel. Then the prosecutor put

a question as to whether the said fact was stated by

anybody and then the answer of PW1 was that, he knows

that there were quarrel prior to that. The property was

bequeathed by the deceased woman in favour of her

daughter. The said daughter had expired 6 months back. It

is also spoken to by PW1 that after the death of the

daughter of the deceased woman, there were property

disputes between the accused and the deceased. PW1 has

also stated "connected with the property dispute, Chandran

Crl.Appeal.No.1188 of 2011   :  12 :

(accused) might have done against the deceased Lakshmi

Amma".       PW1 has also stated that he had gone to the

police station and gave a statement and he identified his

signature in the statement shown to him. Thus, the First

Information Statement is marked as Ext.P1. The accused

was arrested by the police on the next day. He had also

claimed that at the time of the arrest, he was also present.

At that time, he was asked by the Ottapalam Police to

reach in the Ottapalam Police Station. On reaching there,

the police asked him, whether "that is the person". PW1

has further stated that "in the house of the accused,

himself and the deceased woman alone were residing". The

son of the accused had gone for work. The said son is not

residing there.       The daughter of the accused was given

away in marriage and she is residing there. He had also

deposed that the police had recorded his statement. When

he is asked as to whether he is able to identify the dress of

the accused at the time of the arrest, he told that he is not

remembering. During the cross-examination, the defence

has brought out that whenever there was work, he was

going at 8.'0' clock in the morning and returned by 5.'0'

Crl.Appeal.No.1188 of 2011   : 13 :

clock in the evening. He had also deposed before cross-

examination that during month of October, there would not

be any agricultural operations. It is also brought on record

by the prosecution through the cross-examination of PW1

that, he doesn't know the subject matter of the quarrel. But

he knows that it was with respect to the property. He had

also stated that he is not examined the documents

connected with the property of Lakshmi Amma. He had

also deposed that he has not heard about the quarrel on

the date of occurrence in the house of the deceased. He has

also deposed before the court that he has no direct

knowledge about the death of the deceased Lakshmi

Amma. It is also deposed by PW1 that after the death of

the daughter of Lakshmi Amma, her affairs was attended

by the accused. Though, it is not marked during the cross-

examination, the defence were succeeded in getting an

admission from PW1 that the statement contained in Ext.P1

First Information Statement that Chandran (accused),

Lakshmi Amma and Priya, daughter of Chandran are

residing in the house, are incorrect. It is also stated by

PW1 during the cross-examination that there is a public

Crl.Appeal.No.1188 of 2011   : 14 :

road for vehicular purpose on the eastern side of the house

and there are 9 houses and that inhabitants are the

beneficiaries of the said road. He had also admitted that

three sides of the house of Lakshmi Amma, there were

dwelling houses. It is also stated that immediately after

seeing the dead body of Lakshmi Amma, the neighbours

were not called. But the persons, those who heard about

the incident, were assembled.

      11.     PW2 is a child witness, who is the son of

Bhagyam, who is the wife of the brother of one Radha and

she is the wife of the nephew of deceased Lakshmi Amma.

It appears that before the examination of the said witness,

the court has put certain questions to arrive into a

conclusion that the child is confident to give evidence.

From the above facts, it is seen that, at the time of the

examination of PW2, he was at the age of 12 and he was

examined on 29.11.2010, after 2 years from the date of

occurrence. Which shows that on the date of the alleged

incident, PW2 was at the age of 10 years only. During the

chief examination, PW2 has stated that his house is at

Velliyad and in the house, he had his parents and sister and

Crl.Appeal.No.1188 of 2011   : 15 :

he knows Chandran in the box. He had also stated that he

knows Lakshmi Amma and he called Lakshmi Amma as

'Ammamma'. It is also stated, he used to go in their house.

It is also stated that on the date on which Lakshmi Amma

died, he had gone to the house of Lakshmi Amma. It is

seen stated that on that day, there was examination and

after the examination, when he reached in his house, he

went to the house of the Lakshmi Amma to watch TV. After

sometime, while watching the TV, the accused Chandran,

he called 'Chandrettan', came to the house. He had also

pointed out Chandrettan, as the person standing in the box.

He had also stated that the Chandrettan gave him some

tapioca chips and while he was eating the same, there

occurred      a   quarrel  between the   Chandrettan   and

Ammamma. At that time, according to PW2, he ran away

to his house and conveyed the information to his mother.

At that time, a loud cry was heard from the house of

Lakshmi Amma and then, his mother and aunty Radha had

gone to the house of Lakshmi Amma. PW2 said that he had

not gone along with his mother. Thereafter, mother

returned and told him that Ammamma was lying dead. He

Crl.Appeal.No.1188 of 2011   : 16 :

had identified the shirt as MO1 and dhothi as MO2 which

were worn by Chandrettan (accused), when he was coming

to the house. He had also stated that police had questioned

him and he went to the house to watch the TV after taking

lunch. It was also the contention of the counsel that PW2 is

a child, who was residing along with PW3. So, his version

cannot be believed. During the cross examination of PW2,

he had deposed that he has no knowledge or awareness

about the subject matter of the alleged quarrel and he had

not noticed the same. He had also stated during the cross

examination that he is unable to say about the programme

telecasted in the TV on the date on which he had gone to

watch the TV. He also stated that, he is unable to say

about the programmes tele casted in the TV on the date on

which he had eaten the tapioca chips. According to PW2,

there are several houses adjacent and people are residing

in the said houses. It is also answered by PW2 that he

could not trace out the place from which the noise was

heard.

      12. PW3 is another witness and she is the mother of

PW2 as pointed out earlier. She is the wife of the brother

Crl.Appeal.No.1188 of 2011   : 17 :

of Radha and the deceased Lakshmi Amma was the wife of

her father's brother. She had deposed that she is also a

resident of Velliyad and her family consists of her husband

and two children and she is the mother of Arun (PW2).

She knows accused as he is residing near to her house.

She knows Lakshmi Amma as well who is the mother of the

deceased wife of the accused. According to PW3, in an

incident, the said Lakshmi Amma died and the occurrence

was on 15.10.2008. She had deposed that, at about 4'0'

clock, the said Lakshmi Amma was found lying dead.

According to her, on hearing the cry, herself and Radha

went to there and though they have called her, the door

was not opened. Thereafter, they came to the road lying in

front of the house.        At that time, Chandrettan, who

examined as a witness earlier, came there, then, they told

him that they had heard a cry. Thereafter, they three went

to the house of Lakshmi Amma. The front door was closed

and at that time, Chandrettan peeped into the house

through the opened window panel and told them that he

had seen the hand of Lakshmi Amma. Thereafter, they

went to the back of the house which was seen bolted from

Crl.Appeal.No.1188 of 2011   : 18 :

outside. According to PW3, after opening the said door,

Chandrettan entered into the house followed by them. At

that time, Chandrettan told them that Lakshmi Amma was

lying dead near the front door and there were marks on the

neck. At that point of time, they also looked at Lakshmi

Amma and at that time, there were marks on the neck.

PW3 has also stated that, on that day, her son went to the

said house after lunch to watch the television. She had

also deposed that her son had examination till noon on that

day. It is also stated by PW3 that, her son told them that

there was quarrel between Lakshmi Amma and the accused

Chandran.       Immediately, after 5 minutes, according to

PW3, they heard a cry.        She has also deposed that,

occasionally, there occurred quarrel. So, the said quarrel

was not noted as a serious one. PW3 had also deposed

that the quarrel was with respect to the property. She has

also deposed that her house is situated 5 meters away

from the house of said Lakshmi Amma. According to PW3,

on hearing the cry, herself and Radha hurried to the house.

PW3 has also deposed, "when I was coming, I had seen the

accused going to their house. The dress worn by the

Crl.Appeal.No.1188 of 2011   : 19 :

accused at the time when he was going to the house can be

identified" and thus, she identified MO1 shirt and MO2

dhothi as the dress worn by the accused. PW3 has also

stated that the accused has got two children, one son and a

daughter, who got married. PW3 has also stated that, after

the death of the wife of the accused, the daughter

occasionally came to the house and resided there. On the

date of the incident, the daughter was in her husband's

house.      According to PW3, the son is engaged in the

welding work and he is not regularly available in the house.

It is also stated that, on that day, he was not in the house.

On that day, according to PW3, Lakshmi Amma alone was

there in the house during the day time. After arrival of

accused Chandran, he was also there. She identified the

said Chandran as the person standing in the box. She had

also stated that police had questioned her and recorded her

statement.       During the cross examination, PW3 has

admitted that the house of Lakshmi Amma is situated on

the western side of the road and there is easy access to the

house from the said road.           PW3, during the cross

examination deposed that, she is a teacher in an

Crl.Appeal.No.1188 of 2011   : 20 :

Anganawadi and Wednesday is a working day for the

Anganawadi. PW3 has stated that usually she reaches the

house from the Anganawadi at about 3 - 3 = time.

According to PW3, on that day, there was a meeting and

therefore she reached the house earlier. According to the

defence, the version of PW3 that she had reached the

house on that day little earlier because of a meeting is an

improvement made by her during the cross examination

since no such fact has been disclosed to the police when

she was questioned by them. She has also not produced

any documents before the police to show that there was a

meeting on that day. When it was put to her about the

meeting and the fact that she had reached the house

earlier was mentioned for the first time in the court and the

same was not stated to the police, she said that, whatever

police asked has been stated. PW3 has also stated that

when herself and Radha went to the house, there was

nobody. PW3 has also admitted that, after the death of

Parukutty, wife of Chandran (accused), all the affairs of the

said house was attended by Chandran. According to PW3,

she was not aware about the details of the property. PW3

Crl.Appeal.No.1188 of 2011   : 21 :

has also deposed that the house of Lakshmi Amma is

situated on the road side. She has also deposed that she

was unaware as to who are going inside the house or

outside the house.        PW3 has also stated that she can

identify the shirt and dhothi which have been worn by the

accused on the date of the incident. She has also admitted

that PW1 Chandran was her relative.          When it was

suggested to PW3 that Chandran (PW1) was in inimical

terms towards accused as there was altercation between

them, her answer was that, there was no enmity. It was

again suggested to her that, it was out of that enmity, PW1

made accusation against the accused, but, she repeated

her answer that she was not aware about the animosity.

      13. PW4 Dr.Manoj was examined by the police to

show that he had collected hairs from the head, shoulder

and armpit of the accused. When he was examined, he had

deposed that during the year 2008, he was working in the

Ottapalam Taluk Hospital and as requested by the Circle

Inspector of Police, he had collected the hairs from the

accused. Thus, he identified MO3 as the hair collected from

the armpit of the accused, MO4 hair as collected from the

Crl.Appeal.No.1188 of 2011   : 22 :

shoulder and MO5 from the groin and MO6 from the head.

According to him, all these hairs were put in a cover and

that cover is identified as MO7 and produced before the

Circle Inspector of Police. He had also deposed that the

hairs were taken from the accused who is standing in the

box.

      14. PW5 - Govindan is examined by the prosecution

to show that the accused was seen going towards the

western direction on the date of the incident. According to

PW5, he knows accused Chandran as well as the deceased

Lakshmi Amma and Lakshmi Amma is the mother of the

wife of the accused. According to PW5, he had seen the

accused going along the railway track towards the western

side on the date on which Lakshmi Amma died. It was at

Mannannoor and he did not call the accused. According to

PW5, he can identify the dress worn by the accused at the

time when he saw him. Thus, PW5 has identified MO1 shirt

and MO2 dhothi.           PW5 has also deposed that, there

occurred quarrel between Chandran and Lakshmi Amma

and when it was asked to him during the chief examination

about the subject matter of the quarrel, he answered that,

Crl.Appeal.No.1188 of 2011   : 23 :

that was with respect to the property. He had also deposed

that, it was told by Lakshmi Amma that the property has

been given to the daughter and according to him, the

quarrel was with respect to the same. He had also deposed

that, he had also disclosed to others about the fact that he

had seen Chandran going towards the western side along

the railway track. According to him, it was at about 4.30

p.m. that he had seen Chandran.          During the cross

examination, it is deposed by him that, he had not involved

in any quarrel and he is not aware about the quarrel. It is

also deposed by PW5 that the accused, his son Santhosh,

daughter Priya and the deceased Lakshmi Amma were

staying in the same house. He had also deposed that the

house was constructed in the property of Lakshmi Amma

which was given to Parukutty. When a question was put to

the witness that while Parukutty was alive and after her

death, whether the entire affairs were attended by the

accused Chandran, he replied that he did not know about

that. During re-examination, the prosecution has brought

out the fact that, after the marriage of the daughter of

Chandran, and after the death of the wife of Chandran, the

Crl.Appeal.No.1188 of 2011   : 24 :

daughter stayed along with Chandran for some time and

the son was not available in the house.        During re-

examination, it is also deposed by PW5 that, on the date of

the incident, the daughter of the accused had gone from

the said house.

      15. PW6 is a witness to the Inquest prepared by the

Circle Inspector of police. When PW6 is examined, he had

deposed that, he knows Lakshmi Amma as well as the

accused Chandran. He also deposed that he is aware of the

incident by which Lakshmi Amma died. According to him,

the Circle Inspector came to the place and prepared

Inquest after inspecting the body of the deceased Lakshmi

Amma and he had put his signature in the said Inquest.

The said Inquest report is marked as Ext.P2. PW6 has also

deposed that, during the preparation of Inquest, police had

seized some hairs from the hands of the deceased and he

had witnessed the seizure of the same.       He has also

deposed that the police had prepared scene mahazar and

he had put his signature in the said scene mahazar and the

same was identified as Ext.P3.

      16. PW7 is a Police Constable then attached to the

Crl.Appeal.No.1188 of 2011   : 25 :

office of the Ottapalam Circle Inspector and he is examined

to prove the seizure of the dress worn by the accused at

the time of his arrest. According to PW7, he had witnessed

when the accused produced his shirt and dhothi before the

police on his arrest at the office of the Circle Inspector of

police.     According to him, the said dress of the accused

were seized after preparing the seizure mahazar and he

had put his signature in the said mahazar. He identified

the said signature in Ext.P4 seizure mahazar and the same

is marked as PW7. PW7 has also identified MO1 shirt and

MO2 dhothi of the accused and produced by him. During

the cross examination, the attempt of the defence was to

establish that the said MO1 and MO2 was that of the son of

the accused and the accused produced the same out of

compulsion.

      17. PW8          was the   then   working     as   the

Superintendent of Sub Jail, Ottapalam.          When he is

examined, he deposed that, as per the order of the Judicial

First Class Magistrate Court, Ottapalam, the accused was

produced before the Circle Inspector of police and

Dr.Manoj.      He had also deposed that the said Doctor

Crl.Appeal.No.1188 of 2011    : 26 :

collected hairs of the accused particularly from his head,

armpit, chest and groin which were separately tied in four

separated covers and the said four covers were put in a

single cover and the same was sealed by the Doctor. He

had deposed during the chief examination itself that, except

obtaining his signature by the ASI in a paper, there were no

other procedures.         He identified his signature and the

mahazar       is  marked    as   Ext.P5.   During   the cross

examination, PW8 has admitted that the reports were not

sent to the superior authorities and the contents of the

mahazar were not read over to him.           The name of the

Assistant Sub Inspector, who recorded the mahazar, is also

not mentioned in Ext.P5. He had also admitted that the

Doctor, who had taken the hairs of the accused, is also not

signed in Ext.P5.

      18. PW9 was the then working as Lecturer and

Assistant Professor, Department in Forensic Medicine,

Medical College, Thrissur. PW9 had conducted autopsy on

the body of the deceased Lakshmi Amma in this case

involved in Crime No.789/2008 and he issued the post

mortem certificate.        When PW9 is examined, he had

Crl.Appeal.No.1188 of 2011       :   27 :

deposed that he had noticed the following ante mortem

injuries:

            "1.   Lacerated wound 1.5 x 0.5 x 0.5cm on right side
    of back of head oblique lower inner end 9cm above right ear
    with multiple abraded contusions over an area 5 x 4 cm.
    Underneath this scalp contusion 10x12cm on right side of head
    involving right parietal and temporal lobe with minimal
    separation of right tempero parietal suture. Brain oedematous.

            2.    Crescentic abrasion 0.5x0.1cm right side of neck
    oblique lower inner and 6.5cm outer to midline 5cm above
    collarbone.

           3.     Crescentic abrasion 0.5x0.1cm on right side of
    neck oblique 0.5cm below injury No.2.

            4.    Abrasion 1.2x0.3cm on the left side of neck
    oblique upper inner end 1cm outer to midline and 7.5cm above
    suprasternal notch.

            5.     Abrasion 1x0.2cm oblique on left side of neck
    upper inner end 1.5cm outer to midline and 6cm above
    suprasternal notch.

            6.    Abrasion 2.5x0.5cm on the front of neck across
    the midline left lower and 3cm above suprasternal notch and
    1cm left to midline.

            7.     Multiple mucosal tears over an area 1x0.5cm on
    the inner aspect left side of upper lip 2.5cm outer to midline,
    which corresponds to upper left canine.

            8.    Mucosal tear 0.5x0.2cm on the inner aspect of left
    of side of upper lip 0.5cm outer to midline corresponds to left
    lateral incisor.

            9.    Contusion subcutaneous deep 5x1 cm on the
    front of right shoulder.

            10.   Abraded contusion 1.5x0.5 cm at the root of nasal
    orifice across the midline, left end 0.5cm outer to midline and
    1.5 cm above lip margin.

            Neck was dissected in a under bloodless filed showed
    infiltration of blood over an area of 5x2x0.5cm involving the
    soft tissues covering the Posteriolateral aspects of thyroid and

Crl.Appeal.No.1188 of 2011       :   28 :

    cricoid cartilages and posterior wall of oesophagus. There was
    inward compression fracture at the root of superior horn of
    thyroid cartilage on right side with infiltration of blood around.
    There were multiple bleeding spots in the inner part of larynx."

       19. The post mortem certificate issued by him is

marked as Ext.P6. During his examination, he had deposed

that injury Nos.2 to 9 combinely are sufficient in the

ordinary course to cause death. According to PW9, those

are external injuries in case of throttling and smothering.

He had also deposed that injury No.1 also might have

contributed the cause of death.

       20. PW10 was the then Secretary of Vaniamkulam

Grama Panchayat. According to him, as requested by the

Circle Inspector of Police, Ottapalam, he had issued the

ownership certificate, in which, the address shown as

Parukutty Amma, Oukkattil, Velliyadu, Mannannoor.                    The

signature contained in Letter No.10/298 is identified and

the same is marked as Ext.P7.

       21. PW11 is the then Village Officer of Vaniamkulam

Village.     According to him, as directed by the Ottapalam

police,     he had prepared a sketch plan of the place of

occurrence which contained his signature. Thus, Ext.P8 is

marked through PW11.

Crl.Appeal.No.1188 of 2011   : 29 :

      22. PW12 is the then Circle Inspector of Police who

had undertaken the investigation in Crime No.789/2008 of

the Ottapalam police station.     He had deposed that the

above First Information Report was registered as per Ext.P1

First Information Statement and the First Information

Report contained the signature of Mr.Manikandan and he

identified the signature of said Manikandan as the said

Manikandan had worked under him and he had witnessed

the signature put by the said Manikandan. Thus, the First

Information Report in the above crime is marked through

PW12 as Ext.P1(a). He has also deposed that, on getting

the information, he reached at the place of occurrence and

the body of the deceased Lakshmi Amma was examined

and prepared Inquest Report which he identified as Ext.P2.

He had also deposed that, as per the said Inquest report,

the blouse and 2 dhothis worn by the deceased were also

seized and he identified MO8 blouse, MO10 dhothi having a

light coloured border.     According to PW12, the body was

sent for post mortem report with a requisition to the

Medical College Hospital, Thrissur.    He has also deposed

that, on getting reliable information that the accused was

Crl.Appeal.No.1188 of 2011   : 30 :

available near the vicinity of Ottapalam railway station, he

proceeded to the said place and on identifi of the accused,

he was arrested in the presence of witness at about 4.15

p.m on 16.10.2008. According to him, he had prepared an

arrest memo which is identified as Ext.P9. According to

PW12, about the arrest, intimation was given to the son of

the accused and the said arrest intimation is marked as

Ext.P10. The accused was inspected before his arrest and

the Inspection Memo is identified as Ext.P11. According to

PW12, the dress worn by the accused at the time of the

arrest was seized as per mahazar in the presence of

witnesses. Thus, he identified MO1 shirt and MO2 dhothi as

the dress worn by the accused at the time of the arrest.

According to him, the material objects were produced

before the court through a property list which is identified

as Ext.P12.       PW12 has also deposed that the covers

containing hairs, which were taken by the Doctor from the

body of the accused while he was in the Sub Jail,

Ottapalam, are seized. Thus, he identified MOs. 3 to 7. He

had also identified the property list Ext.P13 by which the

said item of properties are produced before that court. He

Crl.Appeal.No.1188 of 2011   : 31 :

had also identified his signature seen in the seizure

mahazar for the seizure of the said hairs, as Ext.P5.

According to him, he had questioned the Doctor, who

conducted the post mortem over the body of the deceased

Lakshmi Amma and obtained the post mortem certificate

and he identified the same as Ext.P6. According to him, he

had obtained the certificate showing the ownership over the

property where the incident had occurred and the said

ownership certificate is identified as Ext.P7.  According to

PW12, he got the scene plan with respect to the scene of

occurrence through the Vaniamkulam Village Office and he

identified the same as Ext.P8. He had also deposed that,

after inspection of the place of occurrence, he had prepared

mahazar with respect to the scene of crime and the said

mahazar is identified as Ext.P3. He had also deposed that,

for sending the properties for a chemical examination, he

had prepared a forwarding note and produced before the

court. The said forwarding note is identified as Ext.P14.

He had also deposed that, after examination of the

properties, chemical examination report was obtained and

produced before the court as Ext.P15.        PW12 has also

Crl.Appeal.No.1188 of 2011   : 32 :

deposed that the hairs seen in the hands of deceased

Lakshmi Amma were seized as per the Inquest report and

the said hairs are identified as MO11. According to PW12,

on completing the investigation, he had submitted the

charge before the court. During the cross-examination of

PW12, it is brought out by the defence that no hairs from

the body of the deceased woman other than the hairs from

her hands were collected. It is also admitted by PW12 that

the hairs collected as per the inquest report have not been

sent for examination by the Forensic and Science

Laboratory. It is also brought out through PW12 that the

nail clippings were not sent to chemical examination and no

scientific opinion was obtained with respect to the nail

clippings. It is also brought out in evidence of PW12 that

when PW3 Bhagya Lakshmi was questioned, she has not

stated about the meeting on 15.10.2008. It is also brought

out on record through the evidence of PW12, at the

instance of the defence that PW12 has not conducted any

investigation to ascertain after inspecting the school of

Arun(PW2) as to whether there was any examination in the

said school on the date of the occurrence. It is also brought

Crl.Appeal.No.1188 of 2011   :  33 :

out in evidence that no foot print or finger print was taken

from the place of occurrence. PW12 has also admitted

during his cross-examination that though cellophane tape

was used on the body of the deceased woman but no such

cellophane tape marks were send for scientific analysis. He

had also admitted that no blood stain was obtained or

collected from the place of occurrence.

      23. PW13         is  M.V.Manikandan,  the   then  Sub

Inspector of Police, Ottapalam Police Station. He was

examined to show that it was he who recorded the First

Information Statement that Ext.P1 given by PW1. When

PW13 is examined, he had deposed that on 15.10.2008, at

about 8 p.m, CW1(PW1) appeared the station and gave

statement which was recorded by him and on the basis of

the same, he registered the crime in Crime.No.789/2008

for the offence punishable under Section 302 of IPC. He

identified the First Information Statement as Ext.P1 which

contained his signature. The First Information Report drawn

by him is identified and marked as Ext.P1(a). During the

cross-examination,        PW13  has   admitted   that   after

registration of Ext.P1(a) First Information Report, he went

Crl.Appeal.No.1188 of 2011   : 34 :

to the place of occurrence along with other police

constables.

      24. As we have indicated earlier, during the defence

evidence, DW1 was examined from the side of the defence.

DW1 Santhosh Kumar is none other than the son of the

accused. During the chief examination of DW1, he

submitted that his house name is 'Oukkattil' and the

accused is his father. He had deposed that in the said

Oukkattil house, himself, his father, grand mother and

sister Priya are the persons residing there. He is a painter

by profession and his father is a coolie worker. According to

him, he used to go by 8 a.m for his work and after the

work, returned by 6 p.m.        The grand mother Lakshmi

Amma died on 15.10.2008 and on that day, he had

painting works. His father had coolie work in a property

namely., 'Puthanpurakkal house' near to Mannannur railway

station. He had also deposed that on the date on which the

grand mother died, himself and his father have gone for

work at 8 'O' clock in the morning and done the job

together till the evening. DW1 further said that, on that

day, at about 5.00 - 5.30, one person namely., Babu came

Crl.Appeal.No.1188 of 2011   : 35 :

and said that grand mother is sick and requested to come

urgently to his house and accordingly, after stopping the

work, they together went to the house. When reached the

home, according to DW1, 5 to 6 persons were there and on

looking, he saw the grand mother lying on the corridor and

he went and called her but, she was not alive. Thereafter,

according to DW1, he came out and at that time, the police

arrived along with PW1 Chandran and Sub Inspector was

also arrived. The police examined the body and after

posting a police constable, they went back.

      25. According to DW1, during the night, he went to

the house of Unnikrishnan uncle for sleeping. In the

morning, police came and inspected the body and arranged

to take the body for postmortem examination. It was taken

to Thrissur Medical College Hospital. According to DW1, he

had also accompanied the body and the body was received

back at about 3.45 p.m after the postmortem. Thereafter,

the body was brought to the house and buried in their

property. When asked him as where was his father, at that

point of time, his answer was that when he enquired about

his father, the police taken him to Ottapalam Police Station.

Crl.Appeal.No.1188 of 2011   : 36 :

According to DW1, on completing the rituals, he went to

Ottapalam police station and met his father and he was told

by father that food was given to him by the police.

Thereafter, he returned to the house. At about 9 'O' clock,

the police came and demanded the dress of his father.

Then, he replied that there was no such dress and asked

the police whether the dress worn by himself is sufficient.

The police agreed the same and he identified that it was the

said shirt and dhothi which shown to him.       According to

him, the same had used for one year. The label of the

stitching shows that the shirt was stitched at Vaniyoor and

purchased from KKM Textiles. He had also deposed that, in

their house, there is no dispute or quarrel with respect to

the property. Himself, his father and sister were residing

happily in the house. It is also stated by him that before

the death of his grandmother, she transferred the

properties in favour of his mother. It is also stated by him

that PW1 is not in good terms with the family members of

DW1.

      26. As there was no direct evidence, the prosecution

has pressed into service the above evidence and materials

Crl.Appeal.No.1188 of 2011   : 37 :

to establish certain circumstances so as to prove the guilty

of the accused and it appears that the learned Judge of the

trial court, after accepting the above evidence, came to the

conclusion that the circumstances so proved are consistent

with the hypothesis of the guilt of the accused and

inconsistent with the innocence of the accused and the said

circumstances are conclusive in nature and chain of

evidence is also completed, consequently it was found that

the prosecution has succeeded in establishing that the

accused had committed the murder of Lakshmi Amma by

throttling and smothering as alleged.

      27. Smt.Lissy Jose P., the learned counsel appearing

for the appellant, advanced several arguments to challenge

the judgment of the trial court. According to the learned

counsel, the prosecution witnesses, who are examined to

establish the circumstances relied on by the prosecution,

are unreliable especially, when they are close relative and

interested witnesses. According to the learned counsel,

merely because the accused was residing along with the

deceased is not a ground to fix the criminal liability upon

the accused and the prosecution has miserably failed to

Crl.Appeal.No.1188 of 2011   : 38 :

rule out any possibility of the involvement of any other

person other than the accused with the commission of the

offence. According to the learned counsel, to prove the

presence of the accused in the house on the day, the

prosecution has very much relied upon the evidence of

PWs.2 and 3 but, their evidence cannot be believed. In

order to disbelieve or reject the evidence of PW2, the

learned counsel has pointed that there are no supporting or

corroborating evidence to the versions of PW2, the child

witness that he was present in the house and he had an

occasion to see the accused. It is also pointed out that the

police did not conduct any investigation in the school of

PW2 to ascertain whether there was examination till the

noon time and there was class for the students of that

school on that day. It is also submitted that regarding the

quarrel or dispute between the accused and the deceased

that claimed to have occurred in the presence of PW2, PW2

failed to reproduce the words of the quarrel or the subject

matter of the dispute. So, according to the learned counsel,

PW2 cannot be believed. It is also the contention of the

learned counsel that PW3 is also a related and interested

Crl.Appeal.No.1188 of 2011   : 39 :

witness and her presence is also doubtful, on the alleged

time, since she is an Anganawadi teacher. According to the

learned counsel, PW3 has stated before the court that, she

happened to reach in her house at the relevant point of

time as there was a meeting in the Anganawadi but the

said statement of PW3, according to the learned counsel is

an improvement since she has no such version before the

police. So, according to the learned counsel, if evidence of

PW 2 and 3 are excluded, there is no concrete evidence to

prove the presence of the accused in or around the place of

occurrence on the fatal day. Another important contention

advanced by the learned counsel for the accused is that,

the investigating agency has not taken steps to conduct the

Neutron Activation Analysis with respect to the hairs

allegedly seized from the hand of the deceased during the

inquest and what the prosecution has obtained is only a

report on the basis of the microscopic examination which

according to the learned counsel for the appellant is not

acceptable in the present case in view of the decision

reported in Sudheer Babu Vs. State of Kerala [2013

(2) KLT 168]. So, according to the learned counsel, the

Crl.Appeal.No.1188 of 2011   : 40 :

prosecution has miserably failed to establish positively that

the accused alone has committed the murder of Lakshmi

Amma, particularly, in view of the settled principles of law

governing      the    cases depending upon    circumstantial

evidence. So, the trial court, according to the learned

counsel, committed wrong in accepting the case of the

prosecution and convicting the appellant.

      28. Per contra, Smt.Praicy Joseph, the learned Public

Prosecutor, after taking us the evidence of PWs.1,2 and 3,

submitted that, though these witnesses are relatives, there

is no contradiction in their evidence or infirmative in their

version to discard their evidence. According to the learned

Public Prosecutor, though these witnesses were subjected

to thorough cross-examination, nothing brought on record

to shake the substratum of the prosecution allegation

against the accused. The learned Judge of the trial court,

after having examined the minute details including the

evidence of the prosecution witnesses, have formulated

certain circumstances which are finally found as established

by    the    prosecution   by  adducing  cogent    evidence.

Thereafter, according to the learned Public Prosecutor, no

Crl.Appeal.No.1188 of 2011    : 41 :

interference is warranted.

      29. We        have   carefully  considered the   rival

contentions adduced by the learned counsel for the

appellant as well as the learned Public Prosecutor. We have

perused the evidence on record and materials and carefully

gone through the judgment of the trial court.

      30. In the light of the rival contentions and the

evidence and materials on record, the question to be

considered is whether the trial court is justified in its

findings and convicting the appellant for the offence under

Section 302 of Indian Penal Code, especially when the

entire    prosecution     case  purely  depends  upon   the

circumstantial evidence.

      31. The crux of the prosecution allegation is that the

deceased and the accused were residing under the same

roof namely 'Oukattil house' and the accused is none other

than the son-in-law of the deceased and the daughter of

the deceased expired 6 months back to the death of the

deceased and according to the prosecution, there were

frequent quarrels between the accused and the deceased

Lakshmi Amma with respect to the property and out of that

Crl.Appeal.No.1188 of 2011       :   42 :

animosity, the accused committed murder of his own

mother-in-law prior to 8 p.m on 15.10.2008.                It is the

above case sought to be established by the prosecution

with the help of certain circumstances sought to be

established. In this juncture, it is relevant to note that the

learned Judge of the trial court particularly, in paragraph 18

had pointed out 12 circumstances which, according to the

learned Judge, had been established by the prosecution.

For the convenience, we will reproduce the circumstances

referred to by the learned Judge in paragraph 18 of the

judgment.

             "To sum-up the following circumstances have
           been brought out in evidence against the accused.

           (i) The occurrence took place in the house in
           which the accused and the deceased were
           residing.
           (ii) PW3 saw the accused going to the said house
           prior to the incident on the relevant day.

           (iii) PW2 deposed that the accused came to that
           house while he was watching television in that
           house.

           (iv) Thereafter there occurred a quarrel between
           the deceased and the accused at which time PW2
           left the house.

           (v) At that time the accused and deceased alone
           were there in that house.

           (vi) Thereafter the cry of the deceased was heard
           from that house by PW3 after 5 minutes when
           PW2 told about the quarrel to PW3.

Crl.Appeal.No.1188 of 2011      :  43 :



           (vii) Immediately thereafter PWs 1 and 3 rushed
           to that house and saw the dead body of Lakshmi
           Amma.

           (viii) At that time the accused and no one else
           was found there.

           (ix) Thereafter the accused was found walking
           along the railway track by PW5.

           (x) The hairs obtained from the inter space
           between the fingers of the right palm of the
           deceased were found similar to the scalp hair of
           the accused.

           (xi) The accused had property dispute with the
           deceased.

           (xii) During cross examination DW1 deposed that
           the accused was not present in the house when
           the body     of the   deceased  was taken    for
           postmortem and that his whereabouts were
           unknown to DW1 who is his only son".



      32. Going by the case of the prosecution as well as

the defence, it could be seen that there is no dispute that

both the accused as well as the deceased Lakshmi Amma

were residing in the same house, for the sole reason that

the accused is the son-in-law of the deceased and even

before the death of the wife of the accused he along with

his family were residing in the house of the deceased

Lakshmi Amma. So, the first circumstance formulated by

the learned Judge can be accepted as correct and proved,

particularly both the side accept the said fact.

Crl.Appeal.No.1188 of 2011   :  44 :

      33.     In order to prove the presence of the accused in

the said house in and around the time in which the

deceased was murdered, two circumstances are heavily

relied upon by the prosecution, as enumerated by the

learned Judge as circumstance number 1 and 2. According

to the accused, he is a coolie and he used to go for his

work at every day and DW1 has deposed before the court

that he is a painter by profession and on that particular day

himself and the father (accused) went for their job and the

father was engaged in the work in the property belonging

to    Puthanpurakkal.      However,   PW3,   on    her   chief

examination, stated before the court that while she was

coming from the Anganawadi, she had seen the accused

going to the house and she had identified also the shirt as

MO1 and dhothi as MO2 as the dress worn by the accused

when he had entered into the said house. Though, PW3 is

an Anganawadi teacher, she had stated before the court

that on that day she had come back to her house little

earlier as there was a meeting and such an occasion

enables her to notice the presence of the accused, who

allegedly entered into the house. In a case like the present

Crl.Appeal.No.1188 of 2011   : 45 :

one, according to us, the mere claim of PW3 - who is

relative of the deceased, cannot be accepted about her

presence at that point of time especially when she is an

Anganawadi teacher, unless there are corroborating or

supporting evidence. In this case, we cannot ignore the fact

that PW3 is a relative of the deceased Lakshmi Amma.

Even though, there were several houses and inmates, the

police has not questioned any person residing in that

locality and adjacent to the house, where the deceased

Lakshmi Amma and the accused were residing. During the

cross examination, the defence were succeeded in bringing

out the fact that she has not deposed before the police,

when the police questioned her that she reached in the

house little earlier as there was a meeting. So, the above

substantial improvement is made by PW3 deliberately to

show that she was present at the relevant point of time.

The police has not conducted any further investigation in

this regard to ascertain whether there was any meeting as

claimed by PW3, so as to come earlier to her house. So

the evidence of PW3 cannot be believed and accepted to

prove her presence near the house of the deceased

Crl.Appeal.No.1188 of 2011   : 46 :

Lakshmi Amma and notice the presence of the accused or

her entrance into the house. It is our considered opinion

that the evidence of PW3 cannot be believed that she had

noticed the accused at the relevant point of time and his

entry into the house of the deceased.

      34. Similarly, another witness examined by the

prosecution to prove the presence of the accused in the

said house is none other than the son of PW3, who is

residing along with PW3 at the relevant point of time as

well as during his examination as PW2 in the court. The

third circumstance relied upon the court below is about the

presence of PW2, as he was watching TV in that house. We

have already referred to the deposition of PW2. According

to PW2, as there was examination on that particular day,

on completing the examination, he came back to his house

by the noon and after taking the meals, he went to the

house of the deceased to watch the TV programme, and

while he was watching the TV programme the accused

came there and gave him tapioca chips. We are unable to

accept the case of prosecution that the accused has chosen

to commit the murder of his mother-in-law even after

Crl.Appeal.No.1188 of 2011   : 47 :

noticing the presence of PW2, who is his relative. PW2 has

stated all such details about the presence of the accused

etc., but he could not withstand the cross-examination and

failed to say anything about the programme which he

watched in the TV at that point of time. He could not

reproduce the words or the subject matter of the dispute

allegedly occurred between the deceased and the accused.

The investigating agency has not adduced any evidence in

support of the claim of PW2 that he happened to go to the

house of the deceased to watch the TV programme, after

his examination on that day. No evidence, with respect to

the school records to show the examination, are produced

or no witness was examined from the school to show there

was any examination conducted on 15.10.2008 and

afternoon no class or examination for PW2. Thus, it can be

seen that the prosecution has miserably failed to produce

any corroboration or supporting evidence to prove the

claim of PW2 that he was present in the house of the

deceased Lakshmi Amma, during the relevant time and at

that time the accused had arrived in the said house. In the

matter of appreciation of evidence of a child witness, we

Crl.Appeal.No.1188 of 2011      :  48 :

are guided by the principles laid down by the Hon'ble Apex

Court in the decision in K. Venkateshwarlu Vs. State of

Andhra Pradesh [(2012) 8 Supreme Court Cases 73

which is held as follows:

           "He can be tutored easily either by threat, coercion or
    inducement. Therefore, the court must be satisfied that the
    attendant circumstances do not show that the child was acting
    under the influence of someone or was under a threat or
    coercion. Evidence of a child witness can be relied upon if the
    court, with its expertise and ability to evaluate the evidence,
    comes to the conclusion that the child is not tutored and his
    evidence has a ring of truth. It is safe and prudent to look for
    corroboration for the evidence of a child witness from the
    other evidence on record, because while giving evidence a
    child may give scope to his imagination and exaggerate his
    version or may develop cold feet and not tell the truth or may
    repeat what he has been asked to say not knowing the
    consequences of his deposition in the court."



      So, the circumstance relied on by the learned Judge

as item No.2 and 3 cannot be said to be proved and

established.

      35. The circumstance No.4 - 6 stated by the court

below can be considered together.             As we have already

noticed that PW2 has stated that there was a quarrel

between the deceased and the accused, but he failed to

reproduce the words exchanged between the deceased and

the accused and he has no idea about the subject matter of

the dispute. In the present case, it is relevant to note that

Crl.Appeal.No.1188 of 2011   : 49 :

the deceased Lakshmi Amma was at the age of 80 years at

that time and there is no evidence or circumstances

available on record to show the intensity of the quarrel

which lead to the murder of the deceased Lakshmi Amma.

It is also the case of the prosecution that there were

frequent quarrels between the deceased Lakshmi Amma

and the accused. If that be so, we are of the view that

unless the prosecution established the gravity of the

quarrel, so as to lead the same to commit the murder of

Lakshmi Amma, mere claim of PW2 that there was quarrel

between the deceased and the accused is not sufficient to

take such a situation adversely against the accused and in

favour of the prosecution.

      36. The 5th circumstance stated by the court below is

that at that time the accused and deceased alone were in

that house. It is true, PW2 has stated that while he was

watching the TV, accused came in that house and gave him

some tapioca chips. PW2 has no claim that he had watched

the entire building before sitting in front of the TV to watch

the programme. What he had deposed before the court is

that, after taking lunch, he went to the house in question

Crl.Appeal.No.1188 of 2011   : 50 :

for watching TV and while he was watching TV, the accused

came there. He doesn't know any other person available in

the house. In this juncture, it is also relevant to note that

as per the claim of PW2, while he was watching the TV,

there occurred a quarrel between the deceased and the

accused and therefore, he left the house and went to his

house and he conveyed to his mother about the quarrel. In

such a situation, we cannot draw a conclusion that it was

the accused alone and no other person had committed the

offence particularly when the prosecution has no clear idea

about the time at which the accused was seen near the

premises of the house. As per the 6th circumstance,

according to the learned Sessions Judge, PWs.2 and 3

heard the cry of the deceased after 5 minutes immediately

after PW2 came from the house. Neither PW2 nor PW3 has

got a case that immediately after hearing the cry, the

accused was seen coming out of the house. As we have

already pointed out that the prosecution has no clear case

with regard to the exact time by which the prosecution

witness had seen the accused near the house.         In this

juncture, It is relevant to note that PW1, during his

Crl.Appeal.No.1188 of 2011   : 51 :

examination particularly, during his chief examination, it is

seen stated that when PW1 enquired about the accused,

one Gopi told him that the accused was found going

speedily, changing his shirt and dhothi. Till then, PW1 has

no case that the said Gopi told him about the time at which

he had seen the accused.        In this juncture, it is also

relevant to note that the prosecution has not questioned or

examined the said Gopi. So, in order to corroborate the

evidence of PW1, there is no supporting evidence. We are

unable to act upon the evidence of PW1 and to hold that

the accused was found in and around the relevant time and

place based upon such evidence of PW1.          Though the

prosecution has not examined the said Gopi referred to by

PW1 in deposition, they have examined one Govindan as

PW5. But, PW5 has not deposed about the time at which

he had seen the accused, except his daily time schedule for

his job. So, the evidence of PW1, according to us, is not

helpful for the prosecution to show that the accused was

seen going from the house immediately after the incident.

The net result of the above discussion is that the

prosecution has miserably failed to prove the presence of

Crl.Appeal.No.1188 of 2011   : 52 :

the accused in and around the place of occurrence and

within the alleged time.

      37. Another important circumstance relied upon by

the prosecution as well as the court below against the

accused is that, hairs obtained from the inner space

between the fingers of the right palm of the deceased were

found similar to the scanned hair of the accused. Such

nature of evidence, according to us, is only to corroborate

the other evidence about the presence of the accused in a

scene of crime. In the present case, we have already found

that the evidence of PWs.2 and 3 are not sufficient to

establish the presence of the accused immediately prior to

the incident. According to the prosecution, during the

examination of the body of the deceased and while

preparing Ext.P6 inquest report, they detected some hairs

in between the fingers of the right hand of the deceased

and the same were seized as per Ext.P6 inquest report. It is

also the case of the prosecution that after obtaining the

order from the committal court, hairs of the accused were

collected from his head, on his shoulder, from his armpit

and from his groin through PW4, the Doctor.       It is the

Crl.Appeal.No.1188 of 2011   : 53 :

further claim of the prosecution that the hairs collected

from the accused as well as from the body of the deceased,

were sent for chemical analysis.    Ext.P15 is the chemical

report. This report shows that the hairs received as item

Number 1, were found similar to the hairs received under

item Number 7. The said report further revealed that the

findings are arrived at on the basis of the microscopic

examination of the hairs. In this juncture, it is relevant to

note that the investigating agency has not collected the

hairs of the deceased Lakshmi Amma at the time when

they seized the hairs found in between the fingers of the

right palm of the deceased Lakshmi Amma. The question

that arises for consideration is, how far Ext.P15 report can

be accepted to show that the accused was present at the

relevant point of time or it was the accused who was

committed the murder of Lakshmi Amma.

      38. The learned Judge of the trial court to hold the

guilty of the accused as well as to found that the 10th

circumstance, which is proved, repelling the contention of

the defence, heavily relied upon upon the decision reported

in Fr.George Cherian and others Vs. State of Kerala

Crl.Appeal.No.1188 of 2011      :    54 :

[1989 (2) ILR 95], it differ from the facts involved in the

case on hand. In the present case, the evidence shows

that the accused and the deceased alone were present in

the house at the relevant time and that Item No.1

mentioned in the report was found in the palm of the

deceased between the fingers, which is found similar to the

scalp hair of the accused. We are unable to uphold the

above finding and observation.              In the above referred

decision, particularly in Para.No.54, it is held:

            "P.W.37 at page 13 of his deposition has stated that
     in vast majority of cases it is not possible to fix the identity
     of the individual after examining the hair.          The only
     peculiarity noticed by P.W.37 is what he has stated at page
     17 of his deposition which reads:

            "I found a peculiarity in the medulla.      I found oval
     fragments towards the tips, narrow and interrupted in the
     middle and totally absent towards the root."

     This, according to the expert, is a peculiar formulation
     which he had not come across before and it is in that
     context that he gave the opinion that it is highly improbable
     that the three specimens of hair examined by him would
     have come from different individuals.       He was not sure
     whether the brother, sister or any other blood relation of
     the individual will have the same type of hairs. P.W.37 has
     admitted that he had used only instrumental method and
     that he had not adopted the microchemical method. He
     has also admitted that he had not conducted the nutrone
     activation analysis referred to in the textbooks quoted
     above. In the light of the uncertainty of the method and in
     view of the imperfection of the science itself, it is unsafe to
     rely on Ext.P-47 to connect the accused with the offence in
     the light of the evidence of P.W.37 referred to above. "

      39. In this judgment, it is relevant to note that the

Crl.Appeal.No.1188 of 2011       :  55 :

police, while seizing the hairs, found on the right hand of

the deceased, as per Ext.P6 Inquest Report, no hairs, no

blood from the head of the deceased was obtained or taken

and the same were not subject to scientific analysis to rule

out that the hair found on the fingers of the deceased, is

that of any other person. In view of the decision referred

above, we are of the view that, it is unsafe to convict an

accused on the basis of similarity reported by the Chemical

Examiner with respect to the hairs of the deceased as well

as the accused.

       40. In a recent decision in Sudheer Babu Vs. State

of Kerala reported in [2013 (2) KLT 168], a Division

Bench of this Court has held:

           "Therefore, it may not be proper to find an accused
    guilty on the sole basis of a report that the hair samples
    collected from the scene of the crime have resemblance with
    the hair samples collected from him, though the same may
    have relevance for consideration along with the other
    incriminating circumstances against the accused."

       41. It is also relevant to note that Dr.Umadethan in

his text, Principles and Practice of Forensic Medicine,

particularly in page No.28 has stated:

        "Hair
           Detailed description of scalp hair, moustache, beard,
    axillary hair, chest hair, and public hair should be recorded;
    length, colour and texture are to be noted.       Microscopical

Crl.Appeal.No.1188 of 2011        :   56 :

    comparison of the morphology of the hair samples is possible.
    In the Neutron Activation Analysis method (NAA) hairs are
    made radio active and quantitative analysis of the elements
    contained in the hairs is done for comparison and identification
    of the samples. The unique method of DNA typing is possible
    from the cells attached to the hair roots. For this, entire hairs
    with roots are necessary. DNA typing provides absolute proof
    of identity.

           Chemical examination of the hair samples can reveal the
    presence of hair dyes or bleaching agents applied to the hair
    for cosmetic purpose. Poisoning with heavy metals like arsenic
    can also be detected by chemical analysis. Samples may be
    collected."

        42. So, by Chemical examination of the hair

samples, the only inference that could be drawn in the

presence of hair dyes or bleaching agents applied to the

hair for a cosmetic purpose. According to Dr.Umadethan,

in the Neutron Activation Analysis method (N.A.A.), hairs

are made radio active and in quantitative analysis of the

elements contained in the hairs is done for comparison and

identification of the samples.            Similarly, in the decision

(cited supra) reported in 1989 (2) ILR 95, their Lordships

have referred to the text of Dr.B.R.Sharma in his text book

on Forensic Science in Criminal Investigation and Trials, 2nd

Edn. and quoted the following from page 663 of the said

text.

           "Identification of hairs is not an easy task. It requires
    extensive experience in the field, because there are variations
    in the hairs of the same person at the same time and at

Crl.Appeal.No.1188 of 2011     :   57 :

    different times. Further, there are similarities in the hairs of
    different persons.    However, recent advances, especially
    neutron activation analysis (N.A.A.) and blood typing of hair
    hold promise for more definite and acceptable identifications."

       Admittedly, in the present case, the hairs collected in

the above case were not subjected to Neutron Activation

Analysis or blood typing of hair.              So, the conclusion

contained in Ext.P15 report cannot be taken to conclude

that the hairs found between the fingers of the right hand

of the deceased is that of the accused alone and not that of

any other person. The prosecution had sent the hairs so

collected for the Neutron Activation Analysis and blood

typing     of hair, the possibility of presence of any other

person could have been ruled out. In the absence of any

such scientific evidence collected and the fact that the

prosecution has not collected any finger print or foot print

from the scene of crime shows that, the prosecution has

miserably failed to connect the accused with the crime and

ruled out the possibility of the presence of any other

person.

       43. The       11th  circumstance      relied     on    by    the

prosecution and the court below is that the accused had

property dispute with the deceased.                   No acceptable

Crl.Appeal.No.1188 of 2011   : 58 :

evidence is adduced in this regard in support of the above

circumstances. The admitted case of both the prosecution

as well as the defence is that the accused was residing with

his family along with the deceased Lakshmi Amma in her

house and the property, where the house is situating, has

already been given in favour of Parukutty by the deceased

Lakshmi Amma. If that be so, in the absence of any other

evidence, we are unable to approve the conclusion of the

learned Judge about the property dispute. PWs 2 and 3

during the deposition, have also failed to give any account

regarding the property dispute. PW2 miserably failed to

say anything about the quarrel allegedly occurred on the

date of the incident and the subject matter of such a

quarrel. There is no evidence regarding the nature of the

alleged property dispute and dearth of evidence connected

with the same is against the prosecution, when the

admitted facts are that Lakshmi Amma has already

assigned her property in the name of her daughter who is

the wife of the accused and the accused and his family

were residing along with the deceased in the said property.

So, the 11th circumstance is also not proved by the

Crl.Appeal.No.1188 of 2011   : 59 :

prosecution.

      44. The 12th circumstance stated by the learned

Judge in the impugned judgment is not completely correct

in view of the prosecution inputs and therefore, the same

cannot be accepted. The non explanation of DW1 about the

presence of the accused - his father when the body of the

deceased was taken for post mortem, according to us, is

not helpful for the prosecution to draw any presumption or

to hold the guilt of the accused. In the present case, we

have seen from the evidence of the prosecution witness

that, even when PW1 gave the First Information Statement,

he expressed his doubt over the involvement of the

accused in the commission of the crime. PW3 and the said

Radha have also attempted to implicate accused in the

above crime. If that be so, it is quite natural from the part

of a person against whom some doubt is expressed by the

in-laws, to keep away from the house in question or at the

time when the body was taken for post mortem. In this

circumstance, it is relevant to note that DW1, during his

chief examination itself, has stated that, after the burial of

the body of the deceased, when he enquired about his

Crl.Appeal.No.1188 of 2011         :  60 :

father, he realised that his father was taken to the

Ottapalam police station. Thereafter, he went to the police

station and met his father. Under the above circumstances,

according to us, the absence of the accused during the

funeral of the deceased Lakshmi Amma have no much

relevance.

       45. The examination of the entire facts and

circumstances about the case and the evidence, we cannot

approve the conclusion and finding of the learned Sessions

Judge. The legal position, in a case where the prosecution

case rest upon circumstantial evidence, is now well settled.

In the decision in Sharad Birdhichand Sarda Vs. State

of Maharashtra [AIR 1984 SUPREME COURT 1622],

the Hon'ble Supreme Court has held:

          "A close analysis of this decision would show that the
  following conditions must be fulfilled before a case against an
  accused can be said to be fully established:

          (1)    the circumstances from which the conclusion of
   guilt is to be drawn should be fully established.

   It may be noted here that this Court indicated that the
   circumstances concerned 'must or should' and not 'may be'
   established.     There is not only a grammatical but a legal
   distinction between 'may be proved' and 'must be or should be
   proved' as was held by this Court in Shivaji Sahebrao Bobade
   Vs. State of Maharashtra, (1973) 2 SCC 793: (AIR 1973 SC
   2622) where the following observations were made:

           "certainly, it is a primary principle that the accused must

Crl.Appeal.No.1188 of 2011       :  61 :

   be and not merely may be guilty before a Court can convict and
   the mental distance between 'may be' and 'must be' is long and
   divides vague conjectures from sure conclusions."

        (2) the facts so established should be consistent only with
    the hypothesis of the guilt of the accused, that is to say, they
    should not be explainable on any other hypothesis except that
    the accused is guilty,

       (3) the circumstances should be of a conclusive nature and
    tendency,

       (4)   they should exclude every possible hypothesis except
    the one to be proved, and

       (5)   there must be a chain of evidence so complete as not
    to leave any reasonable ground for the conclusion consistent
    with the innocence of the accused and must show that in all
    human probability the act must have been done by the
    accused."

       Similarly, in Para No.9 of the decision in State of U.P.

Vs. Ashok Kumar Srivastava [AIR 1992 SUPREME

COURT 840], the Hon'ble Apex Court has held:

          "This Court has, time out of number, observed that while
   appreciating circumstantial evidence the Court must adopt a
   very cautious approach and should record a conviction only if
   all the links in the chain are complete pointing to the guilt of
   the accused and every hypothesis of innocence is capable of
   being negatived on evidence.      Great care must be taken in
   evaluating circumstantial evidence and if the evidence relied on
   is reasonably capable of two inferences, the one in favour of
   the accused must be accepted. The circumstance relied upon
   must be found to have been fully established and the
   cumulative effect of all the facts so established must be
   consistent only with the hypothesis of guilt. But this is not to
   say that the prosecution must meet any and every hypothesis
   put forward by the accused however far-fetched and fanciful it
   might be. Nor does it mean that prosecution evidence must be
   rejected on the slightest doubt because the law permits
   rejection if the doubt is reasonable and not otherwise. We are
   also conscious of the fact that the presumption of innocence is
   strengthened, certainly not weakened, by their acquittal by the
   High Court and ordinarily this Court is slow to interfere with an

Crl.Appeal.No.1188 of 2011      :   62 :

   order of acquittal in exercise of its extraordinary powers under
   S.136 of the Constitution. However, in the present case the
   facts found proved as discussed earlier are (i)      the accused
   were unhappy about the cash and articles given by way of
   dowry at the time of the 'tilak' ceremony, (ii) the accused
   taunted, tormented and tortured Meera for the insufficiency of
   the dowry amount, (iii) a few days before the incident while at
   Banaras there was a heated argument and then Ashok returned
   to Lucknow without Meera, (iv) Meera entreated her father-in-
   law to permit her to join Ashok but the latter refused saying
   she will have to rot at Bararas alone unless the dowry amount
   was made good, (v) ignoring her father-in-law's refusal Meera
   went to Lucknow, (vi) the two accused Rajendra Lal and Sudha
   followed her to Lucknow, (vii)while at Lucknow all the three
   illtreated her, (viii) Meera was found on fire at about 2.30 or
   2.45 a.m., (ix) while she was burning the three accused who
   alone were inside came out of the room and stood in the
   verandah chit-chatting unconcerned about her plight, (x) none
   of them tried to help Meera, (xi)soon after that the house was
   locked and the accused could not be found, (xii) while the two
   accused were apprehended on the 23rd Ashok could not be
   traced till he surrendered on 5th September, 1974, and (xiii)
   false explanation or statements were made to explain away
   their conduct."



        On the scrutiny of the evidence and the materials on

record in the light of the above authorities, it can be seen

that the prosecution has miserably failed to prove the

presence of the accused - appellant in the house where the

occurrence had taken place, either at the time of the

incident or immediately after the incident, for the reasons,

we have already rendered, the evidence of PWs 2 and 3

cannot be believed. The evidence of PW1 and PW5 also

cannot be believed to establish the presence of the accused

immediately after the incident. The prosecution has failed

Crl.Appeal.No.1188 of 2011   : 63 :

to examine one Gopi said to have told to PW1 that the said

Gopi had seen the accused immediately after the incident.

So the hearsay evidence of PW1 cannot be accepted to

convict the appellant - accused. Thus, if the evidence of

PWs 1, 2, 3 & 5 are excluded, the circumstance Nos.2, 3, 4,

5, 6 7, 8 & 9 cannot be held as proved and consequently,

the chain of circumstances relied on by the prosecution has

been broken. As the prosecution has failed to collect any

evidence with respect to the foot print or finger print from

the place of occurrence and the prosecution has failed to

obtain scientific and expert evidence after subjecting the

hairs for Neutron Activation Analysis, we cannot say that

the prosecution has positively proved the presence of the

accused at the time of crime and thus there is no link

evidence to connect the accused with the crime.          The

motive suggested by the prosecution has also not been

proved with a cogent evidence, to the satisfaction of this

court.

      Under the above circumstances, we are of the opinion

that the prosecution has miserably failed to establish the

circumstances relied on by them and also failed to prove

Crl.Appeal.No.1188 of 2011   :  64 :

the chain of circumstances pointing towards the guilt of the

accused and ruling out any hypothesis with the innocence

of the accused.

      In the result, this appeal is allowed setting aside the

judgment dated 25.01.2011 in S.C.No.450/2009 of the court of

Additional Sessions Judge, Fast Track Court No.II, Palakkad and

the appellant - accused is acquitted of all the charges levelled

against him.

      As this court has already set aside the judgment by which

the appellant is convicted and has acquitted him, he is entitled

to get released from the jail forthwith if he is not required for

any other case. Therefore, the Registry is directed to forward

the gist of this judgment to the Superintendent, Central Prison,

Kannur, forthwith for appropriate action.




                                    Sd/-
                           V.K.MOHANAN, JUDGE

                                    Sd/-
                    RAJA VIJAYARAGHAVAN V, JUDGE

Bb

                                   [True copy]

                                         P.A to Judge



