
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                           PRESENT:

             THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE K.HARILAL

 WEDNESDAY, THE 16TH DAY OF SEPTEMBER 2015/25TH BHADRA, 1937

                   RPFC.No. 10 of 2007 (E)
                   ------------------------


  AGAINST THE ORDER IN MC 277/2006 of FAMILY COURT, PALAKKAD
                       DATED 10-10-2006

REVISION PETITIONER/COUNTER PETITIONER::
----------------------------------------

       RAJAGOPALAN, S/O. RAMAN KUTTY,
       KARIMBATHU VEEDU, KARUKAMANI, PANIYOOR P.O.,
       ATHIKKODE, CHITTUR, PALAKKAD.

       BY ADV. SRI.JACOB SEBASTIAN

RESPONDENT(S)/PETITIONERS::
---------------------------

          1. GIRIJA, AGED 36 YEARS,
       D/O. PARAMESWARAN, PUZHAKKAL VEEDU, KANNADI,
       PALAKKAD.

          2. RAHUL, AGED 7 YEARS,
       S/O. GIRIJA, RESIDING AT PUZHAKKAL VEEDU, KANNADI,
       PALAKKAD.


       THIS REV.PETITION(FAMILY COURT)  HAVING BEEN FINALLY
HEARD ON 16-09-2015, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE
FOLLOWING:




OKB


                      K.HARILAL, J.

                _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _

                  R.P(FC). No.10 of 2007
                _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _

        Dated this the 16th day of September, 2015.


                          O R D E R



    The petitioner herein is the respondent in

M.C.No.277/06 on the files of the Family Court,

Palakkad, filed by the respondents herein who are the

wife  and   the   son     of    the     petitioner,    claiming

maintenance allowance under Section 125 of the Cr.P.C.

According to the 1st respondent, she is the legally

wedded wife of the petitioner and their marriage was

solemnised in the year 1997. The 2nd respondent is the

son born out of the said wedlock.                They cohabited

together from 1997 to 2001 only. She was constrained

to leave the company of the petitioner when his ill-

treatment and cruelty became intolerable. He used to

harass her demanding more money and gold ornaments.

At last, she was compelled to return to her parental

house and thereafter the respondents are depending

upon the parents of the 1st respondent.                 The 1st

R.P(FC). 10/07                :2:


respondent has no job or any source of income and

thereby she is unable to maintain herself; whereas, the

petitioner is conducting a welding workshop and he is

earning Rs.5,000/- per month.       The 1st respondent

claimed an amount of Rs.1,500/- and the 2nd respondent

claimed an amount of Rs.1,000/- per month.

      2.      The petitioner admitted the relationship

claimed by the respondents. But he resisted the claim

for maintenance on the ground that the 1st respondent

was residing separately without sufficient reasons.

According to him, the 1st respondent is able enough to

maintain herself as she is earning Rs.2,000/- per month

from her tailoring works.      He denied the allegation

that he is earning Rs.5,000/- per month from his job.

According to him, he is only a worker in the said

workshop and getting only Rs.90/- per day.      On the

above pleadings, both the parties adduced evidence

which consist of the oral evidence of P.Ws.1 and 2 and

CPW.1. Exts.D1 to D2(b) were marked on the side of the

1st respondent.      After evaluating the evidence on

record, the court below directed the petitioner to pay

R.P(FC). 10/07                :3:


maintenance allowance @ Rs.900/- per month to the 1st

respondent       and Rs.700/-  per   month   to  the  2nd

respondent.       The legality of the entitlement of the

maintenance allowance and the correctness of the

quantum determined by the learned Family Court are

under challenge in this revision petition.

      3. Heard the learned counsel for the revision

petitioner.

      4.      The learned counsel advanced arguments

assailing the findings whereby the petitioner was

directed to pay maintenance allowance to the 1st

respondent. The sum and substance of the arguments is

that the 1st respondent is residing separately without

sufficient reasons. Therefore, she is not entitled to

get maintenance allowance.

      5. The marital status of the 1st respondent and the

paternity of the 2nd respondent are admitted. It is also

contended that though the marriage was solemnised in

the year 1997, they cohabited together upto 2001 and

thereafter the respondents are residing separately.

The M.C. was filed in the year 2006. No evidence was

R.P(FC). 10/07               :4:


forthcoming to show that the petitioner has made any

earnest       effort to resume  the  company   of   the

respondents. So also, there is no evidence to show that

he has paid any amount towards maintenance of the

respondents from 2001 to 2006. The 1st respondent has

given evidence to satisfy the court that the petitioner

had ill-treated her with cruelty demanding more

dowry and when the ill treatment became intolerable,

she was constrained to leave the company of the

petitioner. I do not find any reason to interfere with

the findings of the leaned Family Court judge who had

an opportunity to witness the demeanour of the

witness. I do not find any illegality or impropriety in

the finding that the 1st respondent is entitled to get

maintenance allowance from the petitioner.

      6. Coming to the correctness of the quantum of

maintenance allowance, though the petitioner had

contended that the 1st respondent is earning Rs.2,000/-

per month from her tailoring works, no evidence was

forthcoming to show that she is a tailor by profession.

In the absence of such evidence, it can be safely

R.P(FC). 10/07              :5:


concluded that the 1st respondent is unable to maintain

herself and the 2nd respondent. The petitioner himself

admitted that he is doing welding works.           But,

according to him, he is only a worker in the workshop.

However, he admitted that he is a skilled worker doing

welding works. He has no case that he is unhealthy or

physically disabled, to do any work. "Means" provided

under Section 125 of the Cr.P.C. signifies not only

movable or immovable property in the shape of salary,

agricultural income or rent, but also the earning

capacity of a physically able bodied man. Similarly,

"maintenance" includes provision for food, shelter,

residence, medical attendance, educational expenses of

the children, etc.      A husband is liable to pay

maintenance allowance to his wife and children in

accordance with their living status and standard of

life and the day-to-day requirements. In the above

analysis,      I find that the  monthly   maintenance

allowance granted by the court below at the rate of

Rs.900/- to the 1st respondent and Rs.700/- to the 2nd

respondent is not excessive and there is no reason to

R.P(FC). 10/07               :6:


interfere with the said finding also.     Consequently,

this R.P(FC) is dismissed.

      7. The learned counsel for the revision petitioner

sought for some time to pay the arrear. Having regard

to the facts and circumstances of the case, the

petitioner is given four months time to pay the arrear,

provided that half of the entire arrear shall be paid

within two months and the remaining balance shall be

paid within the next two months.       In the event of

failure to pay the first instalment, this instalment

facility will stand automatically vacated and the 1st

respondent is at liberty to realise the entire arrear in

lump sum, in accordance with law.

                                            Sd/-
                                      K. HARILAL, JUDGE

okb.



