
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                       PRESENT:

                  THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE C.T.RAVIKUMAR

         WEDNESDAY, THE 3RD DAY OF JUNE 2015/13TH JYAISHTA, 1937

                              CRL.A.No. 1533 of 2005 ( )
                                ---------------------------
AGAINST THE JUDGMENT IN SC No.161/2000 of THE COURT OF ADDL. SESSIONS
      JUDGE FAST TRACK COURT-II(ADHOC), THRISSUR DATED 24.08.2005

APPELLANT/ACCUSED NO.1:
------------------------------

         UNNIMON @ UNNIKRISHNAN,
         S/O.CHERADY VEETTIL KUNHAPPU, NENMANI DESOM
         THAIKKAD VILLAGE, CHAVAKKAD TALUK.

         BY ADVS.SRI.P.VIJAYA BHANU
                      SRI.P.M.RAFIQ

RESPONDENT/COMPLAINANT:
--------------------------------

         STATE OF KERALA, REPRESENTED BY
         PUBLIC PROSECUTOR, HIGH COURT OF KERALA,
         ERNAKULAM.

         R, BY ADV. PUBLIC PROSECUTOR

               THIS CRIMINAL APPEAL HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD ON
03-06-2015, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY DELIVERED THE FOLLOWING:


                         C.T.RAVIKUMAR, J.
                     ------------------------------
                       Crl.A.No.1533 of 2005
                    -------------------------------
                        Dated 2nd June, 2015

                              JUDGMENT

            This appeal is directed against the judgment in S.C.No.161

of 2000 of the Court of Additional Sessions Judge Fast Track Court-II

(Adhoc), Thrissur. The appellant was the first accused in the said

Sessions Case.     He along with three other co-accused who are

respectively his mother and brothers, were tried for the offence under

Section 304B of the Indian Penal Code. But, the appellant alone was

found guilty under Section 498A of the Indian Penal Code and the

others were acquitted. For the conviction thereunder, the appellant

was sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for a period of three

years and to pay a fine of  50,000/- within a period of six months

failing which to undergo rigorous imprisonment for a further period of

six months. The amount of fine, if realised, was directed to be paid

equally to the children of the deceased and as they being minors it

was ordered that the said amount shall be deposited in equal shares in

their respective names in a Nationalised Bank till they attain majority.




            2. The case of the prosecution is as follows:-

            The appellant married Sujana, the deceased, on 11.2.1990

Crl.A.No.1533/2005                 2


and while they were living in the matrimonial house the appellant and

the other accused who are his mother and brothers tortured her mentally

and physically and subjected her to cruelty demanding more dowry and

unable to bear the torture she committed suicide by sprinkling kerosene

over her body and setting fire by herself at about 9.30 p.m. on

30.8.1996.     Crime No.154 of 1996 of Guruvayur Police Station was

registered and after the investigation a final report alleging commission

of offence punishable under Section 498A read with Section 34 of the

Indian Penal Code was laid before the Court of Judicial First Class

Magistrate, Chalakkudy. Cognizance was taken thereon and it was taken

on file as C.C.No.192 of 1998. On appearance of the appellant and the

other accused and after hearing them as also the prosecution the learned

Magistrate framed charge under Section 498A read with Section 34 IPC.

It was read over and explained to them and they pleaded not guilty and

claimed to be tried. Consequently, trial was conducted. PWs 1 to 9 were

examined and Exts.P1 to P7 were marked.           Thereupon, the learned

Magistrate noticed that the incident took place on 30.8.1996 and the

marriage of the deceased with the appellant herein was solemnised on

11.2.1990.     Therefore, the death occurred within seven years of her

marriage and the ingredients of Section 304B, IPC were attracted.

Consequently, finding that the case is triable only by a Court of Session it

Crl.A.No.1533/2005                 3


was converted and refiled as C.P.No.30 of 1999 and it was committed to

Court of Session, Thrissur. It was taken on file as S.C.No.161 of 2000

and made over to the Principal Assistant Sessions Court, Thrissur and

subsequently, it was transferred to the Court of Additional Sessions

Judge Fast Tract Court-II (Adhoc), Thrissur.     Thereafter, charge was

framed by the trial court against the appellant and the other accused for

offence under Section 304B, IPC. The said charge was read over and

explained to them and they pleaded not guilty and claimed to be tried.

To bring home the charge against the appellant and the others

prosecution had examined PWs 1 to 23 and got marked Exts.P1 to P27

besides identifying MO1 to MO3 series. After the closure of the evidence

of the prosecution the accused were questioned under Section 313,

Cr.P.C. and they denied all the incriminating circumstances put to them.

Finding that there was no reason for acquittal under Section 232, Cr.P.C.

the accused were asked to enter on their defence. Consequently, DW1

and DW2 were examined and Exts.D1 to D11 were marked as defence

evidence. After evaluating the evidence on record the trial court found

the accused including the appellant herein not guilty of the offence under

Section 304B, IPC.    Though no charge was framed against them for

offence punishable under Section 306, IPC the trial court considered the

question whether they are guilty under Section 306, IPC and found them

Crl.A.No.1533/2005                 4


not guilty for an offence punishable under Section 306, IPC.        After

entering into such findings and finding them not guilty of the offences

punishable under Sections 304B and 306, IPC the trial court went

on to consider the question whether the accused persons are guilty of

the offence punishable under Section 498A, IPC.              After such

consideration it was found that accused 2 to 4 are not guilty of the

offence punishable under Section 498A ,IPC and consequently, they were

acquitted of the said offence. At the same time, the appellant herein was

found guilty of the offence punishable under Section 498A, IPC and was

convicted and sentenced as aforesaid. This appeal is filed in the said

circumstances.




             3. I have heard the learned counsel appearing for the

appellant and also the learned Public Prosecutor.




             4. Manifold contentions were raised by the learned Senior

counsel for the appellant to mount challenge against the impugned

judgment of conviction. It is contended that though no specific charge

was framed against the appellant and the other co-accused for the

offence punishable under Section 498A, IPC the trial court which framed

charge against the accused only under Section 304-B, IPC upon finding

Crl.A.No.1533/2005                   5


them not guilty under Section 304-B, IPC considered their culpability

under Section 306, IPC and even after finding them not guilty thereunder

continued with such consideration in relation to the offence under Section

498-A, IPC.    The trial court finding the co-accused of the appellant viz.,

A2 to A4 not guilty under Section 498A, IPC relied on the evidence of

PW1 and PW2 to certain extent and the oral testimonies of PW16 to

PW18 and Ext.P18 to arrive at the finding of guilt of the offence

punishable under Section 498A, IPC against the appellant erringly. It is

submitted further that the evidence of the relatives of the deceased viz.,

PWs 1, 16 and 17 constitute hearsay evidence and as such inadmissible

under Section 60 of the Evidence Act especially, in view of the acquittal

of all the accused including the appellant herein under Section 304B and

306, IPC in the matter of consideration of the culpability under Section

498-A, IPC. However, their evidence were also relied on to enter on the

finding of conviction against the appellant wrongly and illegally. It is

contended that in view of the acquittal of the accused including the

appellant for the offence punishable under Section 304-B and 306, IPC

the cause of death of Sujana lost its significance as an element for

deciding the culpability and in such circumstances, taking into account

the cause of death and the circumstances leading to death as questions

of relevance, was inadmissible as it would not fall under exception to

Crl.A.No.1533/2005                  6


Section 32(1) of the Evidence Act. Such evidence of the relatives were

also taken into account despite inadmissibility, for the purpose of

entering into the conclusion of guilt against the appellant, it is

contended. It is also contended by the learned Senior counsel for the

appellant that in the light of the decision of the Hon'ble Apex Court in

Bhairon Singh v. State of Madhya Pradesh (AIR 2009 SC 2603)

and the decision of this Court in Mony @ Suresh Kumar v. State of

Kerala (2010 (1) KLD 81) placing reliance on such evidence and in

such circumstances explained above, is absolutely unsustainable. The

learned Senior counsel further submitted that applying the dictum laid

down by the Hon'ble Apex Court in Bhairon Singh's case (supra) the

evidence of the relatives which fall into the category of hearsay evidence

ought to have been found inadmissible under Section 60 of the Evidence

Act and in such circumstances, the surviving evidence against the

appellant for considering his culpability or otherwise as relates the

offence punishable under Section 498A, IPC was only the twin dying

declarations viz., Exts.P11 and P18. At the same breath it is contended

that those dying declarations also could not have been relied on for the

purpose of entering into a finding of conviction against the appellant as

they are materially contradictory to each other and in the absence of any

other evidence to corroborate Ext.P18. To buttress the said contention

Crl.A.No.1533/2005                 7


the learned Senior counsel relied on the decisions of the Hon'ble Apex

Court in Lella Srinivasa Rao v. State of A.P. ((2004) 9 SCC 713),

Amol Singh v. State of Madhya Pradesh ((2008) 5 SCC 468),

Chinnamma v. State of Kerala ((2004) 12 SCC 244) and Sanjay v.

State of Maharashtra ((2007) 9 SCC 148). It is further contended

by the learned Senior counsel for the appellant that in view of the

indisputable position obtained that Exts.P11 and P18, the two dying

declarations available in this case, are mutually inconsistent and

contradictory to each other and in the absence of any other piece of

evidence to corroborate Ext.P18 and also in the light of the contentions

raised based on the decision in Bhairon Singh's case (supra) there was

absolutely no material at all to convict the appellant for the offence

under Section 498A, IPC. The learned Senior counsel for the appellant

further contended that the conviction of the appellant under Section

498A, IPC is unsustainable on another ground as well. It is virtually, an

alternative    contention. Without    conceding   the   aforementioned

contentions, it is contended that accusations made against the appellant

to attract the offence under Section 498A, IPC in Ext.P18 and also the

evidence of PW1, PW16 and PW17 were available against the other

accused as well and therefore, having found them not guilty under

Section 498A, IPC there was absolutely no reason or justification for

Crl.A.No.1533/2005                  8


entering into a different finding as relates the appellant on the same set

of evidence and in the absence of any other allegation of specific overt

act. In that context, it is further contended that the trial court lost sight

of the fact that in Ext.P11 dying declaration an explicit exculpatory

statement was made by the deceased herself in respect of the appellant

herein in the matter and even in the absence of any such favourable

piece of evidence the others were acquitted for the offence under Section

498A, IPC and in such circumstances, the finding of guilty against the

appellant for the offence under Section 498A, IPC is absolutely

unsustainable. In short, it is submitted by the learned Senior counsel for

the appellant that the impugned judgment of conviction warrants

appellate interference.     Per contra, the learned Public Prosecutor

contended that the contention regarding the non-framing of specific

charge under Section 498A, IPC is inconsequential in the light of the

provisions under section 222, Cr.P.C. It is submitted that there can be

no dispute regarding the position that offence under Section 498A,IPC is

a lesser serious offence than offences under Sections 304B and 306, IPC.

When specific charge was framed against the appellant for the offence

under Section 304B, IPC the mere fact that he was found not guilty

thereunder is not a reason for canvassing the position that in the

absence of specific charge under Section 498A, IPC the appellant could

Crl.A.No.1533/2005                   9


not be convicted thereunder in the light of the provisions under Section

222, Cr.P.C. The learned Public Prosecutor further contended that the

evidence of the relatives viz., PW1, PW16 and PW17 also could not have

been eschewed while considering the culpability of the appellant for the

offence punishable under Section 498A, IPC and it is incorrect and

unsustainable to say that their oral testimonies are inadmissible in

evidence in the light of Section 60 of the Evidence Act. So also, it is

contended that the decision relied on by the appellant in Bhairon

Singh's case (Supra) is inapplicable to the facts and circumstances of

the instant case. The learned Public Prosecutor further contended that

the mere existence of two dying declarations is not a ground for ignoring

them and in such circumstances, it is incumbent on the court to consider

whether any of such dying declarations could be relied on for the purpose

of considering the culpability of the accused/appellant. To bring home the

said point the learned Public Prosecutor relied on the decisions of the

Hon'ble Apex Court in Laxman v. State of Maharashtra ((2002) 6

SCC 710), Sher Singh v. State of Punjab (AIR 2008 SC 1426) and

also a Division Bench decision of this Court in Biju v. State of Kerala

(2012 (4) KLT SN 97 (C.No.88).            It is also the contention of the

learned Public Prosecutor that besides the evidence of PWs 1, 16 and 17

the evidence of PW18 with Ext.P18 would lead only to the irresistible

Crl.A.No.1533/2005                  10


conclusion of guilt of the accused and therefore, the impugned judgment

cannot be said to be suffering from any legal infirmity or illegality

warranting appellate interference. For a proper appreciation of the rival

contentions it is relevant to advert to the oral evidence as also the

documentary evidence.




             5. PW1 is the mother of deceased Sujana. She would depose

that Sujana was given in marriage to the appellant in the year 1990 and

that at the time of marriage 6> sovereigns of gold was given to her.

She would further depose that when the appellant came with the

proposal their inability to conduct the marriage was divulged to him and

his relatives and then, the appellant and the relatives agreed to PW1 and

their family that they would permit them to take six months' salary of

Sujana who was working as a teacher in Manathala High School. She

deposed further that father of Sujana, in fact, collected two months'

salary of Sujana since the marriage. But, when he turned up to collect

the salary thereafter he was scolded and attempted to be beaten up by

the appellant and accused Nos.2 and 3 and since then he never went to

the appellant's house. She would further depose thus:-

             When it was learnt that Sujana was carrying PW17 who was

her sister was sent to the appellant's house to bring Sujana for delivery.

Crl.A.No.1533/2005                 11


However, the appellant and the second accused were unwilling to send

her along with PW17 and later they came to know that Sujana delivered

a child in a hospital. The appellant did not permit her to see Sujana, but

on the 3rd day of her delivery Sujana came to her house and complained

of being put to hunger and also about the total lack of aftercare and she

left immediately and thereafter on the 56th day of delivery she again

came back home complaining of illtreatment and manhandling from the

part of the appellant. Sujana remained at home for about 10-20 days

stating that she could not tolerate the torture meted out to her by the

appellant and the other accused. Sujana came there on that day without

the baby and later after mediation she was taken to her matrimonial

home by her younger sister, her husband, the father of the deceased and

a neighbour.      Upon entering the house all the accused dragged

Sujana inside and closed the door. The persons who accompanied Sujana

to her matrimonial home further divulged to her that after Sujana was

being dragged inside they heard only her cry from inside. Later, on

coming to know that Sujana gave birth to another child she went to see

the child but was driven out of the house by the appellant and since then

she used to meet Sujana only from the school where she was then

teaching.    When she went to see Sujana in the hospital after being

hospitalised, on sustaining the burns, Sujana told her about the serious

Crl.A.No.1533/2005                12


illtreatment and cruelty meted out to her and that her bones were

broken by birching.   Ext.P1 F.I. Statement was signed by her husband

and he died subsequently and she identified his signature thereon and in

Ext.P2 statement given before the Court of Judicial First Class Magistrate,

Chavakkad.




             6. PW2 is a neighbour of the appellant and he, in fact, is his

cousin. He deposed that the appellant married Sujana in 1990 and he

was not invited to the said marriage owing to the long standing dispute

between the families of himself and the appellant and that he did not

accompany Sujana to the hospital. He was declared hostile and was

cross examined by the learned Public Prosecutor with permission of the

court.   During such cross examination he deposed that there is long

standing family dispute regarding the property between their families

and that was why he did not participate in the marriage of the appellant

with Sujana. He would also depose that he was the Secretary and the

appellant was the Treasurer of a Samithi constituted to help the

members of the community in obsequial matters and denied the

suggestion of existence of a dispute between himself and the appellant

with respect to the withdrawal of an amount of  6,000/- and at the

same time, he admitted that there was a joint withdrawal of  6,000/-

Crl.A.No.1533/2005                13


for him. He denied of any knowledge of illtreatment to deceased Sujana

by the accused persons demanding dowry.           PW3 is also another

neighbour of the appellant and he too, turned hostile to the prosecution

and deposed during cross examination that he saw ablazed Sujana

coming to the house from outside. PW4 is yet another neighbour and

she would depose that Sujana died of burns and further that she did not

know the reason for the incident. PW5 is the Doctor attached to Jubilee

Mission Hospital, Thrissur who examined Sujana on 30.8.1996 at

10.30 p.m. and issued Ext.P9 wound certificate. He deposed that the

cause of injury was revealed to him by the bystanders as accidental

burns on sprinkling of kerosene and also that at the time of examination

she was found fully conscious though found suffering from excruciating

pain. According to PW5, Sujana had burns all over the body and she was

stinking with kerosene and even her hair had the said odour. He further

deposed that the cause of injury may be accidental or suicidal and that

Sujana died on 4.9.1996 at about 4.50 p.m. and Ext.P10 medical records

pertaining to the deceased Sujana were marked through PW5. He would

further depose that as per the said medical reports on 1.9.1996 at

3 p.m. the Doctor was called to the ward on the arrival of the Magistrate

for recording dying declaration and the learned Magistrate also sought

for a certificate from the Doctor. He also deposed that though such an

Crl.A.No.1533/2005               14


information was passed on to him he could not recollect the name of the

informer and that he was not specifically told as to what kind of a

certificate was to be issued. PW5 deposed that he knew Dr.Thimothi

who recorded Ext.P11 dying declaration of deceased Sujana and that

Dr.Thimothi was working as Chief Medical Officer in the said hospital. He

identified his signature and deposed that Dr.Thimothi is no more. He

deposed that Ext.P11 dying declaration was recorded by Dr.Thimothi on

31.8.1996 at 9.30 a.m. and in the light of the statements in Ext.P11 he

further deposed that Sujana sprinkled kerosene on her saree and set

herself to fire. Among other things she declared to Dr.Thimothi that she

got no problems with her husband and specifically stated that the

husband is not responsible for the incident and therefore, he should not

be harassed in connection with the said incident and that he was an

employed person going by Ext.P11 dying declaration.         PW5 further

deposed that the said document would further reveal that when

Dr.Thimothi asked Sujana regarding the place of occurrence she replied

that it occurred from the matrimonial house on the previous night at

9 O' clock and on being asked whether she got anything more to say she

stated that the husband should not be implicated and that his job should

not be affected in any manner. PW5 also deposed that he had given

evidence before the Court of Judicial First Class Magistrate, Chavakkad

Crl.A.No.1533/2005                15


and admitted that Ext.P8 is the oral testimony given by him before the

learned Magistrate. He also deposed that he is aware of the fact that the

Magistrate had recorded another dying declaration of Sujana on

1.9.1996. PW5 deposed further that the records could not show that

Sujana was unconscious on 1.9.1996 at 2.30 a.m. viz., the date and time

in which Ext.P18 dying declaration was recorded by the Magistrate.

During cross examination PW5 deposed that on 1.9.1996 when he

examined Sujana, she was complaining of pain and headache and was

expressing drowsiness and that the drowsiness might be on account of

the medicines administered to her on 31.8.1996. But, he would also

depose that on 1.9.1996 no medicines or fluids causing sedation was

given to her. He deposed that extensive burns and cardiac respiratory

arrest was the reason for her death. Evidently, he denied the suggestion

of the defence that the patient with 100% burns could not speak and

would reiterate that Sujana when brought to the casualty was in her

senses and was fully conscious. He would depose that a person with

100% burns could speak provided no burn injury inside of the oral

cavity.

             7. PW6 was the Headmistress of the school where deceased

Sujana was teaching. PW7 was a teacher in the said school. Both PW6

and PW7 got high esteem about the character of Sujana. PW8 issued

Crl.A.No.1533/2005                 16


Ext.P13 certificate which would reveal that the house in which the

incident occurred belonged to the father of the appellant.       PW9 and

PW10 are the attesting witnesses to Ext.P14 inquest report. Both of

them admitted their signatures in Ext.P14. PW11 is the driver of the

ambulance in which deceased Sujana was brought to the hospital

immediately after the incident. PW12 is the attesting witness to Ext.P15

scene mahazar. He would admit his signature thereon. PW13 was the

Police Constable who guarded the dead body of Sujana. PW14 would

depose that he was working as Head Constable at Thrissur East Police

Station at the time of the incident and on seeing the critical condition of

Sujana he informed the said fact to Circle Inspector of Guruvayoor and

on his direction intimation was given to the Doctor to record dying

declaration. He deposed that Dr.Thimothi recorded the dying declaration

from Sujana and the Doctor himself forwarded the same to the court.




             8. PW16 is the younger sister of diseased Sujana.         She

deposed that marriage of Sujana with the appellant was solemnised on

11.2.1990 and Sujana was a teacher in a Government school and that at

the time of marriage she was given 6> sovereigns of gold ornaments

and further that the appellant and the members of his family had agreed

to permit their father to receive salary of Sujana for six months. She

Crl.A.No.1533/2005                  17


further deposed that their father received salary of Sujana for two

months and thereafter he was ill-treated when turned up for collecting

the salary. According to her, she was told by the father that Sujana was

dragged inside the house and was manhandled. She also deposed that

shortly after the delivery, on the 3rd day, and also on the 56th day Sujana

visited their house and on those occasions the child was not with her.

She also deposed that after mediation Sujana was taken to the house of

the appellant and she too accompanied her. She would further depose

thus:-

       When they reached the house of the appellant the appellant along

with the other accused dragged Sujana inside and closed the room and

it is the subsequent ill-treatment that led Sujana to commit suicide. At

the time of marriage of Sujana she was 17 or 18 years old and that she

got four elder sisters and on two or three occasions after quarrelling with

her husband Sujana came and stayed in the parental house. She was

there in the hospital till the death of Sujana. At the time of recording of

Ext.P18 dying declaration by the learned Magistrate herself, Suseela,

Suvarna and Sulochana, the other sisters of Sujana were present in

the room and the learned Magistrate had not asked them anything

and that Sujana had to suffer cruelty and harassment at the hands

of the accused.      PW17 is the sister of PW1.        She would depose

Crl.A.No.1533/2005                 18


that 6> sovereigns of gold were given at the time of marriage to Sujana

and there was also a promise from the part of the appellant and his

family members that for six months Sujana's father would be permitted

to collect her salary. She also deposed that from the 3rd month onwards

salary of Sujana was not given to him and that she had visited Sujana

about two years prior to her death in the school and then, Sujana told

her about the illtreatment. She deposed that she was standing outside

when the Magistrate recorded the dying declaration of Sujana. PW18 is

the then Judicial First Class Magistrate-II, Thrissur and he would depose

that on 1.9.1996 he recorded Ext.P18 dying declaration of Sujana at

about 2.30 p.m. from Jubilee Mission Hospital, Thrissur.       He would

depose that the request for recording the dying declaration from the

Circle Inspector of Chavakkad was received by him while he was in the

quarters and owing to Onam holidays he was in additional charge of all

the Magistrates of Thrissur District.    On receiving such intimation at

2.10 p.m. on 1.9.1996 he went to the hospital and recorded the dying

declaration of Sujana at 2.30 p.m.       He also deposed that when he

reached the hospital for the aforesaid purpose Doctors were not present

there and a hospital employee and the Circle Inspector took him to the

cot where Sujana was lying and that no Doctors were available for

certifying the mental condition of Sujana and therefore, he himself asked

Crl.A.No.1533/2005                  19


questions to Sujana to satisfy himself of her mental condition after

introducing himself as Judicial First Class Magistrate-II, Thrissur. He also

deposed that he put different questions and from the answers he

received for such questions he was satisfied about the fitness of her

mental condition for giving dying declaration and thereafter recorded

Ext.P18 statement. He also deposed that thereafter it was read out to

her and she admitted the same as true and her thumb impression was

taken twice as the first thumb impression was not clear and that the

recording of the dying declaration was over by 3 p.m. He would also

depose that after recording the dying declaration he waited there for 45

minutes more for the Doctor and then a lady Doctor came there and on

being asked to issue a certificate she refused to do so and he has

endorsed it in the memorandum and left the hospital at 3.45 p.m.

Ext.P19 is the letter by which the dying declaration was forwarded to the

Judicial First Class Magistrate, Chavakkad. He would also depose that

when he recorded the dying declaration nobody was present in the room.

During cross examination he deposed that Sujana was lying at the end of

a common ward and the cot was covered with mosquito net and she was

not seen in a separate room. He also denied the suggestion that the

declarant Sujana was not conscious and was not fit for giving dying

declaration.   During the re-examination PW18 admitted that Ext.P20

Crl.A.No.1533/2005                 20


requisition from the Circle Inspector was received by him at his residence

on 1.9.1996 at 2.10.p.m. PW18 would further depose that when Sujana

was asked about the incident she replied that she poured kerosene over

her body and set herself on fire. She stated that on the second day of

Onam there occurred a quarrel between herself and the mother-in-law

and the mother-in-law abused her when she came late from the

bathroom to sitzbath her daughter. She further stated to PW18 that the

appellant thereupon beaten on her face and dragged her and pushed

inside the room. She has also stated that previously her husband took

three of her bangles which were in the possession of the mother-in-law

and gave them to his friend to help him to perform a function. PW18

would further depose that Sujana stated to him that the appellant and

the other accused put her upside down and the brother of the appellant

attempted to beat her. Sujana further told him about the incidents

occurred immediately prior to the setting on fire. She stated that on the

third day of Onam holidays when she was taking rest after preparation of

meals her husband came there, scolded her for taking rest and caught

hold of her hands and pulled and pushed her outside the room. Then,

while sitting in the northern verandah of the house she thought why she

should continue to live like that and then sprinkled kerosene all over

her body and set fire using a match box and thereafter she regained

Crl.A.No.1533/2005                21


consciousness from the hospital. PW19, the chemical examiner who

issued Ext.P21 certificate after examining the six material objects,

deposed that in all of them presence of kerosene was found. PW20

conducted the inquest and he proved Ext.P14 as its report. PW21 was

the then Dy.S.P. of Kunnamkulam who verified the investigation

conducted by the Circle Inspector. PW22 proved Ext.P22 postmortem

certificate issued by Dr.V.T.Augusti and deposed that the Doctor opined

that Sujana died of burns. He deposed that the larynx was unaffected

by the burns, going by Ext.P22. PW23 was the then Circle Inspector

of Police who conducted the investigation. He deposed that on coming

to know about the admission of Sujana at Jubilee Mission Hospital with

burns and her critical condition he directed Head Constable Mohanan to

give intimation to the Doctor to record the dying declaration of Sujana.

Ext.P1 is the F.I. Statement based on which Ext.P23 F.I.R. was

registered. He deposed that on 1.9.1996 he took up the investigation

and prepared Ext.P15 scene mahazar and also seized MO1 to MO3

series and evidently, they were described in Ext.P15 scene mahazar.

As noticed hereinbefore, PW12 was the attesting witness to the

same. During cross examination PW23 would depose that owing to the

presence of the husband and the in-laws Sujana was seen not in a

position to give a statement and Ext.P1 statement was taken from the

Crl.A.No.1533/2005                   22


father of deceased Sujana. PW23 would depose that it was the Doctors

who had shown Sujana to PW18 to enable him to record the dying

declaration.




             9. DW1 is the sister of the appellant. She deposed that her

brothers including the appellant and the mother had not harassed or

treated deceased Sujana with cruelty and she proved Exts.D1 to D5

which are respectively the service book, insurance book, bank account

records, policy certificate etc. of deceased Sujana and deposed that after

the death of Sujana no amount was withdrawn. She also deposed that

when Sujana was admitted in the hospital in the earlier days she

attended her and she returned home only when the accused were

arrested in connection with the incident.      DW2 was the Manager of

Canara Bank, Chavakkad during the relevant point of time. He would

depose that an account was maintained jointly by Sujana and the

appellant with the said branch and that after 15.10.1995 there was no

withdrawal from the said account maintained by them and also that

father of Sujana gave Ext.D11 request not to permit the appellant to

withdraw any amount from the said account.




             10. From the evidence on record as adverted above and the

Crl.A.No.1533/2005                23


rival   contentions certain    questions    of  relevance  emerged     for

consideration.    Admittedly, in this case, the appellant and also his co-

accused were charged with and acquitted of the offence under Section

304B, IPC. So also, admittedly, the question of their culpability under

Section 306, IPC based on the same set of facts and evidence was

considered, without the charge being there for the same. Again, all of

them were found not guilty thereunder. On the same set of facts and

evidence on record the culpability of all the accused under Section 498A,

IPC was also considered by the trial court though no specific charge was

framed     under Section 498A, IPC.      After such consideration all the

accused except the appellant were acquitted of the offence under Section

498A, IPC and the appellant alone was convicted for the offence under

Section 498A, IPC. I will now, consider the legality of entering into a

conviction under Section 498A, IPC without framing charge thereunder

against a person who was chargesheeted for the offence under Section

304B and acquitted thereof.       While considering the said question

Sections 222 and 215, Cr.P.C. would assume relevance. There can be no

dispute with respect to the position that a mere omission or defect in

framing a charge does not disable a criminal court from convicting an

accused for another minor offence in case the accused was

chargesheeted for a major offence and if the ingredients of a particular

Crl.A.No.1533/2005                 24


minor offence were proved against the said accused.          Section 222,

Cr.P.C. deals with the situation which enables a criminal court to convict

a person of a minor offence even though the accused is not

chargesheeted with it, if with respect to an offence consisting of `several

particulars' a combination of some only of which constitutes a complete

minor offence and combination is proved, but the remaining particulars

are not proved. In this case, admittedly, the appellant along with others

were chargesheeted for the offence under Section 304B, IPC. It is an

offence of higher degree for causing `dowry death' and it is punishable

with the minimum sentence of seven years of rigorous imprisonment and

the maximum of life imprisonment. Section 306, IPC punishes abetment

of suicide.    The maximum sentence that could be awarded for the

conviction thereunder is 10 years and the minimum sentence thereunder

is not provided. As such, it is a lesser offence compared to Section

304B, IPC. When it comes to the offence under Section 498A, IPC the

offence punishable thereunder is making of a woman subject to such

cruelty falling under the explanation thereunder by the husband or the

relatives of the husband of that woman. It is punishable with

imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and shall also

be liable to fine. Therefore, evidently, it is still a lesser offence than

Section 306, IPC. In such circumstances, in the light of the provisions

Crl.A.No.1533/2005                 25


under Section 222, Cr.P.C. if a person is charged and acquitted under

Section 304B, IPC, non-framing of charge under Section 306, IPC or

under Section 498A, IPC are no grounds for not considering the question

of his culpability either under Section 306 or under Section 498A, IPC

subject, of course, of the existence of any evidence and invariably, the

scope of conviction would depend upon the success of the prosecution in

proving any such minor offence.        In such circumstances, all such

incriminating materials which constituted the said minor offence are also

to be put to the accused before recording conviction, if conviction were

to be entered into based on the evidence, to avoid failure of justice.

Evidently, in the case on hand, all the incriminating circumstances were

put to the appellant.    Viewing the case on hand, in the light of the

aforesaid position of law, the facts that the appellant herein was

acquitted of the offence under Section 304B, IPC and found not culpable

for the offence punishable under Section 306, IPC and also the finding of

guilty of the offence under Section 498A, IPC despite non-framing of a

charge thereunder are not grounds for appellate interference.




             11. Now, the question to be decided is whether the conviction

of the appellant for the offence under Section 498A, IPC is sustainable in

view of the evidence on record.        While considering the same the

Crl.A.No.1533/2005                 26


contention raised by the learned Senior counsel for the appellant in the

light of the decision of the Hon'ble Apex Court in Bhairon Singh's case

(supra) and the decision of this Court in Mony's case (supra) are

relevant. It is relevant for the purpose of deciding the evidentiary value

of the oral testimonies of PWs 1, 16 and 17. The contentions raised by

the learned Senior counsel for the appellant in the light of the decisions

of the Hon'ble Apex Court in Lella Srinivasa Rao's case, Amol Singh's

case,    Chinnamma's case and          Sanjay's case (supra) also have

relevance and obviously, such contentions are taken up for the purpose

of canvassing the position that Exts.P11 and P18 dying declarations

cannot form the basis for the appellant's conviction inasmuch as, they

are materially contradictory to each other. So also, the contention of the

learned Senior counsel for the appellant that having acquitted accused 2

to 4 of the offence under Section 498A,IPC, based on the same

accusation and on the same set of evidence there was absolutely no

sustainable ground for conviction of the appellant under Section 498A,

IPC also calls for serious consideration. Needless to say that

consideration of the contentions raised by the learned Public Prosecutor

in the light of the decisions in Laxman's case, Sher Singh's case and

Biju's case (supra) is also inevitable in this case.

Crl.A.No.1533/2005                  27


             12. Indisputably, for arriving at the conclusion of guilt of the

appellant the trial court relied on the oral testimonies of PW1, PW2 to

certain extent and that of PW5, PW16, PW17, PW18 with Ext.P18. From

the evidence on record it can be seen that the oral testimonies of PWs 1,

16 and 17 are the evidence available for considering the culpability or

otherwise of the appellant for the offence under Section 498A, IPC. But,

at the same time, their evidence, on close scrutiny for the said purpose,

would reveal that they partake only the nature of hearsay evidence. The

question is whether it is admissible in view of Section 60 of the Indian

Evidence Act ?      The discussion of evidence by the trial court in the

impugned judgment would reveal that though the evidence of PWs 1, 16

and 17 are adverted to, the trial court found that those prosecution

witnesses got no specific case at all to the effect that there was any

harassment or cruelty by any of the accused in connection with any

demand for dowry. At the same time, from the impugned judgment

itself it is evident that the oral testimonies of PWs 1, 16 and 17 were

insufficient to rather, inadmissible to enter into a finding of conviction

against the appellant for the offence under Section 304B, IPC as the

essential ingredient to be established for such offence was a demand for

dowry soon prior to the death. Evidently, the oral testimonies of PWs 1,

16 and 17 was not found sufficient for the purpose of entering into a

Crl.A.No.1533/2005                 28


finding of conviction against the appellant as also the other accused for

the offence under Section 306, IPC. The evidence of PWs 1, 16, 17 as

discussed above would undoubtedly reveal that they fall within the

category of hearsay evidence. In this context, it is to be noted that it is

not the case of the prosecution that they are eye witnesses.           The

question is whether the said evidence which indisputably fall within the

category of hearsay evidence can be the materials for the purpose of

conviction of the appellant under Section 498A, IPC. No doubt, such

hearsay evidence is inadmissible in the light of Section 60 of the

Evidence Act for the purpose of looking into the culpability or otherwise

of the accused for offence under Section 498A, IPC. A scanning of the

evidence of PWs 1, 16 and 17 would undoubtedly reveal that they did not

actually witnessed any harassment and going by their own version they

were told about such torture by the deceased Sujana.              In such

circumstances, to make the evidence tendered by them acceptable and

admissible in law they will have to fall within the exception to Section 32

(1) of the Indian Evidence Act. I may hasten to add here that it is true

that PW16 who is the sister of PW1 deposed that when she along with

the father of the deceased Sujana took Sujana to the matrimonial home

and when Sujana entered the house she was dragged inside and they

heard a cry. The further evidence tendered by PW16 itself would reveal

Crl.A.No.1533/2005                    29


that such piece of evidence got no relevancy as she herself deposed that

it occurred years before and thereafter Sujana lived in that house along

with the appellant and evidently, begotten a second child.            I am of the

view that a detailed discussion is not required to arrive at the finding that

they are inadmissible in law in view of the decision of the Hon'ble Apex

Court in Bhairon Singh's case (supra). It is only apropos to extract

paragraph 11 of the decision in Biron Singh's case (supra) to answer

the aforesaid question. It reads thus:-


                 11. The moot question is: whether the statements
          attributed to the deceased could be used as evidence for
          entering upon a finding that the accused subjected Ranjana
          Rani @ Raj Kumari to cruelty as contemplated under Section
          498-A, IPC. In our considered view, the evidence of PW-4 and
          PW-5 about what the deceased Ranjana Rani @ Raj Kumari
          had told them against the accused about the torture and
          harassment is inadmissible under Section 32(1) of the
          Evidence Act and such evidence cannot be looked into for any
          purpose. Except Section 32(1) of the Indian Evidence Act,
          there is no other provision under which the statement of a
          dead person can be looked into in evidence. The statement of
          a dead person is admissible in law if the statement is as to the
          cause of death or as to any of the circumstance of the
          transactions which resulted in her death, in a case in which
          the cause of death comes into question. What has been
          deposed by PW-4 and PW-5 has no connection with any
          circumstance of transaction which resulted in her death. The
          death of Smt. Ranjana Rani @ Raj Kumari was neither
          homicidal nor suicidal; it was accidental. Since for an offence
          under Section 498-A simpliciter, the question of death is not
          and cannot be an issue for consideration, we are afraid the
          evidence of PW-4 and PW-5 is hardly an evidence in law to
          establish such offence. In that situation Section 32(1) of the
          Evidence Act does not get attracted.
                                                       (emphasis added)

Crl.A.No.1533/2005                  30


The position as to what is the exception and when the exception, under

Section 32(1) of the Evidence Act is applicable are clearly discernible

from the aforequoted paragraph.       In that case after considering as to

what the deceased told the witnesses against the appellant/accused

regarding the torture and harassment the Hon'ble Apex Court found that

they got no connection with any of the circumstances of the transactions

which resulted in the death of the deceased Ranjana Rani in connection

with whose death the appellant/accused therein was tried.          For an

offence under Section 498-A, IPC simpliciter, the cause of death is not

and cannot be an issue for consideration. The statements attributed to

the deceased could be used only if they fall within the exception under

Section 32(1) of the Indian Evidence Act. Such statement of a dead

person is admissible in law only if the statement is as to the cause of

death or as to any of the circumstance of the transactions which resulted

in her death, in a case in which the cause of death is an issue for

consideration. In the said circumstances, the statements, attributed to

deceased Sujana in the oral testimonies of PW1, PW16 and PW17 cannot

and will not fall within the exception available under Section 32(1) of the

Indian Evidence Act. In the light of the said decision their depositions

regarding what the deceased Sujana told them with respect to the

torture and harassment could not have any evidentiary value in law to

Crl.A.No.1533/2005                31


establish the offence under Section 498A, IPC against the appellant as in

respect of such an offence cause of death could not be an issue for

consideration and therefore, they would not fall within the exception

under Section 32(1) of the Evidence Act. In such circumstances, it is

absolutely unnecessary to deal with the oral testimonies of PWs 1, 16

and 17 any further for considering the sustainability or otherwise of the

conviction of the appellant under Section 498A, IPC.             In such

circumstances, what survives for consideration is what are the surviving

materials available to decide on the culpability or otherwise of the

appellant under Section 498A, IPC. Eschewing the evidence of PWs 1, 16

and 17 which were found inadmissible hereinbefore, what survives for

consideration is the evidence of PW5 with Ext.P11 and the evidence of

PW18 with Ext.P18 and also oral testimony of PW16 to the extent she

deposed to have witnessed the action from the part of the accused

persons including the appellant in dragging the deceased Sujana inside

the house when Sujana was taken there by PW16 along with father of

the deceased and yet another person.




             13. A scrutiny of the impugned judgment would ultimately

reveal that the real foundation for the conviction of the appellant herein

for the offence under section 498A, IPC is Ext.P18 dying declaration. The

Crl.A.No.1533/2005                 32


trial court found that PW18 recorded Ext.P18 dying declaration after

satisfying himself about the fit state of mind of deceased Sujana to give

proper declarations and after putting different questions. The evidence

of PW5 to the effect that Sujana was not under the effect of sedation on

1.9.1996 was also taken note of. The learned Sessions Judge found that

Sujana was apprehending death when she gave Ext.P18 statement and

she narrated the incident of the day on which she set herself on fire and

also with respect to the incident on the previous day. It was found that

the cruelty meted out to her on the previous day thus narrated would

reveal that it was the cruelty of her husband in pushing her out of the

room and making her to remain there that led to the attempt to commit

suicide. The trial court also found that in such circumstances Ext.P11 is

silent as to the cause that prompted her to set herself fire while Ext.P18

dying declaration revealed the cause. After considering Exts.P11 and

P18 it was found that Ext.P18 revealed the circumstances that led Sujana

to set fire on herself after sprinkling kerosene over the body and

therefore, it was held that Ext.P18 could be accepted as a dying

declaration made truthfully and voluntarily. The trial court also held that

it is corroborated by other evidence. Further it was held that Ext.P18

would reveal that the cruelty shown by the appellant herein would fall

within the definition of `cruelty' under Clause (a) of the Explanation to

Crl.A.No.1533/2005                 33


Section 498A, IPC and though the other accused persons had also ill-

treated her their acts would not fall within the definition of `cruelty'

defined under Section 498A, IPC. It was based on such consideration

that the trial court arrived at the conclusion that the appellant had

committed the offence under Section 498A, IPC. In view of the said

circumstances, the question to be looked into, is whether the trial court

was right in relying on Ext.P18 to enter into the finding of guilty against

the appellant. As noticed hereinbefore, the learned Senior counsel for

the appellant contended that Ext.P18 ought not to have been relied on in

view of the existence of a previous dying declaration viz., Ext.P11 and

that Exts.P11 and P18 are materially contradictory to each other. It is to

be noted that the learned Public Prosecutor contended that even in such

circumstances the dying declaration which relates cruelty which would

fall within the definition of Section 498A, IPC as discernible from the

statements in the declaration, could be relied on safely to arrive at a

finding of guilt of an accused. In such circumstances, the question to be

considered is when two materially contradictory dying declarations are in

existence whether it would be safe to rely on any one of them to find

guilt on the part of the accused concerned ? The fact that Exts.P11 and

P18 are materially contradictory to each other is not at all disputed and

in fact, the said fact is indisputable. A bare perusal of Ext.P11 would

Crl.A.No.1533/2005                   34


reveal that it was recorded by Dr.Thimothy who was then attached to

Jubilee Mission Hospital and it was proved through PW5. The state of

mind of Sujana at the time of giving the said declaration revealed

through Ext.P11 undoubtedly show that at that point of time she was

apprehending death. No reason whatsoever has been given by the trial

court as to why it should not be treated as a dying declaration. In this

context, it is also to be noted that the categorical finding of the trial court

on appreciating the evidence is that at the time of giving Ext.P18 dying

declaration the deceased Sujana was apprehending death. It is evident

from Ext.P11 that deceased Sujana was in a fit state of mind to give a

dying declaration and that after narrating the incident she specifically

stated that her husband viz., the appellant herein had no responsibility.

It is stated in Ext.P11 thus:-

               "              vsf Nk                 ?   sf.        

            sf.                                                    .

                  . As against the question                           

sf                     ? she answered; sf.                  .

                                       . It is also discernible

from Ext.P11 that against the question         ?

she replied;                                                                  .

Crl.A.No.1533/2005                 35


Q.                Nk     ? A.                                  .

   Nk                   . It is also relevant to note that as against the

question        ? she replied;                     .             

   NkLv|f|L                      .   It is thereafter that as against the

question regarding the role of the husband she stated as mentioned

hereinbefore. Ext.P18 was recorded subsequently by PW18. PW18 was

the then Judicial First Class Magistrate-II, Thrissur. Going by Ext.P18

dying declaration, deceased Sujana who had not attributed anything

against her husband in Ext.P11 had attributed something against the

husband and the other accused in Ext.P18. It is in such circumstances

that I made the observation that Exts.P11 and P18 are materially

contradictory to each other. When that be so, the question is whether

Ext.P18 could have been relied on for the purpose of arriving at the guilt

of the accused. In that context the decisions of the Hon'ble Apex Court

in Lella Srinivasa Rao's case, Amol Singh's case, Chinnamma's

case and Sanjay's case (supra) assume relevance. In Lella Srinivasa

Rao's case there were two dying declarations.          In the first dying

declaration the allegation was made against the mother-in-law by the

declarant to the effect that she used to harass her. In the second dying

declaration the declarant had given details relating the visit of her

Crl.A.No.1533/2005                 36


parents on 4.9.1990 and harassment meted out to her by the appellant-

husband after he came to know about the visit of her parents.

Paragraph 8 thereunder would reveal that after considering such aspects

the Hon'ble Apex Court found that in the first dying declaration there was

only a general allegation against the mother-in-law who was accused

No.2 in that case and in the second dying declaration allegation of

harassment was made against the husband as well as the mother-in-law

and also it was made clear that the immediate cause for the suicide was

the harassment meted out to her by her husband who was the appellant.

It is also to be noted that in that case the first dying declaration was

recorded by the Magistrate after taking all necessary precautions and

prior to the recording of the same her state of mind was certified by the

treating physician and he was also present while the statement was

being recorded. The second dying declaration was recorded by a Head

Constable and it was so recorded just five minutes after the recording of

the first dying declaration. The Hon'ble Apex Court held that having

regard to the inconsistency in the two dying declarations it was unsafe to

act solely on them to convict the appellant. It is also to be noted that

even after taking note of the fact that in both the dying declarations

allegations were made against the mother-in-law the Hon'ble Apex Court

observed that it was in fact, unsafe to rely on the said dying declarations

Crl.A.No.1533/2005                 37


to convict the second accused, the mother-in-law.    In short, a scanning

of the said decision would reveal that the dictum laid down by the

Hon'ble Apex Court is that when more than one dying declarations are

available and if such declarations are inconsistent with each other it

would not be safe to act solely on them to convict the accused. Virtually,

a scrutiny of the decision of the Hon'ble Apex Court in Amol Singh's

case (supra) would reveal that the same view was restated in a case

where multiple dying declarations were in existence.        True that, the

Hon'ble Apex Court held therein that when such multiple dying

declarations are available it is the duty of the court to examine the

nature of inconsistencies and also to probe into the authenticity. It is

also held therein that inconsistencies in multiple dying declarations is a

matter to be looked into and in such circumstances, it would be unsafe

to convict the accused relying on such dying declarations.               In

Chinnamma's case (supra) two dying declarations were available. That

was a case of death by burning. After considering the statements in each

of them the Hon'ble Apex Court found that glaring contradictions are

there in the dying declarations. It is to be noted that, it was also a case

wherein no eye witnesses to the incident was available and the

prosecution primarily relied only on two dying declarations to establish

the guilt of the accused therein. A scanning of the said decision would

Crl.A.No.1533/2005                  38


reveal that essentially, the dictum laid down in the cases referred above

was restated by the Hon'ble Apex Court.         In Sanjay's case (supra)

multiple dying declarations were recorded and that was also a case of

death from burn injuries. In the first dying declaration it was stated by

the declarant that while she was pumping the stove it burst suddenly

and her saree caught fire and that hearing her cry her husband rushed

there and tried to save her. In the subsequent dying declaration she

stated that being angry with her husband set her body ablaze. Thus, it is

evident that in that case, in the first dying declaration there was nothing

to implicate the accused/appellant whereas, in the second dying

declaration the declarant stated that she poured kerosene on her body

and set herself ablaze because she was angry with her husband. In

paragraph 16 the Hon'ble Apex Court held that where the dying

declarations are inconsistent with each other it would be unsafe to

uphold the conviction and the convict should be given the benefit of

doubt, in such circumstances.        The learned Senior counsel for the

appellant relied on those decisions to canvass the position that in view of

the facts obtained in this case they are squarely applicable. I have also

taken note of the fact that the two dying declarations in this case viz.,

Exts.P11 and P18 are materially contradictory to each other inasmuch as,

in the first one nothing was attributed against the husband and at the

Crl.A.No.1533/2005                 39


same time, she asserted the innocence of the non-involvement of her

husband in the incident. In Ext.P18 dying declaration she attributed the

accused/appellant and the other accused.         Before adverting to the

question whether in such circumstances the decisions referred above are

applicable and whether the contentions raised by the learned Senior

counsel for the appellant are to be sustained I think it only appropriate to

consider the contentions raised by the learned Public Prosecutor. As

noticed hereinbefore, the learned Public Prosecutor relied on the

decisions in Laxman's case, Sher Singh's case and Biju's case (supra)

to support and sustain the judgment. In Laxman's case (supra) the

Hon'ble Apex Court was considering the question whether the absence of

a Doctor's certification as to the mental fitness of the declarant would

denude the validity of a dying declaration recorded by the Magistrate. In

other words, the question is whether a Doctor's certificate is sine qua

non for the credibility of the dying declaration recorded by a Magistrate.

After considering all relevant aspects and also the provisions, the Hon'ble

Apex Court held that it could not be said that a Doctor's certification

regarding the mental fitness of the declarant is sine qua non for

accepting the dying declaration recorded by the Magistrate. In other

words, the absence of a Doctor's certificate recording the declarant's

state of mind would not        ipso facto   render the dying declaration

Crl.A.No.1533/2005                 40


unacceptable, it was held therein. There cannot be dispute with respect

to the said position of law that mere absence of Doctor's certification as

to the mental fitness of the declarant would not and could not render a

dying declaration unacceptable. It is to be noted in this context that the

appellant canvassed the position that Ext.P18 is unacceptable not on

account of the absence of the Doctor's certification as to the mental

fitness of the declarant. There can be no doubt with respect to the

position that even in the absence of a Doctor a Magistrate could ascertain

the state of mind of the declarant certainly, after putting certain relevant

questions to assess the fitness of mind of the concerned declarant to give

dying declaration. A perusal of Laxman's case (supra)would reveal that

in such circumstances, even the absence of any noting with respect to

the questions put by the concerned Magistrate to ascertain the state of

mind of the declarant would not make it unacceptable and to make it

acceptable it would suffice if evidence is given by the Magistrate who

recorded it to the effect that before recording the same he ascertained

the state of mind of the declarant by putting relevant questions. In

Biju's case (supra) a Division Bench of this Court held that even if the

cruelty alleged in a particular case would not fall under clause (b) of

Explanation to Section 498A, IPC if it comes within the ambit of clause

(b), such cruelty would become punishable under Section 498A, IPC. If

Crl.A.No.1533/2005                 41


the accused is guilty of willful conduct, which would fall under cruelty

going by the definition thereunder, it would constitute cruelty for the

purpose of Section 498A, IPC. In Sher Singh's case (supra) multiple

dying declarations were available.     The first dying declaration was

recorded by police immediately after the incident and there the declarant

gave a story of the accidental burn and the same was recorded in the

presence of the mother-in-law. The second dying declaration was

recorded by the Magistrate inculpating all her in-laws and husband. In

that case, there were three dying declarations and the 3rd declaration

was consistent with the second declaration recorded by the Magistrate

inculpating all her in-laws and husband. In such circumstances, it was

held that the dying declaration recorded by the Magistrate could be relied

on. True that, in the light of the decisions relied on by the learned

Public Prosecutor the absence of a certification by the Doctor by itself

would not make Ext.P18 dying declaration unacceptable.          But, the

question is whether Ext.P18 dying declaration is materially contradictory

to Ext.P11. In this context, it is to be noted that Ext.P11 is the first

dying declaration and it was recorded by the Doctor who treated her. It

is also to be noted that in the said declaration the deceased Sujana

exculpated her husband and at the same time inculpated husband as also

the other accused in Ext.P18 dying declaration. When it is evident that

Crl.A.No.1533/2005                 42


the two dying declarations are materially contradictory to each other

going by the dictum laid down by the Hon'ble Apex Court          in Lella

Srinivasa Rao's case, Amol Singh's case, Chinnamma's case and

Sanjay's case (supra) in the absence of any other corroborative

evidence it would be absolutely unsafe to rely on Ext.P18 to record

conviction against the appellant herein. I have already found that apart

from the two dying declarations the other piece of evidence to look into

the question of culpability of the appellant for the offence under Section

498A, IPC is the oral testimony of PW16. It is evident that the incident

thus narrated during her testimony was one which occurred shortly after

the birth of the first child. She would depose that after the birth of the

first child without carrying the child the deceased Sujana came to the

house of PW1 and thereafter after mediation she was taken to her

matrimonial home by herself and the father of the deceased Sujana.

Going by her deposition when Sujana had entered the house she was

dragged by the appellant and the other accused. She would further

depose that thereafter she had screamed. In this context, it is to be

noted that going by the evidence on record it is evident that even

thereafter the appellant and the deceased Sujana lived together as

husband and wife and Sujana gave birth to a second baby. In other

words, the incident whereby she sprinkled kerosene over her body and

Crl.A.No.1533/2005                  43


set her on fire occurred years thereafter. The said solitary deposition of

PW16 on the aforesaid lines is certainly insufficient to hold that the

appellant/husband was showing cruelty to her and therefore, he is liable

to be convicted under Section 498A IPC. In that context, another aspect

also assumes relevance. Though PW16 had deposed against the other

accused and their role was also stated in Ext.P18 the court found that

accused Nos.2 to 4 could not be held guilty under Section 498A, IPC and

in fact, they were all acquitted. In such circumstances, I have no doubt

in my mind, what is stated in Ext.P18 and the aforesaid piece of

statement made by PW16, in fact, the evidence of PW16 not at all

sufficient to arrive at a conclusion that the prosecution has conclusively

established the guilt of the appellant under Section 498A, IPC in the facts

and circumstances of the case referred hereinbefore.           As noticed

hereinbefore, in the light of the dictum laid down by the Hon'ble Apex

Court and taking into account the indisputable position that Exts.P11 and

P18 are materially contradictory to each other, Ext.P18 and the other

evidence referred above could not have been relied on by the learned

Sessions Judge to convict the appellant for the offence under Section

498A, IPC. A scanning of the impugned judgment would reveal that

these relevant aspects were not at all considered in the right perspective

by the learned Sessions Judge and it was relying on Ext.P18 which ought

Crl.A.No.1533/2005                  44


not to have been relied on in the light of the dictum laid down by the

Hon'ble Apex Court that the trial court entered convicted under Section

498A, IPC against the appellant. In view of the position obtained in this

case and in view of the circumstances explained hereinbefore, certainly it

could not be said conclusively that the prosecution has succeeded in

establishing the guilt of the accused to fetch a conviction for the offence

punishable under Section 498-A, IPC. When that be the circumstance, I

have no hesitation to hold that the impugned judgment invites appellate

interference. In the said circumstances, the judgment of the Court of

Additional Sessions Judge (Fast Track Court-II (Adhoc)), Thrissur in

S.C.NO.161 of 2000 dated 24.8.2005 is set aside. The appeal is allowed.

The appellant is set at liberty. His bail bond will stand cancelled.




                                                        Sd/-
                                                C.T.RAVIKUMAR
                                                       Judge
TKS



