
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                PRESENT:

                THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE SUNIL THOMAS

       TUESDAY, THE 22ND DAY OF SEPTEMBER 2015/31ST BHADRA, 1937

                    Crl.Rev.Pet.No. 1731 of 2014 ()
                    --------------------------------


(AGAINST THE ORDER/JUDGMENT IN CRA 552/2013 of 4TH ADDITIONAL SESSIONS
COURT,ERNAKULAM AGAINST THE ORDER/JUDGMENT IN CC 706/2007 of J.M.F.C.-
I,KOCHI)


PETITIONER(S)/IST APPELLANT/1ST ACCUSED:
--------------------------------------

       DIETZ GEN CREDO SOONER, AGED 40 YEARS,
       S/O.C.P. SOONER, CHUDUKATTUNGAL HOUSE,
       NEAR LIGHT HOUSE, PUTHUVYPE, ERNAKULAM - 682 508.

           BY ADV.       T.M.MOHAMMED YOUSEFF(SR.)
                        SMT.AYSHA YOUSEFF
                        SMT.MOLLY JACOB
                        SMT.RABIA BEEGAM T.K.
                        SRI.JOBI.A.THAMPI
                        SMT.M.KABANI DINESH
                        SRI.ABHILASH.K.S.
                        SMT.FASHIYA YOUSEFF

RESPONDENT(S)/RESPONDENT/COMPLAINANT:
-------------------------------------

       STATE OF KERALA,
       REPRESENTED BY THE PUBLIC PROSECUTOR,
       HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM.

       R BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SMT.ABHIJITH LESLIE

       THIS CRIMINAL REVISION PETITION  HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD  ON
16-09-2015, THE COURT ON 22/9/2015 PASSED THE FOLLOWING:


                        SUNIL THOMAS, J.
                   - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                 Crl.R.P.No. 1731 of 2014
                   - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
       Dated this the 22nd day of September, 2015

                            O R D E R


      The first accused, who stands convicted by the

Judicial First Class Magistrate-I,Kochi, in C.C.No.706/2007

for offences punishable under Section 498A IPC, as

confirmed by the judgment of the Additional District and

Sessions    Judge-IV,     Ernakulam,            in    Criminal Appeal

No.552/2013, is the appellant herein.

      2. The case of the de facto complainant was that the

first accused had married her on 16/1/2003 as per the

religious rights and ceremonies. On 26/1/2003, the first

accused, who was employed abroad, left India. Accused 2

and 3 are the parents of the first accused and the 4th

accused is his sister. The allegation was that ever since

the date of marriage, the de facto complainant was

physically and mentally harassed by the accused acting in

combination, with the intention to satisfy their demand for

Crl.R.P.No.1731/2014            2


more dowry, over and above 75 sovereigns of gold

ornaments and five cents of land already given to her. It

was alleged that harassment was to such an extent that it

was likely to drive her to commit suicide.        When the

physical and mental harassment became unbearable, she

left the matrimonial house, to her parental house, on

24/4/2003.      Thereafter also, allegedly the first accused

continued to harass her, by making false allegations orally

and over telephone and spread rumours among the local

persons. Complaining about that, Ext.P1 complaint dated

10/4/2004 was submitted to the Women's Commission

which was forwarded to the concerned police station on

17/6/2004. Thereafter, the crime was registered. After the

conclusion of the investigation, final report was laid

against all the accused, for offences punishable under

Section 498A read with Section 34 IPC.

      3.    All the accused appeared before the learned

Magistrate and pleaded not guilty. They faced the trial.

On the side of the prosecution, PW1 to PW 13 were

marked. Exts.C1 to C4 were marked as court exhibits. On

Crl.R.P.No.1731/2014           3


the side of the accused Exts. D1 to D3 were marked. The

court below on an evaluation of the available materials,

concluded that the prosecution had succeeded in proving

the allegation against the accused and convicted accused 1

to 3. The first accused was convicted to undergo simple

imprisonment for two years and to pay a fine of

Rs.10,000/-, in default to undergo simple imprisonment for

three months. Accused Nos.2 & 3 were found guilty and

imposed simple imprisonment of six months each and a

fine of Rs.10,000/- with a default clause.        That was

challenged by accused Nos. 1 to 3 in Criminal Appeal

No.552/2013 before the Sessions Court.       The Appellate

Court on an re-valuation of the available inputs, concurred

with the conclusion arrived at by the learned Magistrate

in so far as it related to the first accused and confirmed

the conviction.      However, the court held that the

allegation against accused Nos. 2 and 3 were not proved

and they were acquitted.

      4. Contenting that both the courts have committed

manifest error in evaluation of the facts and also applying

Crl.R.P.No.1731/2014             4


the law, this revision has been preferred.       Heard both

sides and examined the records.

      5. It isan admitted fact that the alleged marriage took

place on 16/1/2003 and the first accused left India on

26/1/2003.       It is further admitted that the defacto

complainant left the matrimonial home on 24/4/2003 and

thereafter has not returned to the matrimonial home. The

specific allegation of the de facto complainant is that the

accused had harassed her both mentaly and physically

from the date of marriage itself in connection with the

demand for dowry. Her oral version is to the effect that it

was so unbelievable that she could not have imagined as

to what could she had committed.

      6. The prosecution essentially relied on the oral

testimony of PW2, the de facto complainant, supported by

the version of PW4. Ext.P1 is the basis of the prosecution

case, which is the complaint dated 10/4/2004 submitted to

the Women's Commission, which was later forwarded to

the concerned police station and        based on which, the

crime was registered. The specific allegation of the de

Crl.R.P.No.1731/2014           5


facto complainant was that she was given 75 sovereigns of

gold ornaments and property as a dowry.           The gold

ornaments were allegedly taken by the husband on the

first night itself and thereafter he started harrasing her

with a demand for more dowry. The definite contention of

her is that she was harassed in connection with demand

for dowry and was not permitted by the acused to visit her

parents and she was locked       in a room.    Though the

learned Magistrate found substance in the above

allegations, the appellate court on re-valuation held that

the allegation of scolding her by the accused and locking

her in a room, preventing her from meeting others and

not permitting her to meet her father even in the hospital,

were not substantiated beyond reasonable doubt. Such an

evaluation is based on materials and in revision, I am not

inclined to enter further into the merits of that finding,

since it is patent from the records that the appellate court

was justified in so concluding.

      7. The only factual premise on which the court below

confirmed the conviction against the first accused was

Crl.R.P.No.1731/2014           6


relying on Exts.P6 to P9 and the oral testimonies of PW2

and PW4 touching upon the above documents. Exts.P6 to

P9 are letters allegedly sent by the accused to few persons

who were claimed to be the neighbours. PW4 was one

among the recipients . Hence, the question that arises in

this revision is whether the conclusion arrived at by the

lower appellate court that Ext.P6 to P9 supported by the

oral testimonies of PW2 and PW4 to prove the guilt under

Section 498A IPC is sufficient or not.

      8. One of the contention set up by the learned senior

counsel for the accused was that there was no valid

marriage between the complainant and the first accused.

The court below has considered this aspect in detail. This

defence is seen set up in the course of cross examination

and also in the reply given by the accused in answer to

Section 313 Crl.P.C questioning. Admittedly, the parties

are Hindu Ezhava.     They are entitled to enter into the

matrimonial relationship as per the customs and practices

applicable to them. Admittedly, the marriage certificate

was not produced      before the court below. There was

Crl.R.P.No.1731/2014           7


admittedly no registration of the marriage also.

      9. The lower appellate court relied on Ext.C4, which

was the judgment of this Court in Mat.Appeal No.48/08.

The appeal was preferred by the first accused challenging

the order of the Family Court in O.P.No.430/2006 granting

divorce.     By Ext.C4 judgment, this court confirmed the

finding of the Family Court.    In the light of this finding

granting divorce, it is only to be held that the divorce

granted confirms existence of a valid marriage. The court

below has additionally referred to Exts.C1 to C3 which are

the bail applications submitted by the first accused and the

orders thereon. It was admitted that the first accused was

the husband and thereby admitting the matrimonial

relationship.

      10. PW2 deposed in terms of the valid marriage. She

deposed that they got married on 16/1/2003. She further

deposed that it was registered in Puthuvye SNDP Sakha

and at Valavoor Sakha,which had jurisdiction in relation to

the de facto complainant and her family. There is no series

of cross examination on this. PW4 is a witness to the

Crl.R.P.No.1731/2014            8


marriage, who also deposed that she had attended the

marriage of PW2 with the first accused.

      11. An evaluation of the above materials indicate that

there are sufficient evidence to lead to the definite

conclusion that there was a legal marriage between the

parties as per the religious customs and law applicable to

the parties.

      12.       Ext.P1 discloses that harassment allegedly

started on the date of marriage itself. Evidently both the

husband and wife lived together only during the period

from 16/1/2003 to 26/1/2003. Thereafter, she left the

matrimonial       home   on   24/4/2003.   In   the   above

circumstances, if her case is believed, there could not have

been any instance of direct physical or mental harassment

against the de facto complainant by the first accused after

the ten days period when they lived together and

thereafter by in-laws after 24/4/2003.        However, her

specific allegation in relation to the period thereafter is

that the accused used to spread baseless allegations and

wild rumours against her over the telephone among the

Crl.R.P.No.1731/2014           9


members of the locality.

      13. The specific allegation of PW2 was that the first

accused alleged that she had a love affair with one Prasad

and that she was     maintaining close relation with him.

There was a further allegation that he went to the extent of

alleging that the de facto complainant had undergone an

abortion prior to her marriage. Another allegation against

the accused was that he spread rumours that the child

was not his. According to PW2, this was conveyed by the

accused to PW4, one Rajan and one Bhaskaran and two

other unnamed persons of the locality.

      14. The lower appellate court, essentially relying on

Exts.P6 to P9 arrived at a conclusion that the husband had

spread baseless and wild allegations against the wife,

among the local persons. There is is no doubt that, as

held by the lower appellate court, if the accused had made

baseless allegations that she had love affair with one

Prasad, that she had undergone an abortion before the

marriage and that the child was not his, it is sufficient to

prove the ingredients under Section 498A. In this context,

Crl.R.P.No.1731/2014             10


Exts.P6 to P6(b) have to be examined. Ext.P6(a) is a the

photo copy of the letter dated 1/2/2004 addressed to one

Sudha.      Ext.P6(b) is a letter dated Nil. Ext.P7 is another

letter dated 10/2/2004 stated to be the continuation of

the letter Ext.P6(b). Ext.P6 (a) is stated to be an envelop

in which Ext.P6(b) was allegedly sent to said Sudha. PW4

is one Sugatha Kumari. According to PW2, the said Sudha

is none other than PW4, Sugathakumari. PW4 also in her

evidence deposed that Ext.P6 series and          Ext.P7 were

received by her. Ext.P9 is another letter dated 31/1/2004

addressed to the same Sudha. Ext.P8 is a letter dated

28/1/2004 addressed to one Bhaskaran.               The said

Bhaskaran was not examined on the ground that he was no

more. According to PW2, Bhaskaran died about four year

prior to her examination.        All the above letters were

marked through PW2.         PW4, who is claimed to be the

recipient of Exts.P6, P7 and P9, was also examined as

PW4.     There is absolutely no evidence as to why the

original of Ext.P6 was not produced.

      15.    Evidently, Exts.P6 to P9 are letters prior to

Crl.R.P.No.1731/2014           11


Ext.P1. PW4 in her evidence had no valid explanation as

to why the letters were not referred to in Ext.P1. She had

in the cross examination explained that, the above letters

were not mentioned in Ext.P1, since she received letters

subsequent to Ext.P1. However, she admitted that she had

received the letters in January 2004. If that be so, her

explanation that it was not mentioned in Ext.P1 because it

was not available with her as on the date of Ext.P1 is false.

Ext.P1 is submitted about three months        thereafter. It

assumes significance since Exts.P6 to P9 if believed per se,

raise very serious allegation affecting her chastity which

is enough to conclude cruelty.     However, strangely the

above documents were not referred to in Ext.P1.

      16. The main finding of the appellate court in regard

to allegation of cruelty was based on Exts.P6 to P9. This

has to be appreciated in the back ground of her specific

allegations in Ext.P1 which gave rise to criminal

prosecution. She has vaguely stated that the accused had

orally and telephonically spreading rumours and wild

allegations against her.   She did not have a case at that

Crl.R.P.No.1731/2014          12


time that any such letters were ever sent. She had no case

that the accused had stated that she had undergone

abortion or any definite allegation affecting her chastity.

Hence, it is only to be reasonably presumed that, had she

received Exts.P6 to P9 at that point of time, definitely it

would have been referred to in Ext.P1.

      17. The several allegations in Ext.P1 indicated

essentially only family bickering and disputes within the

family. She had no case that the allegations were so harsh

so as to drive her to commit suicide. Specific instances of

cruelty are also not mentioned, though she had stated

generally that she was harassed in connection with the

demand for dowry. Essentially, Ext.P1 does not disclose

any such specific instance of cruelty, so as to attract

Section 498A. She had also not requested in Ext.P1 for

any action to be initiated under Section 498A. On the

other hand, she only prayed that necessary action may be

taken to ensure that the future of herself and her child

were protected. She had expressed that she would like to

continue to have a matrimonial relationship with her

Crl.R.P.No.1731/2014          13


husband. This only shows that she did not have even an

allegation that the accused had meted out such a cruelty,

so as to drive her to commit suicide or which was in

connection with an demand for dowry.

      18. Exts.P6 to P9 letters were specifically denied by

the first accused. There was even a suggestion that it was

concocted. PW2 had specifically stated that the letters

were entrusted to her by PW4 Rajan and Bhaskaran.

PW2 had stated that those were in the handwriting of the

first accused. The court below relied on the signature of

the first accused in his vakalath to consider whether

Exts.P6 to P9 were in the handwriting of the first accused.

The court held that signature in the vakalath of the first

accused was not identical to that on Exts.P7 and P9.

However, the court concluded that the handwriting in

Exts.P6 to P9 were similar to the writing of the name in

the vakalath of the accused. This appears to be a patent

error committed by the court. There was absolutely no

evidence that the name of accused seen on the vakalath

was in the admitted handwriting of the accused. Even

Crl.R.P.No.1731/2014           14


though it can be presumed that the signature seen in the

vakalath of one person is his own, so such presumption

can be extended in the case of handwriting on the vakalath

unless, it is so specifically proved.         There is no

independent evidence to prove that Exts.P6 to P9 were in

the handwriting of the first accused.

      19.    The court below relied on Ext.P6(a) envelop,

which allegedly contained Ext.P6(b), to conclude that it

was sent by the first accused. Reasoning given by the

court below was that it seems to have been sent from

abroad and hence it must have been sent by the first

accused who was abroad at that time. The envelop shows

that it has Five Rupees Indian Postal Stamp affixed on it.

There are two seals affixed on it. Both seals relate to post

offices in Kerala. Evidently, both the letters were posted

in India and received in India.    Hence, the reasoning of

the court below is not correct in this regard. Hence, there

is nothing to attribute authorship of Exts.P6 to P9 to the

first accused.

      20. Even otherwise, reference to Exts.P6 to P7 shows

Crl.R.P.No.1731/2014            15


that those were lengthy letters written by a person

disclosing his view point on the issue. Even assuming that

it is written by the first accused, it relates to the

matrimonial relationship between himself and his wife, the

reasons for its failure and attributing the entire liability on

the de facto complainant.      There is a reference that the

defacto complainanat was not behaving properly and even

if she had an affair, prior to the marriage, the accused was

ready to forgive and forget. He alleged that the wife was

not co-operative, did not adjust herself with the family and

was always having strange behaviour. It is true that there

is an allegation that after she had left the matrimonial

home, the accused conducted an enquiry and it was

revealed that she had an affair with one Prasad and there

was information that she had even undergone abortion.

Even then, he had gone to the extent of saying that he was

ready and willing to forgive. A perusal of the entire letters

indicate that according to him, the marriage was spoiled

by the de facto complainant.       She allegedly had a bad

behaviour. It only indicates his side of version regarding

Crl.R.P.No.1731/2014            16


the entire incident.    Hence, on the basis of the above

letters alone, one cannot arrive at a definite conclusion

that they are per se false and that they were made without

any bona fides. Hence, it can only be presumed that these

are only allegations which the accused had.             In the

absence of anything to show that the allegations made in

Exts.P6 to P9 are per se false, no conclusion can be arrived

against accused .

      21. Accordingly, the entire evidence in the above

perspective, it is only to be held that the findings of the

court below relying on Exts.P6 to P9 to conclude that the

accused has committed offence punishable under Section

498A IPC is not sustainable. It is only to be held that the

contents of Exts.P6 to P9 are not             proved beyond

reasonable doubt.

      22. In the light of the above, it is only to be held that

the conviction of the court below relying on Exts.P6 to P9

is legally not sustainable and is liable to be set aside.

      In the result, the revision is allowed. The impugned

judgment and conviction is set aside.         The accused is

Crl.R.P.No.1731/2014          17


acquitted. Bail bond stands discharged.

                                    Sd/-


                               SUNIL THOMAS
                                   Judge
dpk

                               /true copy/ PS to Judge.



