
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                  PRESENT:

             THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE DAMA SESHADRI NAIDU

         MONDAY, THE 17TH DAY OF AUGUST 2015/26TH SRAVANA, 1937

                          WP(C).No. 3450 of 2014 (E)
                           ---------------------------

PETITIONERS:
----------------

1.     DHANYAMOL C.J.,
       CHERIAPPATTU HOUSE, THOVARAAYAR P.O.,
       KATTAPPANA, IDUKKI - 685 511.

2.     SONIYA DAS,
       SOUMYA COTTAGE, CHERIYATHURA,
       VALLAKKADAVU P.O., TRIVANDRUM - 695 008.


         BY ADVS.SRI.THOMAS ABRAHAM
                    SMT.MERCIAMMA MATHEW
                    SRI.ASWIN.P.JOHN

RESPONDENTS:
-----------------

1.     STATE OF KERALA REPRESENTED BY ITS CHIEF SECRETARY,
       GOVERNMENT OF KERALA, SECRETATIAT, TRIVANDRUM - 695 001.

2.     SECRETARY, DEPARTMENT OF TAXES, GOVERNMENT OF KERALA,
       SECRETARIAT, TRIVANDRUM - 695 001.

3.     COMMISSIONER OF EXCISE, KERALA STATE, TRIVANDRUM - 695 001.


         R BY SRI. G. GOPAKUMAR, GOVERNMENT PLEADER

         THIS WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD ON
         17-08-2015, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY DELIVERED THE
         FOLLOWING:

WP(C).No. 3450 of 2014 (E)




                         : 2 :

APPENDIX


PETITIONER'S EXHIBITS:


  EXT.P1          : TRUE COPY OF THE G.O.(P) NO.204/2013/TD DATED
                    09.12.2013.

  EXT.P2          : TRUE COPY OF THE FL-3 LICENCE OF THE BAR    HOTEL
                    WHERE PETITIONERS ARE EMPLOYED.

  EXT.P3          : TRUE COPY OF THE DIPLOMA IN AIRLINE AND AIRPORT
                    MANAGEMENT OF THE 1ST PETITIONER.

  EXT.P4          : TRUE COPY OF THE CERTIFICATE ISSUED BY THE
                    SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL EDUCATION DEVELOPMENT
                    COUNCIL TO THE 2ND PETITIONER.

  EXT.P5          : TRUE COPY OF THE REPRESENTATION DATED 14.01.2014.



RESPONDENTS' EXHIBITS: NIL



                                                     //TRUE COPY//




                                                     P.A. TO JUDGE

rv


                      DAMA SESHADRI NAIDU, J.
               ------------------------------------
                    W.P. (C) No. 3450 of 2014 (E)
               ------------------------------------
                Dated this the 17th day of August 2015

                               JUDGMENT

Introduction:

      It is an issue of judicial invalidation of legislation: Rule 27A of

the Foreign Liquor Rules is impugned as being violative of Articles 14,

15 (1) & (3), 16 (1) and 19 (1) (g) of the Constitution of India.

Uncluttered by statutory references, the issue is whether a woman can

be deprived of employment solely on the ground of the alleged

disadvantage she suffers from owing to her gender. In the present

instance, women are sought to be discriminated against because of

their sex, and nothing else.

Facts in Brief:

      2. The petitioners, working as waitresses/restaurant assistants

in a bar attached to a hotel in Trivandrum, faced the threat of

termination from their employment with the introduction of a new

Rule governing the Bars attached to hotels. As per the amendment of

the Foreign Liquor Rules notified as S.R.O. No. 959/2013 dated

W.P.(C). No. 3450/2014            -2-




9/12/2013, a new rule as Rule 27A is incorporated prohibiting women

from being employed "in any capacity for serving liquor on the

licensed premises''. In terms of the same notification, in Form FL-3

under the heading "Conditions'', a new condition has been

incorporated as condition No. 9A which also contains the same

prohibition for engaging women in the Bars. The raison d'jtre for the

introduction of Rule 27A of the Rules and the consequential

procedural measures is that the Government has received complaints

that women are being employed to serve liquor in the licensed bars.

      3.    Both the petitioners, who are working as waitresses or

bartenders in an FL-3 licenced hotel, have a grievance that if the

newly incorporated rule is allowed to hold its field, the petitioners are

bound to lose their jobs and, thus, their livelihood. The petitioners do

aver that their employer has already informed them that the

management is not able to provide them any other employment in the

hotel, and that they are bound to be terminated very soon. The

petitioners' Exhibit P5 representation, submitted to the respondents 1

to 3, does not seem to have evoked any response.

      4. Thus, both the petitioners, being the bread-winners of their

W.P.(C). No. 3450/2014            -3-




families with children and elder members to be supported, challenge

Rule 27A of the Rules as being ultra vires of the Executive, especially

in the face of Articles 14, 15 (1) & (3), 16 (1) and 19 (1) (g) of the

Constitution of India.

Summary of Submissions:

      5.     Mr. Thomas Abraham, the learned counsel for the

petitioners,   has   submitted   that  the   'conceptual  change'   of

employment has advanced the status of women in the society at large,

and any stray incidents of violence against women in their workplace

or elsewhere is not at all a valid reason for keeping them away from

any employment.

      6. He further contends that no restriction can be imposed on

the basis of gender against any person working in a star hotel either

as per the norms/conditions fixed for its classification or under the

FL-3 licence or any other law in force. According to the learned

counsel, there have been no complaints whatsoever regarding any

misbehaviour by any customer towards the women employees

working in the licensed premises. When tourism is aggressively

promoted, the need for involving women in the hospitality industry

W.P.(C). No. 3450/2014            -4-




cannot be overemphasized.

       7. The Government's avowed objective in bringing about the

statutory changes in depriving the women of their employment

opportunities, according to the learned counsel, is entirely on a

misplaced assumption of its role as parens patriae. The governmental

policy, in essence, is myopic and archaic, contends the learned

counsel.

       8. The learned counsel has also contended that the issue raised

in the present writ petition has been squarely covered by the decision

of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Anuj Garg and Others vs. Hotel

Association of India and Others1. He has also placed reliance on Githa

Hariharan v. Reserve Bank of India2, wherein the Apex Court has

adverted to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of

Discrimination against Women, 1979 (`CEDAW') which was adopted in

1979 by the UN General Assembly. In the course of his submissions,

the learned counsel has also referred to United States v. States v.

Virginia3, and Rajamma Vs. State of Kerala and Others4.

       9. It is the specific contention of the learned counsel that by

1  AIR 2008 SC 663
2  AIR 1999 SC 1149
3  518 US 515 (1996)
4  1983 KLT457

W.P.(C). No. 3450/2014             -5-




incorporating the impugned rule by amending the Foreign Liquor

Rules,   through    S.R.O  No.   959/2013    dated   9/12/2013,     the

Government, in effect, is taking away the equality of status and

opportunity that is guaranteed to the women in the Constitution of

India. It is, according to him, a state-sponsored discrimination. The

learned counsel, sounding rhetorical, has submitted that with the

enforcement of the impugned rule, the Government has been laying to

waste welfare legislations like the Commission of Sati (Prevention) Act,

1987, the Equal Remuneration Act, 1976, National Commission for

Women Act, 1990, the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 (28 of 1989), the

Indecent Representation of Women (Prohibition) Act, 1986, the Hindu

Succession Act, 1956, the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961, etc.

      10. The learned counsel for the petitioners has also referred to

the preamble of the       Universal Declaration of Human Rights to

buttress his submissions. After referring to various other international

covenants and treaties, the learned counsel has eventually summed

up his submissions by saying that the impugned Rule is ex facie

discriminatory and ultra vires of the Government, the Executive.

Respondents':

W.P.(C). No. 3450/2014           -6-




       11.  The learned Government Pleader, in the absence of any

counter affidavit having been filed, has initially submitted that the

Government has brought about the statutory changes only with a view

to protecting the women from being exposed to dangers in

workplaces. He has further submitted that even in Bars and

restaurants women have not been prohibited from being engaged

except as bartenders. According to him, it amounts to neither

discrimination against nor deprivation of employment to women. He

has, nevertheless, submitted that in the light of the decision rendered

by the Apex Court in Anu Garg, this Court may decide the issue on

hand.

Discussion:

       12. The Abkari Act is a pre-independence piece of legislation

initially enacted on 05.08.1902 by the principality of Cochin; it was,

later, made applicable to the whole of Kerala as per Act 10 of 1967,

which received the Presidential assent on 29.07.1967. It is, as the

preamble reads, a consolidating and amending act relating to the

import, export, transport, manufacture, sale and possession of

intoxicating liquor and intoxicating drugs in the State of Kerala.

W.P.(C). No. 3450/2014                -7-




Section 10 of the Act deals with the transportation of liquor or any

other intoxicating drug; section 24, with the forms and conditions of

licences, etc., whereas Section 29 delegates to the Government the

legislative power of making rules.

       13. As a part of the delegated legislation, the Government of

Kerala, tracing its powers to Sections 10, 24 and 29 of the Act, has

framed the Foreign Liquor Rules with effect from 01.04.1953. The

fulcrum of the rules being Rule 13, it deals with the licences for

possession, use or sale of foreign liquor. Rule 27 of the Rules

prohibits the sale or transport of liquor by persons suffering from

leprosy or any contagious disease and the employment of such

persons in shops for the sale of liquor.

       14. Through G.O. (P) No.204/2013/TD, dated 09.12.2013, the

Government of Kerala has amended the Foreign Liquor Rules by

engrafting Rule 27A, which reads as follows:

     "Rule 27A. No woman shall be employed in any capacity for serving
     liquor in the licenced premises."


     15. Further, in Form F.L.3, under the heading `Conditions', after

Condition No.9, the following condition has been inserted:

W.P.(C). No. 3450/2014             -8-




      "9A. No woman shall be employed in any capacity for serving liquor in
     the licenced premises."

     16. The explanatory note appended to the Government Order,

though indicated to be not part of the notification, reads to the effect:

     "The Government have received various complaints that women are
     being employed in licensed premises for serving liquor to their
     customers. For prohibiting such practices, the Government have
     decided to amend the Foreign Liquor Rules..."


     17. In the first place, neither the principal legislation, the Abkari

Act, nor the secondary legislation, namely the Foreign Liquor Rules,

prohibits the employment of women in any liquor outlets, especially

the FL-3 licenced premises--now, in the light of the change in the

Governmental policy, exclusively five-star hotels. In the light of this

fact, the question of the Government receiving complaints about the

hotel establishments employing women in any capacity, especially for

serving liquor, is not, by any reckoning, of much consequence. The

Government, however, presupposes that employing women to serve

liquor in the licenced premises is illegal. Since this presumed illegality

needs some statutory support, the Government has brought about the

impugned Government Order. Curious as it may sound, first, the

Government brands something illegal, without any statutory base,

W.P.(C). No. 3450/2014               -9-




though; and subsequently brings about justification by amending the

Rules. The approach of the Government is a classic case of begging

the question.

Constitutional Justification:

     18.    Raymond F. Gregory in his book Women and Workplace

Discrimination: Overcoming Barriers to Gender Equality              (2003,

Rutgers University Press) has narrated the course of discriminatory or

even anti-canon judgments rendered by the American Supreme Court

as regards the gender equality, or rather inequality, especially in

workplaces. Illinois was one of many states that barred felons and

women from becoming lawyers. In 1872, the Supreme Court in

Bradwell v. Illinois, 83 U.S. 130 (1872), affirmed Illinois's rejection of

Myra Bradwell's application for a license to practice law in the state

and took the opportunity to fix women's proper place in society:

     The natural and proper timidity and delicacy which belongs to the
     female sex evidently unfits it for many of the occupations of civil life.
     The constitution of the family organization, which is founded in the
     divine ordinance, as well as in the nature of things, indicates the
     domestic sphere as that which properly belongs to the domain and
     functions of womanhood. The harmony, not to say identity, of interests
     and views which belong, or should belong, to the family institution is
     repugnant to the idea of a woman adopting a distinct and independent
     career from that of her husband.

W.P.(C). No. 3450/2014              -10-




      19.    To make certain that all citizens understood women's

proper place, the Court added:

     "The paramount destiny and mission of woman are to fulfill the noble
     and benign offices of wife and mother. This is the law of the Creator."


      20. Let us move a few years ahead and see how the American

Supreme Court reacted to differential legislation vis-`-vis the women:

In Muller v. Oregon, 208 U.S. 412 (1908), the U.S. Supreme Court has

held that differentiated from the other sex, a woman is properly

placed in a class by herself, and legislation designed for her

protection may be sustained, even when like legislation is not

necessary for men, and could not be sustained. It is impossible to

close one's eyes to the fact that she still looks to her brother and

depends on him. This difference, according to the U.S. Supreme

Court, justifies a difference in legislation and upholds that which is

designed to compensate for some of the burdens that rest upon her.

             21.  A few more years later, we may still examine the

judicial thinking in an advanced country like the USA. As recently as in

1948, the American Supreme Court persisted with its conviction that

women are dependent upon men. In Goesaert v. Cleary, 335 U.S. 464

W.P.(C). No. 3450/2014                -11-




(1948), upheld a Michigan statute that barred a woman from

employment as a bartender unless the male owner of the bar was

either her father or her husband. Ironically, the leading opinion was

rendered by none other than Mr. Justice Frankfurter. The learned

Judge has observed that Fourteenth Amendment did not tear history

up by the roots, and the regulation of the liquor traffic is one of the

oldest and most untrammeled of legislative powers.

       22.      If we examine the litigation the gender issue has

engendered        across   the   Atlantic,  in   Roberts    v    Hopwood a  5



metropolitan borough council had decided to pay its workers a

minimum of #4 a week, whether they were men or women and

regardless of the job they did. The House of Lords approved the

district auditor's surcharge for being overly gratuitous, given the fall

in the cost of living. Lord Atkinson said:

     "[t]he council would, in my view, fail in their duty if ... [they] allowed
     themselves to be guided in preference by some eccentric principles
     of socialistic philanthropy, or   by  a    feminist ambition   to  secure
     the equality of the sexes in the matter of wages in the world of labour."
       Though Lord Buckmaster, dissenting, said:
     "Had they stated that they determined as a borough council to pay the
     same wage for the same work without regard to the sex or condition of
     the person who performed it, I should have found it difficult to say that
     that was not a proper exercise of their discretion."

5  [1925] AC 578

W.P.(C). No. 3450/2014            -12-




      23. As can be seen from the ABC of Women Workers' Rights

and Gender Equality (Pp.8 &9, 2nd Ed. International Labour Officer,

Geneva), discrimination on the grounds of sex is a major form of

discrimination, and has been a focus of attention for the international

community since the Second World War. The protection and

promotion of women workers' rights have always been integral to the

ILO's mandate. The employment of women before and after childbirth

was the subject of one of the ILO's first Conventions, dating from

1919, the very first year of the Organization's life. Convention

No.100, by guaranteeing equal pay for work of equal value, opened

the door to the examination of structural gender biases in the labour

market. Since then, there has been a gradual shift in emphasis from

protecting women to promoting equality and improving the living and

working conditions of workers of either sex on an equal basis. It can

be seen, for instance, in the replacement of the Employment (Women

with Family Responsibilities) Recommendation, 1965 (No.123) by the

Convention No.156.

      24. In the new millennium, new and revised labour standards

W.P.(C). No. 3450/2014            -13-




reflect the overarching goal of decent work, which now underpins all

the ILO's activity. Gender equality is central to this goal. From the

early 1980s, the focus of analysis concerning equality, in general, was

reoriented from women to relations between women and men. As a

result, the conviction has gained ground that any change in the role of

women should be accompanied by a change in that of men; it should

be reflected in their greater participation in family and household

duties. By this thinking, Convention No. 156 and its accompanying

Recommendation        No.  165   concerning    workers    with  family

responsibilities were adopted in 1981. These instruments apply to

men as well as women with responsibilities for dependent children or

other members of their immediate family and are intended to facilitate

their employment without discrimination resulting from such family

responsibilities.

      25. As per the World Bank statics, by 2010 India had only 19%

of its workforce in non-agricultural sector drawn for women. Indeed,

as a signatory to the Convention on the Elimination of Discrimination

against Women (CEDAW) and the UN Convention on the Rights of the

Child (CRC), India has a number of progressive laws that support

W.P.(C). No. 3450/2014             -14-




gender equality and ending discrimination and violence against

women.

      26.    The Government of India was represented at the 2013

session of the Commission on the Status of Women (CSW), where the

Member States committed to ending all forms of violence against

women. They recognized that there was a need to address the

economic and political underpinnings of violence, ensure access to

justice, strengthen multi-sectoral approaches, and end harmful

traditional practices that negatively impact women.

      27. In Gita Hariharan (supra), the Hon'ble Supreme Court has

observed that India is a signatory to the Convention on the Elimination

of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, 1979 ("CEDAW") and

the Beijing Declaration, which direct all State parties to take

appropriate measures to prevent discrimination of all forms against

women. The domestic courts are under an obligation to give due

regard to International Conventions and Norms for construing

domestic laws when there is no inconsistency between them.

      28. Article 15 of the Constitution prohibits discrimination on

grounds of religion, race, caste, sex or place of birth. In fact, Article

W.P.(C). No. 3450/2014              -15-




15 (1) enjoins a particular application of the general principle of

equality enshrined in Article 14 of the Constitution of India, the

fountainhead of fraternity and equality. While Article 15 (1) mandates

the State in general terms not to indulge in any form of

discrimination, Clause (2) thereof particularises it in relation to the

citizens. There is no gainsaying the fact that the combined effect of

Article 14 and 15 of the Constitutin of India does not provide any

blanket ban against passing unequal laws; there can, in fact, be laws

progressively discriminatory. However, the laudability of the objective

behind the seemingly discriminating law does not suffice; on the other

hand, the validity is to be judged by the method of its operation and

its effect on the fundamental rights of a citizen.          It is further

noteworthy that Article 15 (2) is horizontal in its application, thus not

confining itself to the State alone.

      29.    As can be seen, Articles 15 (3) & (4) constitute the

exceptions to Articles 15 (1) & (2). Especially Article 15 (3) expressly

permits the State from making any special provision for women and

children. The provision, thus, is in the nature of a proviso qualifying

the general guarantees contained in Arts.14, 15 (1), (2) and 16 (1) &

W.P.(C). No. 3450/2014                -16-




(2) of the Constitution. There is no cavilling as regards the proposition

that the protective discrimination in favour of women under Article 15

(3) of the Constitution extends to the entire field of state activity,

including that of public employment, which, in fact, has been

specifically dealt with under Article 16 of the Constitution of India. In

essence, the discrimination can be in favour of but not against the

women, whose socio-economic backwardness needs no further

emphasis. Article 15 (3) of the Constitution of India, after all, is an

enabling provision to empower the women.

      30. In Govt. of A.P. v. P.B. Vijayakumar,6 the Hon'ble Supreme

Court has examined the importance and the impact of Article 15 (3) in

the backdrop of Articles 15 (1) & (4) and 16 (1) of the Constitution

and has held thus:

     "7. The insertion of clause (3) of Article 15 in relation to women is a
     recognition of the fact that for centuries, women of this country have
     been socially and economically handicapped. As a result, they are
     unable to participate in the socio-economic activities of the nation on a
     footing of equality. It is in order to eliminate this socio-economic
     backwardness of women and to empower them in a manner that would
     bring about effective equality between men and women that Article 15
     (3) is placed in Article 15. Its object is to strengthen and improve the
     status of women. An important limb of this concept of gender equality is
     creating job opportunities for women. To say that under Article 15(3),
     job opportunities for women cannot be created would be to cut at the


6 (1995) 4 SCC 520

W.P.(C). No. 3450/2014                 -17-




     very root of the underlying inspiration behind this article. Making special
     provisions for women in respect of employment or posts under the
     State is an integral part of Article 15(3). This power conferred under
     Article 15(3), is not whittled down in any manner by Article 16.

      31. The Court has further observed:

     "8. What then is meant by "any special provision for women" in Article
     15(3)? This "special provision", which the State may make to improve
     women's participation in all activities under the supervision and control
     of the State can be in the form of either affirmative action or
     reservation. It is interesting to note that the same phraseology finds a
     place in Article 15(4) which deals with any special provision for the
     advancement of any socially or educationally backward class of citizens
     or Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes."

      32.    In Githa Hariharan v. Reserve Bank of India,7 the Apex

Court has referred to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms

of Discrimination Against Women, 1979 ("CEDAW") and the Beijing

Declaration, which direct all State parties to take appropriate

measures to prevent discrimination of all forms against women.

Acknowledging the fact that India is a signatory to CEDAW having

accepted and ratified it in June 1993, a three-Judge Bench of the

Hon'ble Supreme Court has further observed that the domestic courts

are under an obligation to give due regard to international

conventions and norms for construing domestic laws when there is no

inconsistency between them.

7 (1999) 2 SCC 228

W.P.(C). No. 3450/2014           -18-




Anuj Garg:

      33. In Anuj Garg v. Hotel Assn. of India, (2008) 3 SCC 1, what

fell for consideration was the Constitutional validity of Section 30 of

the Punjab Excise Act, 1914 prohibiting employment of "any man

under the age of 25 years" or "any woman" in any part of such

premises in which the public consume liquor or intoxicating drug. The

Court has observed that right to be considered for employment

subject to just exceptions is recognised by Article 16 of the

Constitution. Right of employment itself may not be a fundamental

right but in terms of both Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of

India, each person similarly situated has a fundamental right to be

considered therefor.

      34. As regards the ascendancy of women in the sphere of public

employment, the Apex Court has observed that when a discrimination

is sought to be made on the purported ground of classification, such

classification must be founded on rational criteria. The criteria in the

absence of any constitutional provision and, it will bear repetition to

state, having regard to the societal conditions as they prevailed in

early 20th century, may not be a rational criteria in the 21st century.

W.P.(C). No. 3450/2014                   -19-




In the early 20th century, the hospitality sector was not open to women

in general. In the last 60 years, women in India have gained entry in

all spheres of public life. They have also been representing people at

grassroots democracy. They are now employed as drivers of heavy

transport vehicles, conductors of service carriages, police etc. Women

can be seen to be occupying Class IV posts to the post of a Chief

Executive Officer of a multinational company. They are now widely

accepted both in the Police as also Army services.

      35.     Eventually, examining what is said to be fundamental

tension between right to employment and security, their Lordships

have held as follows:

          "34. The fundamental tension between autonomy and security is
     difficult to resolve. It is also a tricky jurisprudential issue. Right to self-
     determination is an important offshoot of gender justice discourse. At
     the same time, security and protection to carry out such choice or
     option specifically, and state of violence-free being generally is another
     tenet of the same movement. In fact, the latter is apparently a more
     basic value in comparison to right to options in the feminist matrix.
         35. Privacy rights prescribe autonomy to choose profession whereas
     security concerns texture methodology of delivery of this assurance. But
     it is a reasonable proposition that the measures to safeguard such a
     guarantee of autonomy should not be so strong that the essence of the
     guarantee is lost. State protection must not translate into censorship.
         36. At the same time we do not intend to further the rhetoric of
     empty rights. Women would be as vulnerable without State protection
     as by the loss of freedom because of the impugned Act. The present
     law ends up victimising its subject in the name of protection. In that

W.P.(C). No. 3450/2014               -20-




     regard the interference prescribed by the State for pursuing the ends of
     protection should be proportionate to the legitimate aims. The standard
     for judging the proportionality should be a standard capable of being
     called reasonable in a modern democratic society.
         37. Instead of putting curbs on women's freedom, empowerment
     would   be   a more     tenable  and    socially  wise approach.   This
     empowerment should reflect in the law enforcement strategies of the
     State as well as law modelling done in this behalf.
         38. Also with the advent of modern State, new models of security
     must be developed. There can be a setting where the cost of security in
     the establishment can be distributed between the State and the
     employer."
                                                         (emphasis original)

      36. As to the constitutional validity of Section 30 of the Act, the

Court has observed that its task is to determine whether the measures

furthered by the State in the form of legislative mandate to augment

the legitimate aim of protecting the interests of women are

proportionate to the other bulk of well-settled gender norms such as

autonomy, equality of opportunity, right to privacy, etc. The bottom

line in this behalf would be a functioning modern democratic society

which ensures freedom to pursue varied opportunities and options

without discriminating on the basis of sex, race, caste or any other

like basis. In fine, there should be a reasonable relationship of

proportionality between the means used and the aim pursued.

      37.     Eventually, the Court has quoted with approval the

W.P.(C). No. 3450/2014                 -21-




peroration of Ginsburg, J., in United States v. Virginia8, which is

worthy of reproduction, and which reads as follows:

     "The heightened review standard our precedent establishes does not
     make sex a proscribed classification. Supposed `inherent differences' are
     no longer accepted as a ground for race or national origin
     classifications. Physical differences between men and women, however,
     are enduring. `Inherent differences' between men and women, we have
     come to appreciate, remain cause for celebration, but not for
     denigration of the members of either sex or for artificial constraints on
     an individual's opportunity. Sex classifications may be used to
     compensate women `for particular economic disabilities [they have]
     suffered', to `promote equal employment opportunity', to advance full
     development of the talent and capacities of our nation's people. But
     such classifications may not be used, as they once were, to create or
     perpetuate the legal, social, and economic inferiority of women."
                                             (as quoted in Anuj Garg (supra)

      38. The upshot of the above disposition in Anuj Garg is that the

Hon'ble Supreme Court has affirmed the judgment of the Hon'ble

Punjab & Haryana High Court, which declared Section 30 of the Punjab

Excise Act, 1914 unconstitutional.

      39. This Court as far back as in 1976 has held in an unreported

judgment in O.P. No.5080 of 1976 to the following effect:

     "We in this country carry with us, to a considerable extent, our
     conventional thinking and attitude to social life despite modern trends in
     the approach to individual freedom and right to equality. Our people,
     and particularly the Hindus and the Muslims who constitute a large
     proportion of the population have been conditioned over a long period
     of time to view woman as subordinate to the authority of her man, as


8 518 US 515 (1996)

W.P.(C). No. 3450/2014                 -22-




     one not equal to man in physical prowess and capacity for physical
     endurance. The Constitution of our nation reflects civilized thinking and
     assures women their rightful place as citizens of this country. But
     despite such solemn guarantee there are many areas where she has yet
     to gain equality with the male. Despite resolutions at International
     Conferences highlighting the need for a fairer treatment to the fair sex
     there are areas where law has not still stepped in to remove the
     disabilities of women and the anomalies in the social set up. We have
     recently observed the International Year of the Women but its impact,
     in terms of positive gains is yet to be assessed.
                                         (as quoted in A. S. Rajamma (infra)

      40. In A. S. Rajamma v. State of Kerala9, the issue is concerning

denial of appointment of women candidates in the select list for

appointment in the last grade service on the ground that they are

women incapable of performing arduous physical tasks. Having

observed that not much of case law in the Indian Courts on the

question of discrimination against women is available, a learned

Division Bench of this Court, after referring to copious case of

American and English Courts, has held as follows:

     "34. Remembering what the practical consequence of the attitude of the
     Government has been, namely that for one reason or other not a single
     woman has been advised to any one of the 260 posts we find that this
     is a clear case of discrimination, a discrimination which falls not within
     Article 14 of the Constitution only, but also within the specific
     prohibition in Article 15(1) of the Constitution. The mandate to the State
     that it shall not discriminate against any citizen on grounds only of sex
     is one of the most important fundamental rules that calls for strict
     observance. In the framing of any statute or law or the making of
     subordinate legislation by a delegated legislative authority this is a

9 1983 KLT457

W.P.(C). No. 3450/2014                -23-




     fundamental rule which, under no circumstances, would bear violation.
     Unlike the freedoms in Article 19 of the Constitution there is no Scope
     for restricting the absolute scope of the rights under Article 15(1) of the
     Constitution.    There   would   be   no    scope  whatever     to  justify
     differentiating between the male and female sexes in the matter of
     appointment. The right of women should not be denied on fanciful
     assumptions of what work the woman could do and could not do.
     Whether the work is of an arduous nature and, therefore, unsuitable for
     women must be decided from the point of view of how women feel
     about it and how they would assess it..."

      41. It needs no much cogitation to hold that Rule 27A of Kerala

Foreign Liquor Rules as well as condition 9 A under the head

Conditions in Forms FL 3 fall foul of the Constitutional scheme of

gender equality as has been spelt out in Articles 14, 15 (1) & (2) and

16 (1) & (2) of the Constitution of India. It is accordingly held.

      As a result, the writ petition is allowed. No order as to costs.




                                     sd/- DAMA SESHADRI NAIDU, JUDGE.

rv

W.P.(C). No. 3450/2014    -24-



