
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                        PRESENT:

                  THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE C.T.RAVIKUMAR

         TUESDAY, THE 3RD DAY OF MARCH 2015/12TH PHALGUNA, 1936

                               RPFC.No. 307 of 2013 ()
                                 ------------------------


       AGAINST THE ORDER IN MC 70/2012 of FAMILY COURT, PALAKKAD
                                  DATED 30-09-2013


REVISION PETITIONER(S)/RESPONDENT:
------------------------------------------


         MURALI, AGED 36 YEARS,
         S/O.VELAYUDHAN, KANHIRAMKADU VEEDU,
         KUNISSERI, ALATHUR,
         PALAKKAD DISTRICT. PIN - 678 681

         BY ADV. SRI.V.A.JOHNSON (VARIKKAPPALLIL)

RESPONDENT(S)/PETITIONER:
-------------------------------


         VIJINI S., AGED 29 YEARS
         D/O.SUDEVAN, CHAKKARATHODI VEEDU
         PERUKUNNAM P.O.KUZHALMANNAM, ALATHUR
         PALAKKAD DISTRICT -678 541

          BY ADV. SRI.JACOB SEBASTIAN

         THIS REV.PETITION(FAMILY COURT) HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD ON
03-03-2015, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE FOLLOWING:

dlk


                        C.T.RAVIKUMAR, J
               ---------------------------------------
                    R.P.(F.C) No. 307 of 2013
               ----------------------------------------
                Dated this the 3rd day of March, 2015

                            ORDER


         This revision petition is filed against the order dated

30.9.2013 passed by the Family Court, Palakkad in M.C.No.70/2012.

The revisionist-husband was the respondent therein and the

respondent herein was the petitioner therein. It was filed by the

respondent herein claiming maintenance from the revision petitioner

under section 125 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. At the very

outset it is to be noted that the factum of marriage with the

respondent herein has not been disputed by the revision petitioner.

In fact, their marriage was solemnised on 13.11.2011. It is the case

of the revision petitioner that after the marriage they started living

separately from 22.11.2011. It is also stated therein that she was

mentally and physically harrased by the revision petitioner for

bringing more dowry and that on 22.11.2011 the revision petitioner

sent her out of his house in order to compel her to bring more

money from her house. It is further alleged therein that on

8.12.2011 the respondent along with his friends came to her

R.P.(F.C) No. 307 of 2013
                                  2

paternal house and threatened her and in connection with the said

incident she filed a complaint before the Vanitha Cell. It is also

stated therein that she is an unemployed and the petitioner who is

capable of maintaining the respondent is neglecting to maintain her.

The respondent contended that the revision petitioner herein is

working as Last Grade Servant in Agricultural Department and he

has been drawing salary of Rs.17,000/- per month. It was in the

said circumstances that the respondent filed the petition claiming

maintenance. The respondent appeared and filed counter affidavit

resisting the contentions. Evidently, he took up the contention that

he is prepared to continue the spousal relationship and that the case

was filed against him only to conceal her mental illness. He also

taken up another contention that she is living separately without any

reason and that she is working as a lecturer in Co-operative College,

Alathur and she is getting 6,000/- as monthly salary. He has also

denied the allegations of mental and physical torture. To

substantiate the said submissions the revision petitioner got himself

examined as RW1 and got marked Exts.D1 and D2 documents. On

the side of the respondent herein/the petitioner therein she was

examined as PW1 and Ext.P1 was marked. The Family Court, after

R.P.(F.C) No. 307 of 2013
                                   3

evaluating the evidence on record found that it could not be said

that the respondent herein is refusing to live with the revision

petitioner without any sufficient reason. Evidently, the petitioner did

not deny the factum of marriage with the respondent. The petitioner

has not established a case to get absolved from liability to maintain

the respondent and he has also failed to establish that she has

incurred any disqualification in the light of the provisions under

section 125(4) of the Cr.P.C. to claim maintenance. Taking into all

such circumstances the Family Court found that the revision

petitioner is liable to maintain the respondent. Going by the nature

of the rival pleadings and evidence as revealed from the discussion

in the judgment and also the rival contentions it is evident that the

Family Court could not be said to have faulted in finding that the

respondent is living separately for sufficient reason. As already

noticed the factum of marriage is not disputed by the revision

petitioner. He has also failed to adduce evidence to establish that

the revision petitioner is able to maintain herself or that she had

incurred any disqualification to maintain maintenance by virtue of

the provisions under section 125(4) Cr.P.C. In such circumstances, I

do not find any reason to interfere with the finding of the Family

R.P.(F.C) No. 307 of 2013
                                   4

Court that the revision petitioner is liable to maintain the

respondent. While considering the quantum of maintenance to be

awarded the fact that the respondent was gainfully employed for

sometime in a school for the period from 20.5.2012 to 31.3.2013

was taken note of. Though the respondent contended that during the

said period she was getting only a salary of Rs.4,500/- per month no

evidence whatsoever was produced to show that she was getting

only the said amount as salary. Taking into account such

circumstances      the Family Court    found that she was employed

during the said period and declined to order of maintenance in her

favour for the period from 20.5.2012 to 31.3.2013. No evidence was

adduced by the revision petitioner to establish that she got

employment even thereafter. In the absence of such evidence of

oral testimony of PW1 to the effect that she is employed and she is

unable to maintain       herself was accepted by the Family Court.

Ext.D1 is the salary slip of the revision petitioner. He has produced

Ext.D2 to show that he had availed a loan of RS.2,50,000/-. Exts.D1

and D2 are produced to show that deduction is being effected

towards the loan amount and also towards GPF, Advance etc., and

that his take home salary is only Rs.7,411/-. The family court took

R.P.(F.C) No. 307 of 2013
                                      5

note of the fact that      going by Ext.D1 the revision petitioner is

drawing salary more than 17,000/- per month and accordingly found

that he is liable to pay an amount of Rs.4,000/- as monthly

maintenance to the revision petitioner. Taking into account the

present cost of living such fixation cannot be said to be exorbitant

warranting interference in exercise of the revisional jurisdiction. In

short, on a perusal of the order I do not find any reason to interfere

with the finding of the family court that the revision petitioner is

liable to maintain the respondent and also the fixation of the

monthly maintenance at the rate of RS.4,000/-. Resultantly, this

revision petition is liable to fail and accordingly it is dismissed.

                                                     Sd/-

                                      C.T.RAVIKUMAR,JUDGE.

dlk



