
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                      PRESENT:

                                THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE K.HARILAL

                TUESDAY,THE 17TH DAYOF MARCH 2015/26TH PHALGUNA, 1936

                                             RPFC.No. 293 of 2007 ( )
                                                 -------------------------

                                MC 5/2005 of FAMILY COURT, KASARAGOD
                                                            ...

REVISION PETITIONERS/PETITIONERS:
-----------------------------------------------------

      1. SAFURA, D/O.MOHAMMED, RESIDING AT
           HOUSE NO.VII/469, ERIYAL, P.O.KUDLU,
           KASARAGOD DISTRICT.

      2. NAFEESATH BUSTHANA, AGED 10 YEARS.


      3. BUSTHAN KHADIR, AGED 9 YEARS.


      4. ABDUL HAKKIM, AGED 6 YEARS.


      5. FATHIMA, AGED 4 YEARS,
           (PETITIONERS 2 TO 5 ARE MINORS, REPRESENTED
           BY THEIR MOTHER IST PETITIONER.
           ALL ARE RESIDING AT HOUSE NO.VII/469, ERIYAL
           P.O.KUDLU, KASARAGOD DISTRICT.)

           BY ADVS.SRI.T.SETHUMADHAVAN
                      SRI.PUSHPARAJAN KODOTH
                      SRI.K.JAYESH MOHANKUMAR

RESPONDENT(S)/RESPONDENT:
--------------------------------------------------

           MOHAMMED KUNHI (BEVI), S/O.B.KHADER,
           HOUSE NO.VIII/233 A, AKKIM II, BEVINJE,
           BERKA, P.O.CHENGALA, KASARAGOD DISTRICT.

           R1 BY ADV. SRI.I.V.PRAMOD

           THIS REV.PETITION(FAMILYCOURT) HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD ON
          17-03-2015, ALONG WITH RPFC. 382/2007, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED
THE FOLLOWING:



OKB


                             K.HARILAL, J.

             _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _

                   R.P(FC). Nos.293 & 382 of 2007
             _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _

             Dated this the 17th day of March, 2015.


                                O R D E R


       These revisions are filed challenging the order passed in

M.C. No.5/2005 on the files of the Family Court, Kasaragod. R.P

(FC).No.293/2007 was filed by the first petitioner and R.P(FC).

No.382/2007 was filed by the respondent, in the above M.C. The

parties are referred to as in the original petition.             The first

petitioner is the wife and the petitioners 2 to 5 are the children of

the respondent in the above M.C.            They filed the above M.C.

claiming maintenance allowance under Section 125 of the Code of

Criminal Procedure, from the respondent herein. The marriage of

the first petitioner with the respondent was solemnised on

12.9.1993 and the petitioners 2 to 5 are the children born out of

that wedlock. All of them lived together up to 2002. According to

the first petitioner, the respondent began to behave cruelly and he

ill-treated her demanding more dowry and gold ornaments from

the very beginning of the marriage, but she was constrained to

suffer the same considering the future of the children. The

R.P(FC).293 & 382 of 2007          :2:



respondent was leading an immoral life and had been engaged in

the business of contraband articles.      Ten months prior to the

petition, the respondent had left the first petitioner at her house at

Eriyal and he went away with the children. Thereafter, as aper

order in C.M.P.No.4969/2002 the court entrusted the custody of

the children to the first petitioner as per order dated 19.9.2002.

Thereafter, the petitioners 2 to 5 are in the custody of the first

petitioner. After 2002 the respondent has neglected to maintain

the petitioners and refused to pay maintenance allowance to them.

The first petitioner has no job or income; whereas the respondent

has sufficient means to pay maintenance allowance to the

petitioners. He is conducting an STD booth. After all, his brothers

are in Gulf countries.     His monthly income is not less than

Rs.20,000/-. That apart, the respondent has married a lady by

name Asurabi and he is now living with her.             Now all the

petitioners are depending upon the brother of the first petitioner.

Hence the petitioners claimed maintenance allowance @

Rs.2,000/- each per month.

      2. The respondent filed a counter statement admitting the

marriage with the first petitioner and the paternity of the

respondents 2 to 5. According to him, he had divorced her by

R.P(FC).293 & 382 of 2007          :3:



pronouncing Talak on her and this fact was made known to her

also.   The first petitioner is not entitled to get maintenance

allowance from him. The respondent further contended that the

petitioners 2 to 5 are residing along with him and he has been

looking after the children. The entire day-to-day expenses of the

children are being met by him. He denied the allegation that the

custody of the children was given to the first petitioner by the

court.   It is also contended that he met with an accident on

29/9/1991 and his right leg had been amputated above the knee.

So he is unable to do any manual work and not even able to walk

without a walking aid. In such circumstances, after the departure

of the first petitioner from the matrimonial home, as the result of

deliberation with the relatives he was constrained to marry

another lady so as to get physical as well as mental help to live

forward.    He received a compensation of Rs.2,49,000/- for the

permanent disability sustained, due to the accident and spending

that money, he purchased a property and constructed a house in

the joint names of the first petitioner and the respondent. The

first petitioner falsely implicated him in a prosecution under

Section 498A of the IPC and caused to suffer incarceration. He

further asserted that all the children are living along with him and

R.P(FC).293 & 382 of 2007         :4:



he has been maintaining all the children, who are studying in

different standards. It is also contended that the first petitioner is

doing tailoring works and earning Rs.1,500/- per month. The first

petitioner was examined as P.W.1 and R.Ws.2 to 5 were examined

for the respondent. Exts.B1 to B113 were also marked for the

respondent. After considering the evidence on record, the court

below rejected the claim for maintenance raised by the first

petitioner and found that all the children except the 5th petitioner

are being maintained by the respondent and there is no need to

pay maintenance allowance to other children who are in the

custody of the respondent. The respondent is directed to pay

maintenance allowance at the rate of Rs.1,000/- to the fifth

petitioner alone. The legality of the denial of maintenance

allowance to the first petitioner is under challenge in these

revisions.

      3.    The learned counsel for the first revision petitioner

advanced arguments challenging the findings, whereby the court

below rejected the claim for maintenance raised by the first

petitioner. According to the learned counsel, in view of the aims

and objects of the provision under Section 125 of the Cr.P.C., the

denial of maintenance allowance to the first petitioner is illegal,

R.P(FC).293 & 382 of 2007          :5:



arbitrary and unsustainable. The finding of the Family Court that

the first petitioner left the matrimonial home, without any reason,

is absolutely incorrect. Due to the ill-treatment and harassment,

she was constrained to leave the company of the respondent, and

thereafter the respondent married again and he is living along

with the second wife.       It is also contended that though the

respondent claimed that he had pronounced Talak and thereby he

divorced the first petitioner, the court below found that the said

claim of divorce is unfounded and false. His false claim of Talak

itself is sufficient to show that he was not interested to live along

with the first petitioner; but the court below has not considered

these aspects in its correct perspective. So also the court below

failed to note that a crime has been registered against the

respondent for the offence under Section 498A of the IPC, based

on a complaint filed by the first petitioner.

      4.    Per contra, the learned counsel for the respondent

advanced arguments to justify the findings, whereby the court

below denied maintenance allowance to the petitioners 1 to 4.

According to him, the oral evidence given by R.Ws.1 and 2

unambiguously proves that he first petitioner left the house

without sufficient reason and thereafter she was living separately.

R.P(FC).293 & 382 of 2007            :6:



She is not entitled to get maintenance allowance as she has

refused to live along with the respondent without sufficient

reasons. Exts.B1 to B113 show that the respondent has been

looking after all the children except the fifth petitioner and their

entire maintenance expenses including food, shelter, education,

medicine etc. are being met by the respondent alone. No evidence

had been adduced to show that the first petitioner had been

looking after the children. So also, no documentary evidence has

been produced to show that she had spent any amount towards

their maintenance. Thus, both oral and documentary evidence

are, in abundance, to show that the respondent has been looking

after the petitioners 2 to 4.

      5. In view of the rival submissions at the Bar, the short

question that arises for consideration is whether there is any

illegality or legal infirmity in the findings whereby the court below

rejected the claim of the petitioners 1 to 4 for their maintenance

allowance from the respondent.

      6. Going by the impugned order it is seen that the claim of

the first petitioner was denied on the ground that she has been

living separately without sufficient reasons.      Prima facie, I am

unable to accept the said finding, in view of the admitted fact that

R.P(FC).293 & 382 of 2007           :7:



the respondent had married again and he has been living along

with the second wife from 2002 onwards. That apart, it has come

out in evidence that the respondent had been prosecuted for the

offence under Section 498A of the IPC, alleging matrimonial

cruelty and harassment. No evidence had been adduced to show

that the respondent had attempted to reconcile matrimonial

discordancy so as to resume the company of the first petitioner,

before the second marriage.

      7. In view of the fact that the respondent had married again

as early in the year 2002, the first petitioner cannot be found with

fault for living separately, without forfeiting her right to claim

maintenance. That apart, the stand taken by the respondent was

that the first petitioner is a divorced wife and he had pronounced

Talak in the year 2002 itself. But after considering the evidence

adduced by the respondent the court below itself found that his

claim of divorce by Talak is absolutely false and unsustainable.

Thus, the conduct of the respondent show that he was not

interested to live along with the first petitioner. In the above

view, the finding that the first petitioner is residing separately

without sufficient reasons is unsustainable and, hence, is set aside.

I find that the respondent is liable to pay maintenance allowance

R.P(FC).293 & 382 of 2007          :8:



to the first petitioner.

      8. Coming to the claim for maintenance of the petitioners 2

to 4, as rightly found by the court below, both oral and

documentary evidence are, in abundance, to prove that the

respondent has been looking after them.         The respondent has

succeeded in proving that he has been looking after the children

and the entire living expenses of the petitioners 2 to 4 are being

met by him alone. Though the first petitioner claimed that she has

been looking after the children, she miserably failed to prove the

said claim, before the court. I find that the respondent is a father

who has been carefully looking after the children, though he has

neglected to pay maintenance allowance to their mother. Thus,

the court below is fully justified in rejecting the claim raised by

the first petitioner for maintenance of the petitioners 2 to 4, and

there is no reason to interfere with the said findings.

      9. Coming to the quantum of maintenance allowance which

is liable to be paid to the first petitioner, it has come out in

evidence that immediately after the departure of the first

petitioner, the respondent married again and he has been living

along with the second wife. If he has means to look after his

second wife and all the children, certainly he has to find out

R.P(FC).293 & 382 of 2007          :9:



means to pay maintenance allowance to the first wife also. The

first wife also has a right to live with the standard of life on par

with that of the second wife and the respondent has a liability to

treat both wives equally. It is also true that the respondent is a

physically disabled person. Having regard to that fact also, he is

directed to pay maintenance allowance at the rate of Rs.1,000/-

per month to the first petitioner.

      In the result, R.P(FC).No.293/2007 is allowed in part and R.P

(FC).No.382/2007 is dismissed.




                                                        Sd/-
                                               (K.HARILAL, JUDGE)

okb.



