
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                      PRESENT:

                             THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE P.D.RAJAN

           WEDNESDAY, THE 9TH DAY OF SEPTEMBER 2015/18TH BHADRA, 1937

                                       Crl.Rev.Pet.No. 441 of 2004 (A)
                                             --------------------------------


            AGAINST THE JUDGMENT IN CC 949/1996 of J.M.F.C., MALAPPURAM
                                                ---------------------------

REVISION PETITIONER(S)/APPELLANT/ACCUSED:
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

            VALAKATH THAZHEPULIYOLIL BASHEER,
            S/O. KUNHUTTY, NALLUR AMSOM, PETTA,
            FEROKE, KOZHIKODE DISTRICT.

            BY ADV. SRI.T.K.AJITH KUMAR

RESPONDENT(S)/COMPLAINANT:
------------------------------------------------

        1. STATE OF KERALA, REPRESENTED BY THE
            CIRCLE INSPECTOR OF POLICE, KONDOTTY, BY THE
            PUBLIC PROSECUTOR, HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM

       * 2. MUNDODAN KAMARUNNISA, D/O.CHEKKU,
            VILAKKEPARAMBIL HOUSE, CHERUKAVU AMSOM,
            CHEVAYUR DESOM, PULICKAL POST,
            MALAPPURAM DISTRICT, PIN-673637.

          * ADDL. R2 IMPLEADED AS PER ORDER DATED 17.9.12 IN CRL.M.A.6920/12 IN
            CRL.R.P. 441/04

            R1 BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SRI. N. SURESH
            R2 BY ADV. SRI.P.M.RAFIQ

            THIS CRIMINAL REVISION PETITION HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD ON 09-
09-2015, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE FOLLOWING:


STK


                        P.D. RAJAN, J.
                  -------------------------------
                     Crl.R.P.441 of 2004
           ----------------------------------------------
      Dated this the 9th day of September, 2015


                            ORDER



     Revision petitioner      is the appellant in Crl. Appeal

139/2000 on the file of Sessions Judge, (Adhoc) Fast

Track-1 Manjeri, challenges the concurrent findings of

conviction under Section 498(A) IPC. He was accused in

CC 949/96      of   the    Judicial   First   Class    Magistrate,

Malappuram       and     sentenced       to    undergo    simple

imprisonment for one year and to pay a fine of Rs.5000/-

under Section 498(A) IPC, in default of payment of fine,

simple imprisonment for two months. The conviction of

the trial court was confirmed by the appellate court in the

above appeal.       Aggrieved by that, he preferred this

revision.

     2.   The prosecution allegation against the revision

petitioner is that, he married PW1 on 26.07.92 as per

Muslim Customary Rights. At the time of marriage, he

received 15 sovereigns of gold and subsequently paid a

Crl.R.P.441 of 2004          2



sum of Rs.30,000/- by her father. While she was residing

in the matrimonial house, revision petitioner took away

her gold ornaments weighing 10 sovereigns. Thereafter,

revision    petitioner and   his   brother   harassed   her

demanding more amount of money and gold. She was not

in a position to pay the demanded amount, she informed

this matter to her parents. Thereafter, she was residing

with her parents. Subsequently she filed the above case

in the Judicial First Class Magistrate Court, Malappuram,

from there it was forwarded to Malappuram Police under

Section 156(3) Cr.P.C. for investigation. After completing

investigation, Circle Inspector of Police laid charge before

court.

      3.   To prove the allegation, prosecution examined

PW1 to PW7 and marked Ext.P1 to P4. The incriminating

circumstances brought out in evidence were denied by the

revision petitioner while questioning him.      He did not

adduce any defence witness. While cross-examination of

CW1, Ext.D1 was marked. The trial court after analysing

the evidence on record, convicted the accused.

Crl.R.P.441 of 2004         3



      4.   The learned counsel appearing for the revision

petitioner contended that, prima facie there was no

evidence to attract offence under Section 498(A). There

was no willful conduct which is of such a nature to drive

PW1 to commit suicide or causing any injury danger to her

life, limb or health. No evidence has been adduced by

PW1 to show that revision petitioner demanded dowry and

harassed her both physically and mentally. There was no

coercion from the side of revision petitioner to make any

unlawful demand for any property or valuable security

from her or her close relatives on account of failure to

meet such demand and harassed her. Prosecution utterly

failed to prove the case beyond reasonable doubt.     He

relied the decisions in Lawrence V. State of Kerala

2002 KHC 704 and Rohtash V. State of Haryana

(2012)6 SCC 589.

      5.   Respondent contended that there was physical

and mental harassment against the wife, which was

deposed by PW1 and PW3.       The incident happened on

several occasions were narrated by these two witnesses

Crl.R.P.441 of 2004          4



from their direct evidence.   She sustained minor injuries

for which she was not admitted in a hospital for the

reason that, she need not disturb her family life. Later,

one occasion she admitted in the hospital and took

treatment from there.      The harassment made by the

husband was with a view to coerce her to bring some

money which is an unlawful demand from the side of the

husband, which is sufficient to attract the alleged offence.

      6.     Nowadays, the increasing violence against

women, especially among young couple become a matter

of concern to the society. The indictment provided to

prevent torture to a married women by her husband or his

relatives and punish them for such harassment is coming

under the Indian Penal Code.       Therefore, harassing or

torturing the wife to coerce her or the relatives to concede

or provide any unlawful demand of dowry or money or any

property or any valuable security is an offence, the

husband or his relatives are liable under the Indian Penal

Code.     Section 498(A) was enacted by the Parliament

considering the increase of such harassments in the

Crl.R.P.441 of 2004               5



society and restricting such cruelty against such women

within the institution of marriage. Section 498(A) read as

follows;

        "498A. Husband or relative of husband of a

        woman subjecting her to cruelty.- Whoever,

        being the husband or the relative of the

        husband of a woman, subjects such woman to

        cruelty shall be punished with imprisonment for

        a term which may extend to three years and

        shall also be liable to fine."

      7. The violence mentioned in the above have two

parts. In first part 'cruelty' means - any willful conduct

which is of such a nature as is likely to drive the women to

commit suicide or to cause grave injury or danger to life,

limp or health of a women, which includes whether mental

or physical. Therefore, the husband or relatives of the

husband of a women, subjects such women to cruelty and

any willful conduct from their side to drive the women to

commit suicide or to cause grave injury or danger to life is

an offence under Section part (a) of 498(A) IPC. In the

present case, such an allegation is not found, therefore I

am not considering part (a) of 498(A) IPC.           Part (b)

Crl.R.P.441 of 2004          6



explained harassment of the women, where such

harassment is with a view to coerce her or any person

related to her to meet any unlawful demand for any

property or valuable security or is on account of failure by

her or any person related to her to meet such demand

amounts to cruelty.    The position of 498(A) has been

explained by the Apex court in Girdhar Shankar Tawade

V. State of Maharashtra (2002(5) SCC 177) = (AIR

2002 SC 2078). Therefore, analyzing the clause (a) of

Section 498(A) of IPC, cruelty means, any willful conduct

which is of such a nature as is likely to drive the woman to

commit suicide and clause (b) the explanation pertains to

unlawful demand for money or any valuable things.

Coming to the facts of the case, PW1, the wife of the

revision petitioner contended that, she was harassed by

her husband demanding more money and gold.

      8.   The learned counsel appearing for the second

respondent submitted that both parties divorced and

living separately. I have gone through the oral evidence

of PW1, her evidence shows that on 26.07.92 revision

Crl.R.P.441 of 2004          7



petitioner married her as per Muslim Customary Rights.

At the time of marriage, 15 sovereigns of gold ornaments

given to her. After 15 days of marriage, Rs.30,000/- was

given to him by her father for business purpose.

Immediately after the marriage, they resided together in

the matrimonial home for one year, subsequently, he took

10 sovereigns of gold and appropriated that amount to his

brother's job in gulf countries. She deposed that for the

remaining amount, revision petitioner and his brother ill-

treated her. But nothing was stated by PW1, how much

amount was there in her possession and how much

amount demanded. This shows that there was no demand

from the side of the revision petitioner and PW1 has not

disclosed how much amount she was keeping in her

possession.

      9. When she visited her house, she disclosed about

the gold ornaments. Her family members after knowing

the appropriation of the gold, informed her not to reside in

the matrimonial house and informed her to stay with her

parents. Accordingly, after 3 months, revision petitioner

Crl.R.P.441 of 2004          8



went there and resided with her in the wife house. PW1

also stated that he assaulted her, but the specific overtact

of assault was not mentioned in the petition or before

court. On the other hand, vague allegations are made by

her in the trial court.

      10. Analyzing the evidence of PW1, it is clear that

eventhough, she contended that she was ill-treated by her

husband demanding more money and gold, no specific

allegation of such demand was mentioned in the petition

or before court.    The revision petitioner has not made

specific demand for money, which is clear from the oral

testimony of PW1. PW2 is the mother of PW1, supported

her daughter.       Her allegation was that, the revision

petitioner threatened her with the help of sorcerer that

she will be killed. PW3 also supported the evidence of

PW1. Analysing the oral testimony of PW1 to PW3, it is not

clear that how much amount demanded and how much

amount was in her possession. But it is true that, in their

family life, there was no payment of dowry at the time of

marriage, but as a matter of customary marriage, they

Crl.R.P.441 of 2004           9



gave 15 sovereigns at the time of marriage, 10 sovereigns

of gold was appropriated by PW1 for obtaining Job to her

husband's brother in gulf countries.       As a responsible

sister-in-law, she is bound to help her husband's brother,

to that extend that support was granted to him, otherwise

it is difficult to find any specific demand for money and

specific harassment for such amount. In the absence of

such evidence, I am of the opinion that prosecution failed

to prove that revision petitioner harassed PW1 with a

view to coerce her to meet any unlawful demand for

money or any valuable security and she was harassed

both mentally and physically. When such evidence is not

found in her evidence, a wrong appreciation was made by

the court below, which was not properly appreciated by

the appellate court, resultantly, the conviction and

sentence passed by the trial court is liable to be set aside.

      11.       Apex court in Ghusabhai Raisangbhai

Chorasiya & Others V. State of Gujarat AIR 2015 SC

2670 in para 20 held as follows;

         "20. Coming to the facts of the present case, it

Crl.R.P.441 of 2004             10



         is seen that the factum of divorce has not been

         believed by the learned trial Judge and the High

         Court. But the fact remains is that the husband

         and the wife had started living separately in the

         same house and the deceased had told her

         sister that there was severance of status and

         she would be going to her parental home after

         the 'Holi' festival.  True it is, there is some

         evidence about the illicit relationship and even if

         the same is proven, we are of the considered

         opinion that cruelty, as envisaged under the first

         limb of Section 498A, IPC would not get

         attracted. It would be difficult to hold that the

         mental cruelty was of such a degree that it

         would drive the wife to commit suicide. Mere

         extra-marital relationship, even if proved, would

         be illegal and immoral, as has been said in

         Pinakin Mahipatray Rawal (AIR 2014 SC 331)

         (supra), but it would take a different character if

         the prosecution brings some evidence on record

         to show that the accused had conducted in such

         a manner to drive the wife to commit suicide. In

Crl.R.P.441 of 2004            11



         the instant case, the accused may have been

         involved in an illicit relationship with the

         appellant No.4, but in the absence of some

         other acceptable evidence on record that can

         establish such high degree of mental cruelty,

         the Explanation to Section 498A, which includes

         cruelty to drive a woman to commit suicide,

         would not be attracted.

      In view of the above legal principle, the conviction

and sentence passed by the trial court under Section 498

(A) is set aside and the revision petitioner is acquitted and

set at liberty. This revision petition is allowed.




                                                      Sd/-
                                                 P.D. RAJAN,
STK                                                 JUDGE
                                  //TRUE COPY//


                                P.A. TO JUDGE



