
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                        PRESENT:

          THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE K.HARILAL

 MONDAY, THE 17TH DAY OF AUGUST 2015/26TH SRAVANA, 1937

                   RPFC.No. 49 of 2015
                  --------------------

AGAINST THE ORDER IN OP 58/2013 AND M.C.NO.736/13 of
FAMILY COURT, TIRUR.

REVISION PETITIONER(S)/RESPONDENT:
----------------------------------

      SHAHUL HAMEED, AGED 38 YEARS,
      S/O.MUHAMMED KOYA, PORAKKAT HOUSE, THENHIPALAM,
      CHENAKKALANGADI P.O., TIRURANGADI TALUK,
       PIN-673 636.

      BY ADV. SRI.E.NARAYANAN

RESPONDENT(S)/PETITIONERS & STATE:
----------------------------------

          1. JAMSHEERA,
      D/O.BEERANKUTTY, ORIKKAL HOUSE, ATHRUSSERI,
      KAVAPPURA.P.O., TIRUR. 676 001.

          2. SHIBILA, AGED 9 YEARS,
      D/O.SHAHUL HAMEED, -DO- -DO-

          3. SIMLA, AGED 7 YEARS,
      D/O.SHAHUL HAMEED, -DO- -DO-

          4. MUHAMMED, AGED 4 YEARS
      S/O.SHAHUL HAMEED, -DO-

          5. AHAMMED,
      AGED 1 1/2 YEARS, S/O.SHAHUL HAMEED
         -DO-      -DO-

         [RESPONDENTS 2 TO 5 ARE MINORS AND ARE
         REPRESENTED BY THEIR MOTHER AND GUARDIAN
         JAMSHEERA 1ST RESPONDENT HEREIN]

      R1-R5 BY ADV. SRI.T.PRASAD

       THIS REV.PETITION(FAMILY COURT)    HAVING COME UP
FOR ADMISSION  ON  17-08-2015, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY
PASSED THE FOLLOWING:


                      K. HARILAL, J.
     ------------------------------------------------------
                R.P. (FC) No. 49 of 2015
     ------------------------------------------------------
       Dated this the 17th day of August, 2015

                           ORDER


     The revision petitioner is the respondent in

M.C.No.736 of 2013 on the files of the Family Court,

Tirur. The above M.C. was filed by the respondents 1

to 5, who are the wife and minor children of the

revision petitioner, claiming maintenance allowance

under Sec.125 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.

According to the 1st respondent, the petitioner

neglected them and refused to pay maintenance

allowance from July, 2010 onwards. At the very

beginning of the marriage, the petitioner ill-treated her

both mentally and physically on demand of more

dowry and gold ornaments.          It is also contended that

R.P. (FC) No. 49 of 2015      -: 2 :-

her father had given 50 sovereigns of gold ornaments

and Rs.2,50,000/- on different occasions on demand of

more dowry from the part of the revision petitioner.

But, he misappropriated the gold ornaments and

money given by the father of the 1st respondent and

when      his     behaviour was    intolerable, she  had

constrained to leave the matrimonial home and

thereafter, the petitioner has not paid any amount

towards the maintenance of the respondents. The 1st

respondent has no job or any source of income to

maintain herself and the respondents 2 to 5, who are

the minor children; whereas the petitioner is a taxi

driver by profession.       That apart, he was working

abroad for a period of 10 months.

       2. The revision petitioner admitted the marital

status of the 1st respondent and the paternity of all the

four children aged 9, 7, 4 years and 1 = years

respectively. According to him, even though he is a

taxi driver, he is getting only `200/- per day and out of

R.P. (FC) No. 49 of 2015         -: 3 :-

that amount, he has to look after his aged mother and

his second wife also. It is also contended that the 1st

respondent is residing separately, without sufficient

reasons. After considering the rival pleas and evidence

consists of oral evidence of P.Ws.1 to 4 and R.W.1 and

documentary evidence of Exts.A1 and A2 and Exts.R1

to R4, the Family Court directed the petitioner to pay

maintenance allowance at the rate of `3,000/- to the

1st respondent and `1,000/- each to the respondents 2

to 5. The legality of the entitlement of the

maintenance allowance and the correctness of the

quantum determined by the court below are under

challenge in this revision petition.

       3.   Heard the learned counsel for the revision

petitioner       and    the   learned    counsel for  the

respondents.          The learned counsel for the revision

petitioner advanced arguments assailing the findings

of the court below; whereby the court below

determined the quantum of maintenance allowance.

R.P. (FC) No. 49 of 2015      -: 4 :-

According to him, the quantum of amount determined

by the court below is excessive and disproportionate

with the income of the revision petitioner. Per contra,

the learned counsel for the respondents advanced

arguments to justify the impugned order.      According

to him, the quantum of amount fixed by the Family

Court is not excessive or unreasonable and there is no

scope for interference under the revisional jurisdiction.

       4. The main thrust of the argument advanced by

the learned counsel for the revision petitioner in this

revision petition is based on Crl.M.A.No.4364 of 2015.

It is contended that the petitioner has received

reliable information that the        1st respondent has

admitted his two children, Shibila and Shimla in

'Darussalam Banath Yatheem Khana, Darussalam

English Medium Senior Secondary School Campus,

Changaram Kulam, Kokkoor P.O., Malappuram District.

It is submitted that the said children were admitted

during the trial of the above case in the court below.

R.P. (FC) No. 49 of 2015       -: 5 :-

But the petitioner did not get the exact name of the

institution wherein the children were got admitted.

Now the petitioner has obtained the name of the

institution and such details.     So, the first respondent

has been contesting the above case under the wrong

pretext that the children are still under her care and

custody.       But the fact is otherwise.    In the above

circumstances, it is prayed in the above application

that records pertaining to the admission of the

children in the above Yatheem Khana may be called

for to prove that the children are staying and studying

in the above Yatheem Khana.

       5. The marital status of the 1st respondent and

the paternity of the respondents 2 to 5 are not

disputed.        He has no case that he has been paying

maintenance allowance or he had paid any amount

towards maintenance to the respondents after 2010.

At the time of trial,before the Family Court, he has no

case that he was physically disabled or incapacitated

R.P. (FC) No. 49 of 2015      -: 6 :-

to do work so as to earn livelihood for his wife and

children.      Annexures A1 to A5 produced along with

Crl.M.A.No.1879/2015 have no relevancy at all as the

same relate to subsequent events after passing the

impugned order. More over, these documents do not

show that he is permanently disabled or incapacitated

to do work for ever. He admitted that he was working

as a taxi driver and was getting only Rs.200/- per day;

but according to him, that income is not sufficient to

meet the requirements, including the expenses to

maintain his parents. After analysing the sequence of

events from the beginning of the marriage and the

oral     evidence adduced by P.Ws.1 to 4, the court

below found that the respondents are entitled to get

maintenance allowance from the revision petitioner,

as they are living separately with sufficient cause. I

do not find any perversity in the appreciation of

evidence arrived at by the court below.    So long as

the marital status of the 1st respondent and paternity

R.P. (FC) No. 49 of 2015         -: 7 :-

of the respondents 2 to 5 are not disputed, the

husband as well as the father is liable to pay

maintenance allowance to them. Admittedly, the

petitioner had married again, and now living along

with the second wife. Therefore, the 1st respondent is

justified in residing separately with her four children

and     claiming       maintenance     allowance from the

petitioner.

       6.     Coming to the quantum of maintenance

allowance, the main thrust of the argument is that two

children by name Shibila and Shimla are staying and

studying in Yatheem Khana and the above Crl. M.A.

was filed to call for the records from Yatheem Khana.

The scope and extent of the revisional jurisdiction is

very limited and confined to the examination of the

legality, propriety and correctness of the findings

whereby the court below arrived at. There is no scope

for re-appreciation of evidence, unless it is found that

appreciation of evidence is vitiated by perversity.

R.P. (FC) No. 49 of 2015      -: 8 :-

Therefore, the question is, whether the court below

has arrived at a correct finding on the basis of the

records available at the time of trial.  The petitioner

himself admitted that he could not produce the

materials to show the details of his daughters staying

and studying in Yatheem Khana. Even if the said fact

is admitted, I am of the opinion that no mother would

send her children to Yatheem Khana or orphanage,

unless she is unable to maintain her children.     That

itself shows the penury of a mother who was

compelled to harbour her children in the Yatheem

Khana.       It has also come out in evidence that the

petitioner had married again and now living along with

his second wife. Even though his Personal Law permits

him to marry moe than once, up to four, he is liable to

maintain all the wives equally and to do justice to all

the wives.

       7. The petitioner has no case that he has been

paying maintenance allowance to his children and no

R.P. (FC) No. 49 of 2015          -: 9 :-

evidence has been produced to show that he had paid

any      amount        to  the    children   towards   their

maintenance.           The children are four in number and

they are school going children.           The 1st respondent

has no job or income.          In such circumstance, she is

justified in sending the children to Yatheem Khana.

She was compelled to do so because of the failure

from the part of the petitioner, to maintain his

children. So the documents sought to be produced in

Crl.M.A. No.4364/2015 have no relevancy at all and

thereby the same would stand dismissed.               If the

mother harbours the children in Yatheem Khana after

receiving their maintenance allowance from him,

certainly he can raise his objection before the trial

court. But now he has no right to question such act of

the 1st respondent even if it is true. Needless to say,

Crl.M.A.No.4364/15 will stand dismissed.

       8. Coming to the quantum of maintenance

allowance, according to him, he has to maintain his

R.P. (FC) No. 49 of 2015         -: 10 :-

second wife and his parents. As regards the parents,

he has not adduced any evidence to show that he is

the only son who is liable to look after his parents. In

the absence of such evidence, the same cannot be

taken as a ground to deny the maintenance allowance

to his wife and children. The father has the liability to

maintain his wife and children in accordance with their

living    status,      standard  of     life  and   day-to-day

requirements.            So also, 'maintenance' includes

provision        for    food,  shelter,     clothes,  medical

attendance and educational expenses etc.

       9. It is pertinent to note that all the four children

are below the age of 10 years. A substantial amount

is required for their educational expenses. He himself

admitted that he married again and he has to look

after his second wife. It could be reasonably presumed

that when he married again as he was fully confident

of his income to look after two wives and children born

in both the wedlocks. The first wife and the children

R.P. (FC) No. 49 of 2015          -: 11 :-

born in that wed-lock have the right to live with the

standard of life on a par as that of the second wife and

children born to him in the second wed-lock.            In that

view of the matter, I find that the quantum of monthly

maintenance allowance determined by the court

below at the rate of Rs.3,000/- to the 1st respondent

and Rs.1,000/- each to the respondents 2 to 5 are not

excessive and there is no reason to interfere with the

findings of the court below.

       Hence this revision petition is dismissed.




                                          Sd/-

                                (K. HARILAL, JUDGE)


Nan/

                        //true copy//




                                           P.S. to Judge

R.P. (FC) No. 49 of 2015    -: 12 :-



