CRA  Nos. 78 of 1995 SUSHANTA KUMAR Vs. STATE OF ORISSA Respodents


JUSTICE R.K.PATRA    
JUSTICE CH.P.K.MISRA    

CRA  Nos. 78 of 1995 
 02/07/2001
SUSHANTA KUMAR JENA Petitioner      
STATE OF ORISSA Respodents      
CRIMINAL PROCEDURE CODE, 1973        

 A)  CRIMINAL TRIAL - Extra- Judicial Confessions -  Acceptability
 of  - Scope of - Appellant-accused made confession, before  P.W.2
 (sister's son) the guilt that after murder he hanged the deadbody
 of  his  wife  on a tree in the bari - On appraisal  of  evidence
 appellant  stated under Section 313 of Cr.P.C.  that he have  not
 made   any  such  statement  to   P.W.2  -  Law  that,  retracted
 extra-judicial  confession is a very weak peace of evidence &amp;  in
 absence  of any corroboration same should not be accepted as  the
 confession.

 B)  CODE  OF  CRIMINAL PROCEDURES, 1973 - Sections 374  -  Appeal       
 against  conviction  -  Appreciation  of  evidence  on  record  -
 Sessions  Judge,  while  acquitting   the  accused  from  offence
 punishable  under  Sections 498-A read with S.  304-B, of  I.P.C.
 convictted him under Ss.302/201, of I.P.C.  holdinghim guilty for
 murder  of his wife for dowry by tourturing and harassing her  by
 throatling  and  hanging  her dead-body in the bari on a  tree  -
 Court  below, on the basis of retracted extra-judicial confession
 the  accused  made to P.W.2 corroborated by the circumstances  of
 F.I.R.   story and medical evidence of doctor (P.W.4), held,  the
 accused-appellant  made effort to conceal the commission of crime
 and  attempted  to  stage  a case of hanging  -  Doctor  (P.W.4),
 conducted  the autopsy found the External Injuries of two numbers
 of  abrasion  3" X 2" &amp; 5" X 3" near the umbelicus and  at  right
 illiac   fossa,   horizontally  placed  -   One   legature   mark
 transverslly  placed  between the lyoid &amp; thyroid  cartilage  1/2
 inch  breadth  interrupted at back - And out section  of  abdomen
 found  the stomach was putrified with dark-red irregular  patches
 were  found  on the posterior side - As well as uterus there  was
 expulsion  of product of concepting of size 7 1/2" from foetus to
 uerus attached by placenta, seen putrified - Doctor opined that -
 Death  caused due to extensive haemorrhage and shock - And it was 
 a  case of postmortem hanging, and the legature mark on the troat
 a  post  mortem  injuries  - Death is homicidal in  nature  -  On
 appraisal  of evidence on record in the 313 of Cr.P.C.  appellant
 stated  that  he  had  not   made  any  retracted  extra-judicial
 confession  before  the  prosecution witnesses P.W.2 -  Held  the
 evidence  of extra- judicial confession made by appellant  before
 P.W.2 not to be treated as confession - Law that, retracted extra
 -  judicial  confession  is  a very weak peace  of  evidence  and
 without  corroboration same should not be adopted as the basis of
 conviction  -  In the circumstances of surmises and  conjectures,
 suspicion,  can not be taken place of a legal proof - Confession,
 must  either  admit  in  terms  of  the  crime  or  at  any  rate
 substantially  the facts which constitute the crime - From a bald
 statement of hostile witnesses and P.W.2 conviction should not be
 awarded - In view of the circumstances, inconsistency in evidence
 of  the prosecution witnesses in interferance High Court directed
 conviction  of accused-appellant under sections 302/201 of I.P.C.
 set aside - Appellant set at liberty in appeal.

         Result - Appeal is allowed.

------------------------------------------------------------------