CRA  Nos. 17 of 1998 ARJUNA JENA AND Vs. STATE OF ORISSA Respodents


JUSTICE A.S. NAIDU   

CRA  Nos. 17 of 1998 
 06/05/2003
ARJUNA JENA AND ANR. Petitioner     
STATE OF ORISSA Respodents      
CRIMINAL PROCEDURE CODE, 1973        
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA, 1950    
AR. 51-A 
EVIDENCE ACT, 1872    
SE. 113-B 
DOWRY PROHIBITION ACT, 1961      
SE. 2 

 A)  CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE, 1973 - Section 374 - Appeal  from       
 the  order of conviction - Scope for interference by High Court -
 Appreciation  of  evidence on record - Sessions Judge,  convicted
 the  appellant  (Husband)  under sections 498-A/304-B  of  I.P.C.
 read with section 4 of the Dowry Prohibition Act, sentencing R.I.
 for one year U/ss.498-A I.P.C.  &amp; R.I.  for 8 years U/s.304-B, of
 I.P.C.   with benefit of set off U/s.428 of Cr.P.C.  -  Appellant
 No.2  (Father) for 4 months sentenced under the Dowry prohibition
 Act - Findings that evidence of prosecution witnesses both oral &amp;
 documentary  are clear, cogent, trust-worthy and arese confidence
 -  "Dowry  Death"  due  physical and  mental  assault  torture  &amp;
 harassment  -  Death  of  bride within two years  of  marriage  -
 Findings  that  appellant no-2 (father) demanded dowry  prior  to
 marriage,  accepted  certain  amount  i.e.   Rs.12,000/-  out  of
 Rs.20,000/-  settled amount on the date of marriage  subsequently
 demanded the balance sum of Rs.8,000/- and due to non-payment the  
 bride  was subjected to cruelty - She was murdered by her husband
 (Appellant-1)  and  father-in-law (the Appellant No.2)  -  Doctor
 (P.W.14)  conducted autopsy proving the P.M.Report (Ext.7) stated
 that  19 injuries present on the person of the deceased (Bride) -
 Injuries  antemortem  in  nature - Cause of death is due  to  the
 injuries, "Asphyxia" (traumatic in nature), shock and haemorrhage
 above  injuries  not caused by fall from a height - Defence  plea
 denied  -  Trial  Judge  holding section 113-B  of  Evidence  Act
 squarely  applies  against appellant No.-1 (Husband)  for  "Dowry
 Death",  awarded  the  sentence  -  Held,  Appellant-2  committed
 offence punishable under section 4 of Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961
 - Giving benefit under section 428 of Cr.P.C., High Court reduced
 the  sentence  of Appellant No.2 from four months to  two  months
 directed to pay fine of Rs.2,000/- and in default payment of fine
 to  undergo  a  defaulting sentence of two months  more  and  the
 conviction of Appellant No.1, reduced to period already undergone
 from  R.I.  of 8 years under section 304 - Part-B of I.P.C.   and
 directed  to  pay a fine of Rs.3,000/- failing which  to  undergo
 defaulting  sentence  of  further six months more -  Further  the
 conviction of appellant No.1 under section 498-A, of I.P.C.  read
 with  offence punishable under section 4 of the Dowry Prohibition
 Act confirmed in appeal.

 Decision referred to:

 1994 Cri.L.J. P.1684 - Babaji Charan Barik Vrs. State of Orissa.

 B)  EVIDENCE ACT, 1872 - Section 113-B - Scope and  applicability 
 of  -  "Dowry  Death"  - Evidence  of  prosecution  unambigous  -
 Findings  that  the  deceased  not  only  subjected  to  physical
 assault,  harassment  and cruelty same injuries on the person  of
 bride  culminated into her death - Held, appellant (No.1)  caused
 dowry death of deceased (Bride) - Convicting confirmed in appeal.

 C)  DOWRY PROHIBITION ACT, 1961 - Section 2 - "Dowry" - Scope and     
 meaning  of - Applicability of - Held, "Dowry" means any property
 or  valuable security given or agreed to be given either directly
 or indirectly.

 a)      by one part to other party to marriage,

 b)      by parents of either party to marriage/or by any other
         person - To either party to marriage,

 c)      or to any other person - At/Before/or after the marriage.
         - Amount/ as marriage consideration.

 d)      But does not include any Dower/ or Maher
         (i.e.under Muslim Personal Law- Shariat applies.)

 D)  "DOWRY DEATH" - CONSTITUTION OF INDIA, 1950 - Articles 51-A -     
 Scope  and  applicability  of - Dowry Death of Bride -  Scope  of
 fundamental duties of Citizen under 51-A (e) of Article - Court's
 effervations.

 a)      It shall be the duties of every Citizen of India to
         renounce practice of derogatory to the dignity of a
         woman.

 b)      As marriage is a pure and sacred bond which should not
         and must not be affected by such petty and triffle thing
         like money/ dowry demand.

 c)      As in morden days marriage becomes a more trade, where
         the bride-groom exchanged for a lump sum cash/ movables
         and also immovables/ and or a car/ or some other luxury.

 d)      It should be controlled to the extent, i.e.  Man's greed
         has reached such over powering limits that he stoops so
         low as to kill his own wife. Because she does not bring
         "Fat Dowry".

 e)      Further, one of the most despisable, distastable and
         condemnable evils that has been distressing our Culture,
         and civilisation is dowry in cash/ or kind demanded by
         the Bride-groom family.

 f)      "Dowry" - which is deep rooted social evil appears to be
         cause of so many unfortunate deaths of young ladies - Is
         an offence - Brutal and barbaric should be avoided.

 g)      There should be all out attempt to cover-up such offence
         by family members rather than expose it - It should be
         avoided that the whether the in-laws became out-laws &amp;
         have directly or indirectly contributed to snuff-out the
         life of a woman  causing dowry death.

 h)      Duty of Court - It should be the duty of the Court to
         scan-out whether the acquisition are true/ or false/or
         empty implication and as it is extremely difficult to
         gauge the machination of mischavious mind, the have to
         trade on every slipper ground while dealing with a case
         of said above nature. Because some times emotions runs
         over the realities.

         Result - Appeal is allowed in part.

------------------------------------------------------------------