JCRLA  Nos. 94 of 2001 DASRU@ DOLAMANI PATRA@ BHUE AND Vs. STATE OF ORISSA Respodents


JUSTICE P.K.TRIPATHY    
JUSTICE SANJU PANDA      

JCRLA  Nos. 94 of 2001 
 11/05/2007
DASRU@ DOLAMANI PATRA@ BHUE AND ORS. Petitioner            
STATE OF ORISSA Respodents      
CRIMINAL PROCEDURE CODE, 1973        

 CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE, 1973 - Section 383 - Appeal from jail      
 against  the order of conviction - Scope of interference by  High
 Court  - Appreciation of evidence on record - The Addl.  Sessions
 Judge  in  Sessions  Trial Case No.306/19 of 2000  convicted  the
 Appellants punishable for offence under sections 302/498-A/201/34
 of  I.P.C.   and convicted them to undergo imprisonment for  life
 imprisonment - The F.I.R.  allegation of dowry torture, demand of
 amount,  ill-treatment &amp; death of Bride - And deceased died in an
 unnatural  manner - Charge against the accused person  punishable
 for   offence  under  Sections   302/498-A/201/34  of  I.P.C.   -
 Evidences of prosecution witnesses are reliable, cogent and trust
 worthy  -  Defence plea is complete denial - And counter plea  of
 accused  husband  that  deceased - Wife a strongly built  lady  -
 Whereas  he  is a weak person - And after the  marriage  deceased
 left  him  and stayed with her parents for three to four years  -
 And after the compromise in presence of bhadraloks &amp; intervention
 of  villagers  she came to her in-laws house -  Doctor  (P.W.-12)
 conducted  P.M.  Examination stated that 7 nos of bruise injuries
 present  on  the  body of the victim lady i.e.  like  neck,  left
 chest,  left leg, right tibia, left anterior shoulder, left  side
 face  and adjoining neck, left thigh &amp; adjoining pelvic area  and
 over right cubital fossa - Injuries are antemortem - Death caused
 due  to  "Asphyxia"  - And death is homicidal not  challenged  by
 defence  -  Evidences of prosecution witnesses P.W.9  and  P.W.11
 (Co-Villagers) that there was dissention between the husband  and
 wife starting from marriage - Learned Court below considering the
 motive  is  a  relevant factor is based on  testimony  of  direct
 evidnces  and  or  circumstantial  evidence -  And,  any  rancour
 burgeoning  in  the mind of an offender which can fomednt  wicked
 thoughts &amp; may even flame-up to flash point found corroboration -
 And  as well convict the accused-appellant as said above - Appeal
 -  Ingredients  of  deceased was tortured by the  appellants/  or
 subjected to cruelity and there was demand for money as dowry not
 established  by  the prosecution - Held, Ingredients  of  offence
 under  section  498-A  of I.P.C.  not proved and/or  satisfied  -
 Hence  conviction of appellants under section 498-A, IPC.  is set
 aside  in  appeal  - In interference High Court  considering  the
 facts  and  materials available on record affirmed conviction  of
 appellants under sections 302/201/34 of I.P.C.  in Appeal.

         Result - Appeal is allowed in part.

------------------------------------------------------------------