CRA  Nos. 151 of 2001 PADMA B Vs. STATE OF ORISSA Respodents


JUSTICE P.K.TRIPATHY    
JUSTICE N. PRUSTY    

CRA  Nos. 151 of 2001 
 24/09/2008
PADMA BISWAL Petitioner    
STATE OF ORISSA Respodents      
CRIMINAL PROCEDURE CODE, 1973        
 A)  CODE  OF  CRIMINAL  PROCEDURE, 1973 - Section  374  -  Appeal     
 against  the order of conviction - Scope of interference by  High
 Court  -  Appreciation  of  evidence on record -  The  2nd  Addl.
 Sessions  Judge,  Berhampur,  in S.C.Case  No.20/2000  (S.C.Trial
 No.242/2000-GDC)   has  convicted  the   appellant  for   offence
 punishable  u/s.302  of I.P.C.  and sentenced to under R.I.   for
 life  imprisonment - F.I.R.  allegations of matrimonial-death  of
 bride  - Death of bride occurred in her matrimonial home, 7 years
 after  the  marriage - On completion of investigation the  charge
 filed  against  the  appellant along  with  her  paternal-in-laws
 u/s.498-A/304-B/302/406/34  of  I.P.C.   read with Section  4  of
 Dowry  Prohibition  Act, 1961 - Defence pleas-complete denial  of
 prosecution  charge  -  Court below found  prosecution  witnesses
 except  p.w.2,  1, 5, 8, 9, 10 &amp; 11 are  turn-hostile-prosecution
 witnesses  failed to establish ingredients of offence  punishable
 u/s.498-A/304-B/406/34 of I.P.C.  read with Section 4 of the D.P.
 Act  -  Absence of clinching evidence to substantiate the  charge
 against  the  accused persons for offence punishable  u/s.302  of
 I.P.C.   i.e., the parents-in-laws of the deceased - Held, it  is
 not  a  case  of  "Death by Suicidal-hanging" -  Nor  having  the
 possibility  of hanging inside the third-room - As well found, as
 there  was  a  quarrel between the couples in  the  previous  day
 night, held, Appellant guilty of murder in view of endorsement in
 documents  marked "X" showing by the time of occurance the except 
 the  appellant  other  two  accused had left the  house  for  the
 agricultural  field - And acquitted them - And had convicted  the
 appellant as said above - Hon'ble Court considering the materials
 on  record  found the evidences of Doctor (P.W.1) in proving  the
 P.M.   Examination  Report said, a ligature mark present  on  the
 neck,   obliquely  upwards  from  left   to  right  without   any
 continuity,  on the right temporal lateral aspect of neck -  And,
 said  deceased  died due to "Asphyxia" caused from  strengulation
 which  also linking a small abrasion present on the back of  left
 elgow  -  But  on disection found the neck  structures  including
 subcutaneous  tissues beneath the ligature marks turn pale -  And
 Mussles/Vessels/  nerves  &amp;  vertebrea were found  intact  -  And
 opined  that, as such "Asphyxia" could not have incursigrated one
 by the deceased - Held, Homicidal death of deceased is correct to
 that  extent  - High Court on reapprisal of evidences on  record,
 found  to  prove  the  charge  of  murder  against  -  Appellant,
 prosection  not at all laid any evidence including the  staements
 of  p.w.5, 6 and p.w.7 - In the alternative the last-seen theory,
 as  circumstantial  evidence  can  not be  atracted  against  the
 appellant-accused  - And there is many latches in the prosecution
 evidences  to bring home charge against the accused - Appellant -
 So,  Appellant is entitled grant benefits of doubts in his favour
 -  Further,  High  Court,  direct, the order  of  conviction  and
 sentences  passed  by Sessions Judge is set aside in Appeal -  As
 well  direct, the Appellant be set at liberty forthwith, if he is
 not  required  in  connection with any other  Criminal  case,  in
 appeal.

         Result - Cr.Appeal is allowed.

------------------------------------------------------------------