CRLMA  Nos. 111 of 2008 MATA@MAHESWAR MA Vs. STATE OF ORISSA Respodents


JUSTICE L.K.MISHRA    

CRLMA  Nos. 111 of 2008  
 23/12/2008
MATA@MAHESWAR MAHAKUD Petitioner           
STATE OF ORISSA Respodents      
CRIMINAL PROCEDURE CODE, 1973        
 CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE, 1973 - Section 439 - Bail granting of     
 - Exercise of special power under - Scope of interference by High
 Court  -  Scope of to modify and/or set aside earlier  order  and
 condition/(s)  imposed  by  - Sessions Court  -  Appreciation  of
 evidence on record - Discussed.

 S.439.  Held,  interfer  that  the power has been given  to  High
         Court  and/or the Court of Sessions to modify/ or to  set
         aside  any  condition imposed by the learned  Magistrate,
         when releasing a person on bail.

 b)      And  in absence of any definite provision, held, it would
         be  appropriate for Hon'ble Court, being the next  higher
         authority  of  a Court of Sessions can modify and/or  set
         aside any such condition/(s) imposed by Court below.

 c)      As  well  as  no specific time limit is fixed by  law  to
         modify and/or set aside any condition/(s) already imposed
         by  the learned Court of Sessions - Hence the  limitation
         therefore is co-extensive with duration of granting bail.

 ii.     Further,  therefore  as long as the order of bail  is  in
         subsistence  - An appropriate petition can be filed,  for
         setting  aside  of/ or for to modify a condition -  Since
         the  accused  is continues to be in the rigor of  such  a
         condition  till the subsistence of the order of bail  if,
         already passed by the learned Court of Sessions.

 B.   CODE  OF  CRIMINAL PROCEDURE, 1973 - Special power  of  High     
 Court  -  Exercise of - Scope of modifying, or/setting aside  the
 condition/(s)  imposed earlier by the learned Court of Sessions -
 Scope of interference by High Court - Appreciation of evidence on
 record-petitioner-accused   charged  with    offence   punishable
 u/s.498A/506/and  Section  34 of I.P.C.  read with Section-04  of
 the  Dowry  prohibition  Act, 1961 -  Corresponding  to  G.R.Case
 No.237/05  pending  before the J.M.F.C., Basudevpur -  And  after
 rejection  of  bail  by trial Court, Additional  Sessions  Judge,
 Bhadrak  be  pleased  to  allow   the  bail  application  of  the
 petitioner  - And was directed that the petitioner be released on
 bail  of  Rs.10,000/- with one solvent surety of like amount,  to
 the  satisfaction  of the learned J.M.F.C.  - As  well  directed,
 petitioner with the condition/(s) that the petitioner shall remit
 Rs.500/-  to  the informant-wife by M.O.  in the address  of  the
 informant  as  given in the F.I.R.  - And as well the  petitioner
 shall produce receipt of first remitance at the time of filing of
 the  Bail  -  Bond  - Further, Court of  Sessions  directed,  any
 default  entail "Automatic cancellation of Bail" - Hon'ble  Court
 considering  the  facts situation of the matter and the  reported
 decisions   of  the  Apex  Court   held,  Court   below   imposed
 condition/(s)   deciding  a  "Civil   dispute"  without  any   of
 litigation filed earlier - And it seems the amount should be paid
 to the "Informant-wife of accused towards her maintenance without
 any  petition"  for that nor deciding her entitlement  thereto  -
 Further,  held, such imposition of condition by the learned Court
 below  is  without jurisdiction and set aside in interference  in
 appeal.

 Decision referred to:

 (2006)(6)SCC -P.196 - Mahesh Chandra Vrs. State of U.P. 

         Result - Bail Application is disposed of.

------------------------------------------------------------------